FLORIDA BUILDING CODES - COMBINED DOCUMENT
Generated: 2026-03-10T15:03:53.441Z
Source: codes.iccsafe.org
Building Code Sections: 54
Residential Code Sections: 82

================================================================================
2023 FLORIDA BUILDING CODE, BUILDING, EIGHTH EDITION
================================================================================

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-a]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX A
EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION A101
BUILDING OFFICIAL QUALIFICATIONS
A101.1 Building official.

The building official shall have at least 10 years’ experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, 5 years of which shall have been supervisory experience. The building official should be certified as a building official through a recognized certification program. The building official shall be appointed or hired by the applicable governing authority.

A101.2 Chief inspector.

The building official can designate supervisors to administer the provisions of this code and the Florida Building Codes, Mechanical, Plumbing and Fuel Gas. Each supervisor shall have at least 10 years’ experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, 5 years of which shall have been in a supervisory capacity. They shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade.

A101.3 Inspector and plans examiner.

The building official shall appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized by the jurisdiction. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector of construction or plans examiner who has not had at least 5 years’ experience as a contractor, engineer, architect, or as a superintendent, foreman or competent mechanic in charge of construction. The inspector or plans examiner shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade.

A101.4 Termination of employment.

Employees in the position of building official, chief inspector or inspector shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges before such applicable governing authority.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-b]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX B
CHAPTER 9B-52 F.A.C.
FLORIDA STANDARD FOR PASSIVE
RADON-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION

NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION

9B-52.001 Purpose and intent.

9B-52.002 Definitions.

9B-52.003 Department activities.

9B-52.004 Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential.

Building construction, adopted.

9B-52.001 Purpose and intent.

1.	The provisions of this rule chapter are adopted to implement the Florida Standard for Passive RadonResistant New Residential Building Construction as mandated in Part X, Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, in order to provide standards for construction of passive radon-resistant new residential buildings and to provide for the public safety, health and general welfare.

2.	These rules and regulations prescribe standards for radon-resistant construction of new residential buildings in Florida. However, none of the provisions contained herein, or in the standards adopted, shall preclude or prohibit the owners of such buildings from exceeding these standards at their discretion.

3.	Local jurisdictions may enact ordinances for radonresistant new residential building construction providing that a county governing authority and the governing bodies of the municipalities representing at least a majority of the county’s municipal population enter into an interlocal agreement to adopt by ordinance the department’s standard as referenced in Section 9B-52.004(1). The standard shall apply uniformly to all jurisdictions that adopt the standard. No local jurisdiction may adopt any requirement for radon-resistant building construction other than the standard.

Specific 553.98(1), 553.98(2) FS.

Law Implemented 553.98 FS.

History–New 9-1-96.

9B-52.002 Definitions.

For the purpose of this rule chapter, the following words, unless the context does not permit such meaning, shall have the meanings indicated:

1.	Department-The Department of Community Affairs.

2.	Exempted buildings-

a.	Buildings of occupancy classifications other than one- or two-family detached houses and town house apartments with no more than three stories (as distinguished from condominiums, apartments or commercial buildings that employ different construction practices).

b.	Residential buildings built on piers or pilings that elevate the bottom of the floor joists a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) above grade and which comply with all requirements of Section 103.2(2) of the Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction.

3.	New residential building- One- or two-family detached houses and town house apartments with no more than three stories (as distinguished from condominiums, apartments or commercial buildings that employ different construction practices) for which a building permit is issued on or after the effective date of these rules.

4.	Radon-A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the Uranium-238 decay series, and is the direct decay product of Radium-226.

5.	Standard-The Florida Standard for Passive RadonResistant New Residential Building Construction.

Specific 553.98(1) FS.

Law Implemented 553.98 FS.

History–New 9-1-96.

9B-52.003 Department activities.

1.	The department shall interpret and clarify various aspects of the Florida Standard for Passive RadonResistant New Residential Building Construction.

2.	Any person may request information or interpretations regarding the application and administration of the standards adopted herein, provided that any oral request shall be confirmed by the party in writing to the department prior to the department’s response.

Specific 553.98(1), 120.53(1)(a) FS.

Law Implemented 553.98 FS.

History–New 9-1-96.

9B-52.004 Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction, Adopted.

1.	The Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction, dated July 1, 1995, is herein incorporated by reference.

2.	A copy of the above referenced standard has been filed with these regulations with the Secretary of State. The standard is also available for reference and inspection at the Department of Community Affairs, Division of Housing and Community Development, Radon Program, 2740 Centerview Drive, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-2100.

Specific 553.98(1) FS.

Law Implemented 553.98 FS.

History–New 9-1-96.

FLORIDA STANDARD FOR PASSIVE RADON-RESISTANT
NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
July 1, 1995


State of Florida
Florida Department of Community Affairs
Radon Program
2555 Shumard Oak Blvd
Tallahassee, FL 32399-2100
Linda Loomis Shelley, Secretary
Chapter	Description	Page No.
ONE	GENERAL	
101 General	759
102 Intent	759
103 Scope	759
104 Compliance	759
TWO	DEFINITIONS	
201 General	759
202 Definitions	759
THREE	CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PASSIVE RADON CONTROL	
301 General	760
302 Sub-Slab and Soil Membranes	760
303 Floor Slab-on-Grade Buildings	761
304 Slab-Below-Grade Construction	763
305 Buildings with Crawl Spaces	763
306 Buildings with Combination Floor Systems	763
307 Space Conditioning Systems	763
CHAPTER B101
GENERAL
B101
General.

Provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known as and may be cited as the Florida Standard For Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction, hereinafter referred to as “this standard.”

B102
Intent.
B102.1 General.

This standard shall apply to the design and construction of new residential buildings as determined in Section B103, Scope, to enable control of human exposure to indoor radon and its progeny.

B102.2 Compliance.

This passive standard will provide radon protection beyond that provided by standard building code provisions. Compliance with existing local building codes and with the Florida Energy Efficiency Code for Building Construction, current edition, is assumed.

B103
Scope.
B103.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this standard shall apply to the construction of new residential buildings and additions to existing residential buildings. Residential buildings are defined for the purposes of this standard as one- or two-family detached houses and town house apartments with no more than three stories (distinguished from condominiums, apartments and commercial buildings that employ different construction practices).

B103.2 Additions.

When the cost of an addition exceeds a cumulative total of 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing building, only the addition to the building must meet the requirements for new buildings in Section B104.1.

B104
Compliance.
B104.1 New buildings and additions.

All new residential buildings and additions to existing residential buildings shall use passive radon protection measures, as determined in Chapter B3 of this standard.

B104.2 Exemptions.

Exempt buildings are as follows:

1.	Buildings of classifications not listed in Section B103.1, Applicability, and

2.	Residential buildings built on piers or pilings that elevate the bottom of the floor joists a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) above grade, which do not have skirting or stem walls that restrict air ventilation, and which comply with the following additional provisions:

a.	The perimeter of the building from the ground plane to the lower surface of the floor shall be totally open for ventilation, except for the occurrence of enclosures complying with item (c) below.

b.	All pilings, posts or other supports shall be solid, or if hollow, shall be capped by an 8 inch (203 mm) solid masonry unit or sealed by a permanent barrier that is impermeable to air flow.

c.	Enclosures of any kind, including chases, storage rooms, elevator shafts and stairwells, etc., that connect between the soil and the structure shall be sealed at the surface of the soil to comply with the sealing provisions of Chapter B3 and shall have a soil contact area of less than 5 percent of the total building floor area.

CHAPTER B201
DEFINITIONS
B201
General.

For the purposes of this standard, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be set forth in this chapter. Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; or Florida Fire Prevention Code. Words not defined in these codes shall have the meanings in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.

B202
Definitions.

ADDITION. A building extension or increase in floor area that can be occupied or that exchanges air with the conditioned space of the building.

AIR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. For the purposes of this standard, the air distribution system components which include ducts, plenums, air handlers, furnaces, single-package air conditioners, etc.

CAULKS AND SEALANTS. Those materials which will significantly reduce the flow of gases through small openings in the building shell. Among those used are:

Urethane. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

Epoxy. A thermosetting resin characterized by adhesiveness, flexibility and resistance to chemicals and used chiefly as a coating or adhesive.

Polysulfide rubber. A synthetic rubber characterized by impermeability to gases and used in adhesives, binders and sealing compositions and in coatings.

CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA. The horizontal projection (outside measurements) of that portion of space which is conditioned directly or indirectly by an energy-using system.

CONDITIONED SPACE. All spaces which are provided with heated and/or cooled air or which are maintained at temperatures over 50°F (10°C) during the heating season, including adjacent connected spaces separated by an uninsulated component (e.g., basements, utility rooms, garages, corridors).

CONTRACTION JOINT. A formed, sawed, or tooled groove in a concrete slab to create a weakened plane and control the location of cracking resulting from drying and thermal shrinkage (also sometimes called control joint).

CRAWL SPACE. The unconditioned space between the lowest structural member of the floor and the earth. The crawl space is created when the floor spans between structural supports rather than being directly supported by the earth beneath the floor.

ELASTOMERIC. That property of macromolecular material of returning rapidly to approximately the initial dimensions and shape, after substantial deformation by a weak stress and release of stress.

HIGH RANGE WATER REDUCER. A chemical admixture added to the concrete capable of reducing the water content at least 12 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494 Type F or G.

HVAC. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.

INFILTRATION BARRIER. A product or system designed to limit the free passage of air through a building envelope component (wall, ceiling or floor). Such products and systems may be continuous or noncontinuous discrete elements which are sealed together to form a continuous barrier against air infiltration.

MANUFACTURED SANDS. Sands resulting from the crushing of rock, gravel or slag.

MASTIC. A sealant with putty-like properties.

MIDRANGE WATER REDUCER. A water reducing admixture capable of reducing water content from 6 to15 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494 Type A and or F.

MITIGATE. Make less severe, reduce, relieve.

NATURAL SANDS. Sands resulting from the natural disintegration and abrasion of rock.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used. For the purposes of determining changes of occupancy for this code, the occupancy shall be considered the major occupancy group designations established by the locally adopted building code.

OUTSIDE AIR. Air taken from the outdoors and, therefore, not previously circulated through the system.

PASSIVE RADON PROTECTION SYSTEM. Indoor radon reducing building design, material, or construction features that increase the barriers to radon entry and require no mechanical operation, operating costs, or user attention beyond normal home maintenance (such as recaulking floor cracks, etc.).

PERM. Unit of measurement of the water vapor permeance of materials. Value of one perm is equal to one grain of water vapor per square foot hour per inch of mercury vapor pressure difference.

PICOCURIE (pCi). A unit of measurement of radioactivity. A curie is the amount of any radionuclide that undergoes exactly 3.7 × 1010 radioactive disintegrations per second. A picocurie is one trillionth (10-12) of a curie, or 0.037 disintegrations per second.

PlCOCURIE PER LITER (pCi/L). A common unit of measurement of the concentration of radioactivity in a gas. A picocurie per liter corresponds to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second in every liter of air.

RADIUM (Ra). A naturally occurring radioactive element resulting from the decay of uranium. For the purposes of this standard, radium applies to Radium-226. It is the parent of radon gas.

RADON. A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the Uranium-238 decay series. For the purposes of this standard, radon applies to Radon-222; thus, it is the direct decay product of Radium-226.

REMOTE SPACE. A space isolated from the main conditioned area of a building by intermediate non-conditioned spaces.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A residential occupancies which includes single-family and multiple-family buildings that are three or fewer stories above grade. Hotels, motels and other transient occupancies are considered nonresidential buildings for the purpose of this standard.

SLUMP. A measure of the relative consistency or stiffness of fresh concrete mix, as defined by ASTM C143.

SOIL GAS. Gas which is always present underground, in the small spaces between particles of the soil or in crevices of rock. Major constituents of soil gas include air and water vapor. Since Radium-226 is essentially always present in the soil or rock, trace levels of Radon-222 also will exist in the soil gas.

SUBSTRUCTURE MEMBRANE. Flexible, nondegrading material sheet placed between the soil and the building for the purpose of reducing the flow of soil gas and moisture into the building. Examples are: polyethylene, ethylenepropylene diene terpolymer (EPDM), neoprene, and cross laminated HDPE.

VENTILATION. The process of supplying or removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been conditioned.

WATER-REDUCING ADMIXTURE. A chemical additive to concrete capable of increasing its flowability without increased mixing water, without set retardation, and without increased air entrainment.

CHAPTER B301
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PASSIVE
RADON CONTROL
B301
General.

This chapter provides minimum design and construction criteria for passive control of radon entry into residential buildings. Construction to these standards will limit radon entry points through building floors and foundations and will limit mechanical depressurization of buildings which can enhance radon entry.

B302
Sub-slab and soil membranes.
B302.1 Membrane material.

A sub-slab or soil-cover membrane shall consist of a minimum 0.006 inch (0.152 mm) (6 mil) thick single layer of polyethylene. Polyvinylchloride (PVC), ethylene propylene diene terpolymer (EPDM), neoprene or other nondeteriorating nonporous material may be used instead of polyethylene, provided the installed thickness has greater or equal resistance to air flow, puncturing, cutting and tearing, and a permeance of less than 0.3 perm as determined in accordance with ASTM E96. The membrane shall be placed to minimize seams and to cover all of the soil below the building floor.

B302.2 Tape.

Tape used to install the membrane shall have a minimum width of 2 inches (51 mm) and shall be pressure sensitive vinyl or other nondeteriorating pressure sensitive tape compatible with the surfaces being joined. Paper tape and/or cloth shall not be used for these purposes.

B302.3 Mastic.

Mastic used to install the membrane shall be compatible with the surfaces being joined, and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for the materials, surface conditions and temperatures involved. Mastic may be used to join sections of membrane to one another or to elements of the building foundation, or to seal penetrations in the membrane.

B302.4 Installation.

The membrane shall be placed under the entire soil-contact area of the floor in a manner that minimizes the required number of joints and seams. Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the membrane during the construction process.

B302.5 Seams.

Seams between portions of the membrane shall be lapped a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) and shall be secured in place with a continuous band of tape or mastic centered over the edge of the top membrane.

B302.6 Slab edges and joints.

The membrane shall fully cover the soil beneath the building floor. Where the slab edge is cast against a foundation wall or grade beam, the membrane shall contact the foundation element, and shall not extend vertically into the slab more than one inch.

B302.7 Penetrations, punctures, cuts and tears.

At all points where pipes, conduits, stakes, reinforcing bars or other objects pass through the membrane, the membrane shall be fitted to within 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the penetration and sealed to the penetration. Penetrations may be sealed with either mastic or tape. When necessary to meet this requirement, a second layer of the membrane, cut so as to provide a minimum 12 inches (305 mm) lap on all sides, shall be placed over the object and shall be sealed to the membrane with a continuous band of tape.

B302.8 Repairs.

Where portions of an existing slab have been removed and are about to be replaced, a membrane shall be carefully fined to the opening and all openings between the membrane and the soil closed with tape or mastic.

B303
Floor slab-on-grade buildings.
B303.1 General.

All concrete slabs supported on soil and used as floors for conditioned space or enclosed spaces connected or adjacent to a conditioned space shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Sections B302 and B303.

B303.2 Slab edge detail.

Slabs and foundations shall be constructed using a slab edge detail that eliminates cracks that could connect the house interior to subslab soil and is consistent with other construction constraints such as terrain. Monolithic slab construction should be used where possible. Only the following slab edge detail options may be used:

1.	Thickened edge monolithic. The subslab membrane shall extend beyond the outside face of the slab edge.

2.	Slab poured into stem wall. Where concrete blocks are used as slab forms, the subslab membrane shall extend horizontally at least 1 inch (25.4 mm) into the stem wall, but shall not extend upward along any vertical faces of the stem wall. The concrete slab shall be poured into the stem wall to completely fill its open volume to form a continuous and solid stem wall cap of minimum 8 inch (203 mm) thickness. Framed exterior walls shall be sealed or gasket to the slab.

3.	Slab capping stem wall. Where the floor slab is formed and placed to completely cover the stem wall, the subslab membrane shall extend horizontally beneath the slab to its outer edge. The supporting stem wall shall be capped with a solid masonry unit of at least 4 inch (102 mm) thickness beneath the membrane and the slab.

B303.3 Sealing of joints, penetrations and cracks in slabs.
B303.3.1 Contraction joints.

All contraction joints shall be cleaned and sealed against soil-gas entry by use of an approved sealant (see Section B303.6), applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions. (Note: most sealants require the concrete to be cured and dried.) For bottom-induced joints, inverted T-split ribbed waterstops at least 6 inches (152 mm) wide made of impermeable material may be formed into the slab and shall not require top-surface sealing for radon control.

B303.3.2 Horizontal joints.

Horizontal joints between two slabs of different elevations that are poured at different times shall provide horizontal contact between the two slabs that is at least 8 inches (203 mm) wide, or shall be sealed by an approved sealant (Section B303.6).

B303.3.3 Vertical joints through slabs.

Vertical joints through slabs shall be formed with a recess of not less than 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch (6.4 mm by 6.4 mm) and sealed with an approved sealant.

Exception: Slab-edge vertical joints occurring in slab poured into stem wall construction [see Section B303.2(2)]. The sealant (see Section B303.6) shall be applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions. (Note: most sealants require the concrete to be cured and dried.)

B303.3.4 Penetrations.
B303.3.4.1 Stake penetrations.

Any stake that extends through more than one-fourth the thickness of the slab shall be of a nonporous material resistant to decay, corrosion and rust, and shall be cast tightly against the slab, or sealed to the slab in accordance with Section B303.6. All stakes shall either be solid, or shall have the upper end tightly sealed by installation of an end cap designed to provide a gas-tight seal.

B303.3.4.2 Work spaces.

Work spaces formed into a slab, such as beneath a shower or bath tub drain, shall be sealed gas tight. The exposed soil shall be compacted and then shall be fully covered with a solvent-based plastic roof cement or a foamed-inplace polyurethane sealant or other approved elastomeric material to a minimum depth of 1 inch (25.4 mm).

B303.3.4.3 Pipe penetrations.

Plastic pipes shall be in contact with the slab along the slab’s depth by casting the concrete tightly against the pipe. Where pipes are jacketed by sleeves they shall be sealed by one of the following methods:

1.	Formation of a slot in the slab around the pipe and casting with asphalt or an approved sealant from the slab to a point above the sleeve;

2.	Seal the space between the sleeve and the pipe with an appropriate joint sealant (see Section B303.6);

3.	Pipes and wiring penetrating the slab through chases or conduit shall be sealed by placing an approved sealant between the pipe or wiring and chase or conduit. Plastic sheath, foam or insulation material shall not be used alone around pipes or conduit for sealing purposes; or

4.	Where multiple pipes are ganged, block out a work space around the multiple pipes and seal as in Section B303.3.4.2.

B303.3.5 Cracks.

All slab cracks greater than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) wide; all cracks that exhibit vertical displacement; all cracks that connect weakened zones in the slab such as vertical penetrations or re-entrant corners; and, all cracks that cross changes in materials or planes in the structure, shall be cleaned and sealed against radon entry, prior to applying floor covering, with a flexible field-molded elastomeric sealant installed in accordance with Section B303.6. Cracks less than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) in width that do not meet any of the above criteria may be left unsealed.

B303.4 Concrete for slabs.
B303.4.1 Mix design.

Mix designs for all concrete used in the construction of slab-on-grade floors shall specify a minimum design strength of 3,000 psi (20.7 MPa) at 28 days and a design slump not to exceed 4 inches (102 mm). On-site slumps shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm), provided total water added to the mix including plant, transit and site added water does not exceed the following parameters:

1.	For mixes using natural sands: 275 pounds per cubic yard [33 gallons (125 L)].

2.	For mixes using manufactured sands: 292 pounds per cubic yard [35 gallons (132.5 L)].

B303.4.2 Concrete placement.

For improved workability of concrete used in the construction of slab-ongrade floors, additional water and/or water-reducing admixtures shall be wed within the following constraints:

1.	Slumps in excess of 5 inches (127 mm) shall be achieved through the use of midrange or highrange water reducing admixtures. Water shall not be used in excess of the limitations.

2.	Slumps of concrete containing midrange or high range water reducing admixtures shall not exceed 8 inches (203 mm).

B303.4.3 Curing.

Concrete slabs shall be cured continuously after pouring according to one of the following procedures:

1.	Moist curing by means of ponding, fog spray or wet burlap for at least seven days.

2.	Moist curing using impermeable cover sheet materials conforming with ASTM Cl71 for at least seven days.

3.	Curing with liquid membrane forming compound according to manufacturer’s specifications and conforming with ASTM C309.

Curing compounds shall be compatible with materials specified in Section B303.6.

B303.4.4 Loading.

Loading or use of the slab shall be delayed for a minimum of 48 hours after concrete placement. When the slab is used for material storage after the minimum 48-hour period, caution should be used to prevent impact loading.

B303.4.5 Slab reinforcement.

Floor slabs shall be reinforced by steel reinforcing bars at reentrant corners such as inside corners of an L-shaped slab. Reentrant corners shall have two pieces of #4 reinforcing bar 36 inches (914 mm) long placed diagonally to the corner, 12 inches (305 mm) apart, with the first bar placed 2 inches (51 mm) from the corner. All reinforcement shall be appropriately positioned in the upper third of the slab.

B303.5 Sealing walls.

Penetrations for electrical receptacles and switches, wiring, plumbing, etc. in the interior surface of the concrete block walls shall be sealed.

B303.6 Approved sealant material.

Acceptable polyurethane, polysulfide and epoxy caulks and sealants shall conform with ASTM C920-87, Standard Specifications for Elastomeric Joint Sealants, and ASTM C1193-91, Standard Guide for Use of Joint Sealants. Sealant material and the method of application shall be compatible with curing compounds, admixtures and floor finishing materials; withstand light traffic; be impermeable to soil gas; and have an allowable extension and compression of at least 25 percent with 100 percent recovery. Sealants shall be applied to dried and cured concrete in accordance with manufacturers’ instructions. Backer rods may be used to support sealants in cracks and joints.

B304
Slab-below-grade construction.
B304.1 General.

For the purposes of this standard, slabbelow-grade construction is defined as any conditioned space with the finished floor below finished grade at any point.

B304.2 Slab construction.

Slabs shall have a sub-slab membrane, conforming with Section B302 that extends to the slab perimeter, but does not vertically separate the slab from the foundation wall. The slab and membrane shall be placed in accordance with Section B303, or may use a floating slab design with all of the following conditions:

1.	The stem wall is solid poured concrete.

2.	The slab-wall joint is tooled and sealed with flowable polyurethane (according to Section B303.6).

3.	All other provisions of Section B303 are satisfied.

B304.3 Sealing walls.
B304.3.1 Walls.

Walls surrounding slab-below-grade space shall be constructed from solid poured concrete, at least 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and shall be sealed with a continuous waterproofing coating applied to their outside surface from the top of the footing to finished grade. This coating shall completely seal any joint between the footing and the wall.

B304.3.2 Utility penetrations.

All utility penetrations through walls in partial or full contact with the soil shall be closed and sealed with an approved sealant material (see Section B303.6) on the interior and exterior faces of the wall.

B304.4 Sumps.

Any sump located in a habitable portion of a building, or in an enclosed space directly attached to a portion of a building, shall be covered by a lid. An air tight seal shall be formed between the sump and lid and at any wire or pipe penetrations.

B305
Buildings with crawl spaces.
B305.1 General.

For the purposes of this standard, buildings with crawl spaces include all buildings with floor supported above grade which do not meet the requirements of Section B306.

B305.2 Floor systems.

Reinforced concrete floors constructed over crawl spaces shall conform to all applicable provisions of Section B303. Wood-framed floors constructed over crawl spaces shall include an air infiltration barrier in compliance with Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, current edition. All joints and penetrations through the floor, including plumbing pipes, conduits, chases, wiring, ductwork and floor-wall joints, shall be fully sealed with an approved caulk. Where large openings are created (such as at bathtub drains), sheet metal or other rigid materials shall be used in conjunction with sealants to close and seal the openings.

B305.3 Crawl space ventilation.

Screened vents without closures shall be installed around the perimeter of the house to connect the crawl space with outdoor air.

B305.3.1 Vent area.

The crawl space vents shall have a total area equal to either:

1.	At least 1/150 of the area enclosed by the crawl space if the crawl space is exposed to bare soil; or

2.	At least 1/300 of the area enclosed by the crawl space if the crawl space is completely covered by a substructure membrane.

B305.3.2 Ventilation obstructions.

The crawl space shall not contain structures that restrict ventilation in the crawl space. If freeze protection is provided for plumbing in the crawl space, the protection shall not restrict air ventilation in the crawl space.

B305.4 Sealing walls and doors.

Penetrations from the crawl space into wall cavities shall be fully sealed with an approved caulk or sealant. When a door is located between the crawl space and the conditioned space, it shall be fully weatherstripped or gasketed.

B305.5 Closing and sealing other paths.

Any openings that connect a crawl space and the closed space between floor or ceiling joists, wall studs, or any other cavity adjoining conditioned space shall be closed and sealed.

B305.6 Soil connection.

Foundation walls and piers or other intermediate supports that intersect the floor plane shall be solid across the entire horizontal section at a point above the ground plane.

B306
Buildings with combination floor systems.
B306.1 Floor system construction.

Where slab-on-grade, slab below-grade, crawl space or elevated building construction are combined in one structure, the provisions for each construction type shall be met.

B306.2 Walls.

A wall located between a crawl space and conditioned space shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, current, and the provisions of the applicable Sections B303 through B305 of this standard.

B307
Space conditioning systems.
B307.1 Equipment enclosures.
B307.1.1 Crawl spaces.

Return ducts, return plenums and air handlers shall not be located in crawl spaces. Crawl spaces shall not be used as supply or return plenums.

B307.1.2 Condensate drains, piping and wiring chases.

Condensate drain pipe joints shall be sealed (chemical weld, soldered, etc.) gas tight and shall terminate outside the building perimeter at a height of at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the finished grade ground level. Chases through which the condensate and refrigerant lines run shall not terminate in the return sections of the air distribution system. Where chase lines terminate within the house or garage, they shall be sealed.

B307.2 Air distribution systems.
B307.2.1 Sealing.

All ducts and plenums shall be made air tight, constructed and installed in accordance with the current edition of Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building for building construction. Where rigid fibrous glass ductboard is used, the seal must be on the foil air barrier side of the ductboard.

B307.2.2 Return plenums and ducts.

Return air shall be separated from any floor that is in contact with the soil or a crawl space, by a plenum or duct fabricated in compliance with Section B307.2.1 and all local codes. Construction of the return plenum or duct shall provide a continuous air barrier that completely separates the depressurized plenum or duct from adjacent building components including but not limited to floors, walls, chases, enclosures, etc. The support platform shall not be used as a return plenum. Where the support platform provides a protective enclosure for a duct, one side shall have a removable panel or door to provide access for inspection and/or repair of the duct and duct-to-air handler connection. Ducts shall carry the return air from the return grills or return plenums to the air handler and shall have a positive air-tight seal to the air handler. A closet shall not be used as a return plenum.

B307.2.3 Return grille connection.

The return pathway from the return grille shall be a part of the return duct or plenum and shall have a continuous air barrier along its boundary. Where the return pathway passes through a wall cavity, the cavity shall be sealed around the duct in all directions to prevent the leakage of air into the return air stream.

B307.2.4 Location of ducts and plenums.

Supply and return ducts shall not be located below concrete slabon-grade floors, and return ducts and plenums shall not be located in crawl spaces.

B307.3 Exhaust fans.
B307.3.1 Bathroom fans.

Bathroom exhaust fans shall be controlled by an independent separate switch. Manually operated timers should be used as applicable.

B307.3.2 Attic fans.

If used, attic exhaust fans shall be installed with unobstructed vent and intake areas in accordance with the minimum areas prescribed by their manufacturer. In no case shall effective open vent area be less than the minimum areas prescribed by the manufacturer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-c]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX C
FLORIDA STANDARD FOR MITIGATION OF RADON
IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
Effective: June 1, 1994
INTRODUCTION

Radon is a radioactive gas which occurs naturally in soils. It has been found in high concentrations in some areas of many states including Florida. Radon can enter buildings through floor cracks and openings driven by pressure differences which result from space conditioning and ventilation systems, temperatures and wind. Its radioactive decay products can cause lung cancer when breathed.

The following building standards have been developed in accordance with Section 553.98, Florida Statutes to protect the public by setting standards for mitigation of radon concentrations in existing buildings.

PRINCIPAL APPROACHES FOR RADON MITIGATION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS

This building standard addresses five principal approaches to mitigating radon accumulation in buildings:

1.	Radon control using the building structure as a gas barrier. This is a passive approach which requires no fans (see Chapter 4).

2.	Radon control by lowering the air pressure in the soil beneath the building relative to the indoor air pressure of the building. This is an active approach which requires one or more electrically driven fans (see Chapter 6).

3.	Radon control by raising the indoor air pressure in the building relative to the air pressure in the soil beneath the building. This is an active approach which may either use an existing heating and air-conditioning system blower or an additional electrically driven fan. This approach may have significant negative impact on the annual energy consumption of the building due to heating and cooling of additional outdoor air in addition to fan power consumption (see Chapter 5).

4.	Radon control by ventilating the building with outdoor air. This is an active approach which may either use an existing heating and air-conditioning system blower or an additional electrically driven fan. This approach may have significant negative impact on the annual energy consumption of the building due to heating and cooling of additional outdoor air and to increased fan power consumption (see Chapter 5).

5.	Radon control by separating the building and source with a ventilated region of outside air. This approach is generally applicable to buildings with a crawl space, and may be either active or passive (see Chapter 6).

The standard does not mandate the implementation of any of the principal approaches listed above. It establishes minimum standard practices for each of the principal approaches. Implementation of these minimum standard practices does not guarantee successful mitigation. A post-mitigation indoor radon concentration test must be conducted to demonstrate successful mitigation in compliance with the rules of the Department of Health and Chapter 3 of this standard.

FOREWORD

The practices incorporated in the standard are based on experience, testing and in certain cases expectations founded on interpretation of fundamental physical principles. The demonstration at successful mitigation utilizing the different approaches incorporated in this standard varies.

Subslab depressurization, crawlspace ventilation, and submembrane depressurization have the highest demonstrated success rates. Success with these approaches has in many cases required modification and enhancement of systems based on post mitigation indoor radon tests.

Effective sealing of accessible entry points has been demonstrated to make a significant impact on indoor radon concentrations. However, mitigation by sealing entry points alone has not had a demonstrated level of success equivalent to the aforementioned active mitigation systems. This is understood to be principally because of the difficulty in locating and treating enough entry points to resist the driving forces which cause radon laden soil gas and crawlspace air entry. The significance of entry points and their treatment can be ranked based on their size, location and the degree of depressurization of the building space surrounding them. Design and construction of successful sub-slab depressurization systems also depends on entry point size, location and the magnitude of coincident building depressurization. Attention to limiting entry at points of high depressurization such as space conditioning system return plenums, mechanical closets, etc., is critical to the success of both passive mitigation and minimally designed active mitigation systems.

Building pressurization is expected, based on fundamental principles, to provide a potentially effective mitigation strategy. The effectiveness for individual cases may rely on occupant behavior as well as building leakage characteristics. Pressurization systems also have potentially major impacts on occupant comfort, humidity control and energy use.

Building ventilation has potential application where low indoor radon concentrations exist initially. This approach can have significant impacts on the ability of a building’s climate control systems to perform adequately in the hot and humid climate and on energy consumption for comfort conditioning.

None of the techniques in this standard are guaranteed to provide adequate mitigation. The complexities of existing buildings and the inherent limitations in the ability to determine the building’s construction characteristics result in conditions too diverse for a standard to anticipate. Successful mitigation depends on the experience of the mitigator to make an effective selection of mitigation options. A post mitigation indoor radon test is essential for determining if initial mitigation has been successful. Proper maintenance and operation of mechanical systems implemented as part of active mitigation approaches are critical to the long-term effectiveness of mitigation where such systems are used. Periodic retests of indoor radon concentrations at least every two years, and when the building undergoes significant structural alterations, are advised for all mitigation approaches to provide continued assurance of safe indoor radon levels.

CHAPTER C1
ADMINISTRATION
C101
General.
C101.1 Title.

Provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known as, and may be cited as, the Florida Standard For Mitigation of Radon in Existing Buildings, hereinafter referred to as “this standard.”

C101.2 Intent.
C101.2.1 General.

This standard applies to those alterations to existing buildings that are implemented to reduce indoor radon concentrations, in order to enable control of human exposure to indoor radon and its progeny.

C101.2.2 Limits.

This standard is intended to improve indoor air quality with respect to radon. These standards are based on the principle of limiting radon concentrations to levels as low as reasonably achievable, within the limitations at current technology and economic feasibility. Use of this standard does not guarantee radon will be limited to any specific concentrations in a building; however, experience indicates a reduction in radon and its progeny can be realized by using the mitigation strategies described in this standard.

C101.2.3 Durability.

Experience with the radon-resistant construction details contained herein has been limited to a fraction of the average life of a building. Implementation of radon mitigation measures described herein does not guarantee that mitigation effects will be permanent. Periodic inspection and maintenance of the radon mitigation measures and retesting of indoor radon levels is the responsibility of the building owner.

C101.3 Scope.
C101.3.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this standard shall apply to the construction or alteration associated with the mitigation of indoor radon in every building or structure not specifically exempted. Exempted occupancies shall include structures not intended for human occupancy.

C102
Alternate materials and methods.

The provisions of this standard are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this standard, provided any such alternate is demonstrated according to the provisions of Chapter C3 of this standard, to be effective at the control of radon.

C103
Compliance.

All mitigation shall be deemed to be in compliance with this standard when: (a) the techniques utilized in mitigation meet the minimum standard practices established herein; and (b) the building is determined to meet the “not to exceed” exposure standard established by the Department of Health (DOH) or the level specified in any warranty or guarantee provided to the client. The Department of Health (DOH) has set an exposure standard for radon decay products in buildings at an annual average of 0.02 working levels. Under conditions often encountered in homes, this is equivalent to an annual average radon level of 4.0 picocuries per liter. Radon levels in most buildings can be reduced to 4.0 picocuries per liter or below.

Testing must be conducted in accordance with all applicable sections of the DOH Florida Administrative Code Chapter 64E-5 and in accordance with Chapter C3 of this standard.

CHAPTER C2
DEFINITIONS
C201
General.

For the purposes of this standard, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be set forth in this chapter. Where terms are not defined therein, they shall have the meaning as noted in the applicable locally adopted code. Words not defined in any locally adopted code shall have the meanings in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.

C202
Definitions.

AUTOMATIC. Self-acting, operating by its own mechanism when activated by some personal influence, as for example, a change in current, pressure, temperature or mechanical configuration.

CAULKS AND SEALANTS. Those materials which will significantly reduce the flow of gases through small openings in the building shell. Among those used are:

Urethane. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

CONDITIONED SPACE. All spaces which are provided with heated and/or cooled air or which are maintained at temperatures over 50°F (10°C) during the heating season, including adjacent connected spaces separated by an uninsulated component (e.g. basements, utility rooms, garages, corridors).

CONTRACTOR. A building trades professional licensed by the state, including certified mitigation business.

CRAWLSPACE. An area beneath the living space in some houses, where the floor of the lowest living area is elevated above grade level. This space (which generally provides only enough head room for a person to crawl in), is not living space, but often contains utilities.

DEPRESSURIZATION. A condition that exists when the measured air pressure is lower than the reference air pressure.

ELASTOMERIC. That property of macromolecular material of returning rapidly to approximately the initial dimensions and shape, after substantial deformation by a weak stress and release of stress.

MIL. 1 mil = 1/1000 of an inch.

MITIGATION. The act of making less severe, reducing or relieving. For the purposes of this standard, a building shall not be considered as mitigated until it has been demonstrated to meet the standards of compliance specified in Section 103.

OUTSIDE AIR. Air taken from the outdoors and, therefore, not previously circulated through the system.

PICOCURIE (pCi). A unit of measurement of radioactivity. A curie is the amount of any radionuclide that undergoes exactly 3.7 × 1010 radioactive disintegrations per second. A picocurie is one trillionth (10-12) of a curie, or 0.037 disintegrations per second.

PICOCURIES PER LITER (pCi/l). A common unit of measurement of the concentration of radioactivity in a gas. A picocurie per liter corresponds to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second in every liter of air.

RADIUM (Ra). A naturally occurring radioactive element resulting from the decay of uranium. It is the parent of radon.

RADON (Rn). A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the uranium-238 decay series, it is the direct decay product of radium-226.

SOIL DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEM. A system designed to withdraw air below the slab through means of a vent pipe and fan arrangement (active).

SOIL GAS. Gas which is always present underground, in the small spaces between particles of the soil or in crevices in rock. Major constituents of soil gas include nitrogen, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and (near the surface) oxygen. Since radium-226 is essentially always present in the soil or rock, varying levels of radon-222 will exist in the soil gas.

SOIL GAS RETARDER. A concrete slab; polyvinylchloride (PVC) ethylenepropylene dieneterpolymer (EPDM), neoprene or other flexible sheet material; or other system of materials placed between the soil and the building for the purpose of reducing the flow of soil gas into the building.

URETHANE. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

VENTILATION. The process of supplying or removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been conditioned.

CHAPTER C3
TESTING
C301
General.

Where mitigation projects are performed by commercial mitigation contractors, all tests performed to demonstrate compliance with this standard must be performed by a certified radon measurement business certified by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. Compliance tests must be performed by a measurement business independent of the mitigation contractor.

C301.1 Test procedures.

Testing shall be conducted according to the procedures in the appropriate sections of EPA 402-R-92-004, Indoor Radon and Radon Decay Product Measurement Device Protocols (US EPA, July, 1992) and EPA 402-R-92-003, Protocols for Radon and Radon Decay Product Measurements in Homes (US EPA, June 1993).

C301.2 Acceptable devices and test periods.

Selection of devices, operational devices, and test periods shall be in accordance with EPA 402-R-92-004.

C301.2.1 Acceptance criteria.

The building will be deemed to comply with the standard if post-mitigation test results performed in accordance with this chapter and all applicable sections of Chapter 64E-5, Florida Administrative Code, Part XII, Subpart A, meet the “not to exceed” exposure standard established by the DOH or the level specified in any warranty or guarantee to the client.

CHAPTER C4
STRUCTURAL SEALING AND
HVAC SYSTEM BALANCING
C401
General.

When accessible cracks, penetrations, and joints in floors and walls in contact with the soil, or separating conditioned space from a crawl space, are sealed to reduce radon entry, they shall as a minimum be sealed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, when acceptable indoor radon concentrations are attained by the sealing of ducts and plenums, they shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C402
Sealing cracks and joints in concrete floors and walls.
C402.1 Small cracks and joints.

Cracks and joints with widths less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) shall be repaired by the application of an elastomeric material capable of withstanding at least 25-percent extension and extending at least 4 inches (102 mm) beyond the length and width of the crack, or by the method described in Section C402.2.

C402.2 Large cracks and joints.

Cracks with widths larger than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) shall be enlarged to a recess with minimum dimensions of 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch (6 mm by 6 mm) and sealed with an approved caulk or sealant applied over a sealant backer in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Cracks and joints with widths less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) may also be sealed in this manner if traffic, floor covering material or other conditions are inconsistent with the provisions of Section C402.1.

C402.3 Utility penetrations, work spaces and large slab openings.

Where large openings through the slab exist, such as at a bath tub drain or a toilet flange, an acceptable method for sealing the exposed soil shall include fully covering the exposed soil with a solvent-based plastic roof cement or other approved material in accordance with Section C405.1 to a minimum depth of 1 inch (25 mm). Where voids between masonry foundation walls and the slab edge are accessible, and are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, nonshrinking cementitious material may be used.

C402.4 Utility penetrations in crawlspace walls.

Utility penetrations or other openings through hollow cavity walls that separate conditioned space from soil, or conditioned space from a crawl space, shall be sealed with an approved material on both the interior and exterior faces of the wall. Penetrations and openings through solid concrete floors or walls may be sealed on only the interior face.

C402.5 Hollow masonry walls.

All openings for electrical boxes or plumbing or other wall penetrations in hollow masonry walls, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed with an approved caulk and/or gasket on the interior face of the wall.

C402.6 Sumps.

Any sump located in a conditioned portion of a building, or in an enclosed space directly attached to a conditioned portion of a building, shall be covered by a lid. An air tight seal shall be formed between the sump and lid and at any wire or pipe penetrations.

C403
Floors over crawlspace.
C403.1 Reinforced concrete floors.

Cracks and penetrations through concrete floors constructed over crawlspaces, and that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed in conformance with all applicable provisions of Section C402.

C403.2 Wood-framed floors.

All penetrations through the subfloor, including but not limited to plumbing pipes, wiring and ductwork, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed with an approved caulk in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Where large openings are created by plumbing, such as at bath tub drains, sheet metal or other rigid and durable materials shall be used in conjunction with sealants to close and seal the opening.

C404
Combined construction types.
C404.1 Structural chases.

Openings which connect a crawlspace and the space between floor or ceiling joists, wall studs, or any other hollow chase adjoining conditioned space, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry concentrations, shall be closed and sealed in accordance with the appropriate portions of this chapter.

C404.2 Wall penetrations.

Openings for electrical or plumbing connections in a wall between a crawlspace and a conditioned space, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be closed and sealed with an approved caulk and/or gasket.

C404.3 Doors.

When a door is located in a wall between a crawlspace and the conditioned space, it shall be fully weatherstripped or gasketed.

C405
Approved sealant materials.
C405.1 Sealants.

Acceptable caulks and sealants shall conform with Standard Specifications for Elastomeric Joint Sealants, and ASTM C962, Standard Guide for Use of Elastomeric Joint Sealants. All sealant materials and methods of application shall be compatible with the location, function and material of the surface or surfaces being sealed.

C406
Space conditioning and ventilation systems.
C406.1 Mechanical system connections.

Condensate drains and pipe chases for freon lines that provide a direct connection between the indoor air and the soil shall be sealed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

C406.1.1 Condensate drains.

Condensate drains shall connect to air outside the building perimeter at a height of at least 6 inches (172 mm) above the finished grade ground level. Chases through which the condensate and refrigerant lines run shall not terminate in the air return plenum or duct. If a portion of the condensate pipe does not drop below the height of the condensate outlet, then a trap should be installed to prevent suction of outdoor air into the air handler.

C406.1.2 Freon chases.

Freon chases that terminate within the house or garage shall be sealed with closed cell expanding foam material. Pipe insulation shall be removed from the freon lines at the point of the seal to provide for complete bond between the freon line and the foam.

C406.2 Air distribution systems.
C406.2.1 Sealing.

All ducts and plenums that are modified or sealed in order to achieve acceptable indoor radon concentrations, shall be made airtight in accordance with the current edition Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building. If ductboard is used, the seal must be on the foil side of the ductboard. Mastic sealing systems designed specifically for the conditions of use shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations to close and seal leaks in ducts or plenums. Modifications to ducts located in crawlspaces or service areas of attics shall incorporate support, cover or other protection from accidental damage.

C406.2.2 Return plenums.

If acceptable indoor radon concentrations are achieved in part by construction or modification of a return plenum, it shall be constructed with materials and closures which produce a continuous air barrier for the life of the building. Construction of the return plenum shall be done such that a continuous air barrier completely separates the plenum from adjacent building structures. If duct board is the primary air barrier, then the joints shall be sealed by fabric and mastic on the foil side of the board.

CHAPTER C5
ENGINEERED SYSTEMS
C501
General.

Design of radon mitigation systems must be signed by a certified radon mitigation specialist. Additionally, for radon mitigation systems that rely upon ventilation or pressurization of the conditioned space for radon control, the plans and specifications for the ventilation or pressurization system shall be signed and where appropriate sealed according to the provisions of Section 471.003, Florida Statutes and Section 553.79, Florida Statutes. Such systems may include, but are not limited to, one of the following:

C501.1 Air pressure control.

Indoor pressure may be elevated relative to subslab levels.

C501.2 Ventilation.

An indoor air exchange rate may be maintained in a sufficient quantity to satisfy Section E502.1.

C502
Design criteria.
C502.1 Compliance.

Any engineered radon mitigation system in compliance with this standard must maintain an indoor radon concentration equal to or less than the “not to exceed” radon exposure standard established by the Florida DOH during the primary hours of occupancy. The interior surfaces of buildings pressurized as the primary means of radon control, must be sealed to Section 606, Air infiltration, Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency, of the Florida Building Code, Building. The design values for total ventilation and air exchange rates for each space occupancy shall not exceed the minimums provided for each space occupancy classification in Chapter M4, Ventilation, of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical or the ASHRAE 62 Alternative. When these air quantities are not sufficient to maintain indoor concentrations below the acceptable level, other mitigation options shall be used.

C502.2 Tests.

The indoor radon concentration must be measured in accordance with Chapter 3 and certified as acceptable according to current Florida DOH rules.

C502.3 System monitoring device.

Any engineered system must have a mechanism installed to automatically indicate failure of the system to building occupants, which shall be either a visual device conveniently visible to building occupants, or a device that produces a minimum 60 db audible signal.

CHAPTER C6
SOIL DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEMS
C601 General.

This chapter provides minimum design and construction criteria for active soil depressurization systems. The operating soil depressurization system shall maintain under the building a pressure less than the indoor air pressure. Systems for buildings with slab on grade floors shall as a minimum comply with Section C603.1. Systems for buildings with off grade floors shall as minimum comply with Section C603.2 or C604.

C602 Soil depressurization system installation criteria.
C602.1 Suction fans.
C602.1.1 Fan.

Suction shall be provided by a fan, rated for continuous operation and having thermal overload with automatic reset features.

C602.1.2 Seal.

The suction fan shall be designed and manufactured to provide an air-tight seal between the inlet and outlet ducts and the fan housing. The fan housing must remain air-tight at air pressure equal to the rated maximum operating pressure.

C602.1.3 Rating.

The rating specific to system type shall apply (see Sections C603.1 and C603.2).

C602.1.4 Location.

The suction fan shall be located where any leakage of air from the exhaust portion of the fan or vent system shall be into outside air. No pressurized portion of the vent system shall pass through conditioned space.

C602.1.5 Power supply.

Electrical power shall be supplied to the fan in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building and any additional local regulations.

C602.2 System monitoring device.

The soil depressurization system shall include a system monitoring device which shall be either a visual device, conveniently visible to building occupants, or a device that produces a minimum 60 db audible signal, activated by the loss of pressure or flow in the vent pipe.

C602.3 Vents.
C602.3.1 Material.

Piping material shall be of any type approved by locally adopted codes for plumbing vents.

C602.3.2 Slope.

The vent piping shall have a minimum slope of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) per foot in order to drain any condensation back to soil beneath the soil gas retarder. The system shall be designed and installed so that no portion will allow the excess accumulation of condensation.

C602.3.3 Terminals.

Vent pipes shall be terminated in locations that will minimize human exposure to their exhaust air. Locations shall be above the eave of the roof. To prevent reentrainment of radon, the point of discharge from vents of fan-powered soil depressurization shall meet all of the following requirements:

(1)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more above ground level,

(2)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from any window, door, or other opening (e.g., operable skylight, or air intake) into conditioned spaces of the structure, and

(3)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from any opening into an adjacent building. The total required distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] from the point of discharge to openings in the structure shall be measured either directly between the two points or be the sum of measurements made around intervening obstacles. If the point of discharge is at or below any window, door, or other opening into conditioned spaces of the structure the total required distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] shall be measured horizontally between the two points.

C602.3.4 Labeling.

All exposed components of the soil depressurization system shall be labeled “Soil Gas System” to prevent accidental damage or misuse. Labels shall be on a yellow band, 2 inches (51 mm) wide and spaced three feet apart on all components.

C602.3.5 Clearance.

All vent piping shall be located in compliance with existing and applicable codes, with regards to clearances from mechanical equipment and flues and notching of structural members. No vent shall penetrate a fire wall or party wall.

C603 Soil depressurization system design criteria.
C603.1 Subslab depressurization systems.

Depressurization systems in sands or other granular soils shall as a minimum and within the practical limits posed by the building, meet the following requirements.

C603.1.1 Arrangement.

Within the practical limits posed by the building, suction points shall be distributed as nearly equally as possible, and as follows:

(1)	A maximum of 1,300 square feet (121 m2) per suction point, and

(2)	Each required suction point shall be located not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) nor more than 18 feet (5486 mm) from the perimeter; and

(3)	Multiple suction points shall be located within 36 feet (10 973 mm) of each other.

C603.1.2 Pipe size.

Suction pipe should be of a size appropriate to the air-flows of the system, a minimum of 1/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter at the fan, and shall not be reduced between the fan outlet and the final termination point.

C603.1.3 Pits.

Suction point pits excavated below the slab shall be sized to provide adequate pressure distribution beneath the slab. Dimensions of 22 inches (559 mm) in diameter and 11 inches (279 mm) deep, or excavation of 1 cubic foot (.02832 m3) of soil, shall be presumed to meet this requirement. Further the pit shall be filled with 1 inch (25 mm) size gravel.

C603.1.4 Rating.

Suction fans must be capable of developing minimum flows appropriate to the system at 1 inch water column pressure. Fans producing 100 cubic foot per minute (cfm) (.047 m3/s) at 1-inch water column pressure are presumed to meet this requirement.

C603.2 Submembrane depressurization systems.
C603.2.1 General.

Submembrane soil depressurization systems are essentially the same as subslab depressurization systems, but without the cover of a concrete slab. The membrane shall be protected from wind uplift in accordance with locally adopted codes. Systems may be of suction pit or continuous ventilation mat design.

C603.2.2 Membrane soil-gas retarder.

A membrane soil-gas retarder shall consist of a 8 mil or thicker single ply polyethylene sheet or other sheeting material of equal or lower permeability and equal or greater strength. Place sheeting to minimize seams and to cover all of the soil below the building floor. Retarders must provide excellent environmental stress crack resistance, impact strength and high tensile strength including additives to retard polymer oxidation and UV degradation. Where pipes, columns or other objects penetrate the soil-gas retarder, it shall be cut and sealed to the pipe, column or penetration. All seams of the membrane shall be lapped at least 12 inches (305 mm). Punctures or tears in the membrane shall be repaired with the same or compatible material.

C603.2.3 Depressurization systems in sands or granular soils with suction pit design.

Submembrane soil depressurization systems covering sand or other granular soils shall meet the requirements of Section C602.1, with the suction pits filled with 1-inch (25 mm) size gravel which shall be covered by 1/8-inch (3.2 mm) thick steel plate, 16 gage corrugated sheet metal, or equivalent sheets of other termite resistant structural materials, in compliance with existing and applicable codes.

C603.2.4 Depressurization systems in sands or granular soils with continuous ventilation mat(s) design.

Depressurization systems in sands or other granular soils and utilizing a continuous ventilation mat shall have at least 216 square inches (0.14 m2) of suction area per lineal foot and shall meet the following requirements.

C603.2.4.1 Arrangement.

Suction points shall be equally distributed as follows:

(1)	The suction point should be centrally located along the length of each unconnected strip of mat; and

(2)	Mat strips should be oriented along the central axis of the longest dimension of the crawlspace; and

(3)	A minimum of one strip shall be used for crawlspaces having widths up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) [additional strips should be added for each additional crawlspace width of up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) width]; and

(4)	The mat strip shall extend to not closer than 6 feet (1828 mm) of the inner stemwall at both ends of the building; and

(5)	A separate suction point and fan shall be installed for each 100 feet (30 480 mm) linear length of ventilation mat.

C603.2.4.2 Pipe size.

Suction pipe shall be a minimum 3-inch (76 mm) diameter and shall be carried full size to the final termination point.

C603.2.4.3 Rating.

Suction fans must be capable of developing minimum flows of at least 100 cfm (.047 m3/s), at 1-inch water column (.2488 kPa) pressure.

C604 Crawlspace ventilation.
C604.1 Active ventilation of the crawlspace.

Structures that rely upon active (fan-driven) ventilation of the crawlspace for radon control, shall utilize fans rated for continuous operation, and shall be equipped with a fan failure warning device as specified in Section 603.2, and shall have a thermal overload with automatic reset feature.

C604.1.1 Vents.

Vents connecting the crawlspace with outside air shall be sized and located as required to provide mitigation of the indoor radon concentration as demonstrated by post-mitigation test, and shall not be equipped with operable louvers or other means for adjustment by building occupants. Where adjustable vents are used, they shall be permanently fixed in the proper adjustment by the mitigation contractor.

C604.1.2 Plumbing.

Plumbing located in the crawlspace shall be adequately protected from freezing by insulation or means other than restriction of ventilation air.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-d]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX D
FIRE DISTRICTS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION D101
GENERAL
D101.1 Scope.

The fire district shall include such territory or portion as outlined in an ordinance or law entitled “An Ordinance (Resolution) Creating and Establishing a Fire District.” Wherever, in such ordinance creating and establishing a fire district, reference is made to the fire district, it shall be construed to mean the fire district designated and referred to in this appendix.

D101.1.1 Mapping.

The fire district complying with the provisions of Section D101.1 shall be shown on a map that shall be available to the public.

D101.2 Establishment of area.

For the purpose of this code, the fire district shall include that territory or area as described in Sections D101.2.1 through D101.2.3.

D101.2.1 Adjoining blocks.

Two or more adjoining blocks, exclusive of intervening streets, where at least 50 percent of the ground area is built upon and more than 50 percent of the built-on area is devoted to hotels and motels of Group R-1; Group B occupancies; theaters, nightclubs, restaurants of Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies; garages, express and freight depots, warehouses and storage buildings used for the storage of finished products (not located with and forming a part of a manufactured or industrial plant); or Group S occupancy. Where the average height of a building is two and one-half stories or more, a block should be considered if the ground area built upon is at least 40 percent.

D101.2.2 Buffer zone.

Where four contiguous blocks or more comprise a fire district, there shall be a buffer zone of 200 feet (60 960 mm) around the perimeter of such district. Streets, rights-of-way and other open spaces not subject to building construction can be included in the 200-foot (60 960 mm) buffer zone.

D101.2.3 Developed blocks.

Where blocks adjacent to the fire district have developed to the extent that at least 25 percent of the ground area is built upon and 40 percent or more of the built-on area is devoted to the occupancies specified in Section D101.2.1, they can be considered for inclusion in the fire district, and can form all or a portion of the 200-foot (60 960 mm) buffer zone required in Section D101.2.2.

SECTION D102
BUILDING RESTRICTIONS
D102.1 Types of construction permitted.

Within the fire district every building hereafter erected shall be either Type I, II, III or IV, except as permitted in Section D104.

D102.2 Other specific requirements.
D102.2.1 Exterior walls.

Exterior walls of buildings located in the fire district shall comply with the requirements in Table 601 except as required in Section D102.2.6.

D102.2.2 Group H prohibited.

Group H occupancies shall be prohibited from location within the fire district.

D102.2.3 Construction type.

Every building shall be constructed as required based on the type of construction indicated in Chapter 6.

D102.2.4 Roof covering.

Roof covering in the fire district shall conform to the requirements of Class A or B roof coverings as defined in Section 1505.

D102.2.5 Structural fire rating.

Walls, floors, roofs and their supporting structural members shall be a minimum of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings of Type IV construction.

2.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	Automobile parking structures.

4.	Buildings surrounded on all sides by a permanently open space of not less than 30 feet (9144 mm).

5.	Partitions complying with Section 603.1, Item 11.

D102.2.6 Exterior walls.

Exterior load-bearing walls of Type II buildings shall have a fire-resistance rating of 2 hours or more where such walls are located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of a common property line or an assumed property line. Exterior nonload-bearing walls of Type II buildings located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of a common property line or an assumed property line shall have fire-resistance ratings as required by Table 601, but not less than 1 hour. Exterior walls located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) from a common property line or an assumed property line shall comply with Table 601.

Exception: In the case of one-story buildings that are 2,000 square feet (186 m2) or less in area, exterior walls located more than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a common property line or an assumed property line need only comply with Table 601.

D102.2.7 Architectural trim.

Architectural trim on buildings located in the fire district shall be constructed of approved noncombustible materials or fire-retardant-treated wood.

D102.2.8 Permanent canopies.

Permanent canopies are permitted to extend over adjacent open spaces provided all of the following are met:

1.	The canopy and its supports shall be of noncombustible material, fire-retardant-treated wood, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11 or 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exception: Any textile covering for the canopy shall be flame resistant as determined by tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 701 after both accelerated water leaching and accelerated weathering.

2.	Any canopy covering, other than textiles, shall have a flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 in the form intended for use.

3.	The canopy shall have at least one long side open.

4.	The maximum horizontal width of the canopy shall not exceed 15 feet (4572 mm).

5.	The fire resistance of exterior walls shall not be reduced.

D102.2.9 Roof structures.

Structures, except aerial supports 12 feet (3658 mm) high or less, flagpoles, water tanks and cooling towers, placed above the roof of any building within the fire district shall be of noncombustible material and shall be supported by construction of noncombustible material.

D102.2.10 Plastic signs.

The use of plastics complying with Section 2611 for signs is permitted provided the structure of the sign in which the plastic is mounted or installed is noncombustible.

D102.2.11 Plastic veneer.

Exterior plastic veneer is not permitted in the fire district.

SECTION D103
CHANGES TO BUILDINGS
D103.1 Existing buildings within the fire district.

An existing building shall not hereafter be increased in height or area unless it is of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within the fire district or is altered to comply with the requirements for such type of construction. Nor shall any existing building be hereafter extended on any side, nor square footage or floors added within the existing building unless such modifications are of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within the fire district.

D103.2 Other alterations.

Nothing in Section D103.1 shall prohibit other alterations within the fire district provided there is no change of occupancy that is otherwise prohibited and the fire hazard is not increased by such alteration.

D103.3 Moving buildings.

Buildings shall not hereafter be moved into the fire district or to another lot in the fire district unless the building is of a type of construction permitted in the fire district.

SECTION D104
BUILDINGS LOCATED
PARTIALLY IN THE FIRE DISTRICT
D104.1 General.

Any building located partially in the fire district shall be of a type of construction required for the fire district, unless the major portion of such building lies outside of the fire district and no part is more than 10 feet (3048 mm) inside the boundaries of the fire district.

SECTION D105
EXCEPTIONS TO RESTRICTIONS IN FIRE DISTRICT
D105.1 General.

The preceding provisions of this appendix shall not apply in the following instances:

1.	Temporary buildings used in connection with duly authorized construction.

2.	A private garage used exclusively as such, not more than one story in height, nor more than 650 square feet (60 m2) in area, located on the same lot with a dwelling.

3.	Fences not over 8 feet (2438 mm) high.

4.	Coal tipples, material bins and trestles of Type IV construction.

5.	Water tanks and cooling towers conforming to Sections 1509.3 and 1509.4.

6.	Greenhouses less than 15 feet (4572 mm) high.

7.	Porches on dwellings not over one story in height, and not over 10 feet (3048 mm) wide from the face of the building, provided such porch does not come within 5 feet (1524 mm) of any property line.

8.	Sheds open on a long side not over 15 feet (4572 mm) high and 500 square feet (46 m2) in area.

9.	One- and two-family dwellings where of a type of construction not permitted in the fire district can be extended 25 percent of the floor area existing at the time of inclusion in the fire district by any type of construction permitted by this code.

10.	Wood decks less than 600 square feet (56 m2) where constructed of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal wood, pressure treated for exterior use.

11.	Wood veneers on exterior walls conforming to Section 1405.5.

12.	Exterior plastic veneer complying with Section 2605.2 where installed on exterior walls required to have a fire-resistance rating not less than 1 hour, provided the exterior plastic veneer does not exhibit sustained flaming as defined in NFPA 268.

SECTION D106
REFERENCED STANDARDS
ASTM E84—2013A	Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials	D102.2.8
NFPA 268—12	Test Method for Determining Ignitability of Exterior Wall Assemblies Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source	D105.1
NFPA 701—10	Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-Propagation of Textiles and Films	D102.2.8
UL 723—08	Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials, with Revisions through September 2010	D102.2.8

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-e]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX E
FLORIDA STANDARD FOR RADON-RESISTANT
NEW COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER E101
GENERAL
E101 General.

The design and construction requirements set forth in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known as the Florida Standard For Radon-Resistant Commercial Building Construction, hereinafter referred to as “this standard.”

E102 Intent.

This standard was developed in accordance with Section 553.98, Florida Statutes, to minimize radon entry into newly constructed commercial buildings, in compliance with the state health standard. The design, construction, and operation of buildings are governed by a variety of codes, standards, guidelines, and regulations. Nothing in this standard is intended to create a conflict with existing health and life-safety regulations.

E103 Scope.
E103.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this standard shall apply to the design and construction of new commercial buildings and additions to existing commercial buildings, except single-family and multiple-family residential buildings of three or fewer stories above grade and those identified in Section E104.3. When adopted by county and local government, this standard shall be applied uniformly countywide. This standard shall not be modified by a local government or building-regulatory agency.

E103.2 Additions.

When the cost of an addition to an existing building exceeds 50 percent of the current value of the building; only the addition must be brought into compliance with all applicable portions of this standard, as defined in Section E104.

E104 Compliance.
E104.1 General.

Buildings designed and constructed in accordance with all the applicable provisions of this standard are deemed to comply.

E104.2 New buildings and additions.

All new commercial buildings and additions to existing buildings shall meet the following compliance requirements of this standard:

1.	Compliance with existing local building codes and Chapter 13 of Florida Building Code, Building.

2.	Use of methods described in Chapters 3 and 4 of this standard.

E104.3 Exemptions.

All buildings described below in Items 1 through 5 of this section are exempted from compliance with this standard. Buildings described in Item 6 are exempted from compliance with Sections E306 and E307, and Chapter 4 of this standard. Elevated buildings that comply with all provisions of Item 7 are exempted from compliance with other portions of this standard.

1.	Temporary structures.

2.	Free-standing greenhouses used exclusively for the cultivation of live plants.

3.	Open-air reviewing stands, grandstands and bleachers.

4.	Farm structures used only for storage or to shelter animals.

5.	Residential buildings defined as one- or two-family detached houses or townhouse apartments with no more than three stories.

6.	Buildings of occupancy classification S, storage, or H, hazardous (standard building code designations).

7.	Elevated buildings that satisfy all the following conditions:

a.	The structure shall be separated from the ground by a vertical separation, measured between the final grade and the lower surface of the floor, of at least 18 inches (457 mm);

b.	All pilings, posts, piers or other supports shall be solid, or if hollow, shall be capped by a solid masonry unit or sealed at the surface of the soil with a construction complying with all applicable portions of Chapter 3 of this standard;

c.	Enclosures of any kind, including but not limited to chases, storage rooms, elevator shafts and stairwells, that connect between the soil and the structure, shall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 3 and shall have a soil contact area of less than five percent of the projected building floor area; and

d.	The perimeter of the structure, from the ground plane to the lower surface of the lowest floor, shall be totally open for ventilation.

E104.4 Required documentation.

In order to comply with this standard, all structures must include in the construction documents provided for permitting, a summary of the radon-resistant design strategies being implemented in the structure. Additionally, the building owner shall be provided with a manual substantiating the radon-resistance features. This manual shall include: a summary of the radon-resistant design strategies incorporated into the structure; a listing of the design specifications for all relevant motor-driven systems; a maintenance schedule for maintaining design specifications, including active soil depressurization and heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems; and a listing of all critical adjustments, such as intake-air damper settings.

CHAPTER E201
DEFINITIONS
E201 General.

For the purpose of this standard, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in this chapter. Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; and Florida Fire Prevention Code. Words not defined in these codes shall have the meanings in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. When cited throughout this standard, ASTM and ACI standards refer to the latest editions.

E202 Definitions.

ACTIVE SOIL-DEPRESSURIZATION. The lowering of air-pressure in the soil, relative to the atmospheric pressure immediately above ground level.

ACTIVE SOIL-DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEM. A system designed to lower the air-pressure in the soil beneath a building, relative to the atmospheric pressure immediately above ground level, by continuously withdrawing air from below a membrane covering the soil. An active soil-depressurization system consists of a pressure distribution manifold, one or more radon vents, an operating fan, and a fan-failure indicator.

ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area that can be occupied or that exchange air with the conditioned space of the building.

AND/OR. When referring to a choice of two or more provisions of this standard, signifies that use of any one provision is acceptable, and that two or more provisions may also be used together.

APPROVED. Accepted by the building official or other authority having jurisdiction.

AREA. The maximum horizontally projected area of a building or space, measured to the outside surface of the enclosing walls.

AUTOMATIC. Self-acting, providing an emergency function without human intervention, and activated as a result of a predetermined event such as an interruption of air-flow, a change in air-pressure, or the loss of electrical supply.

BACKER ROD. See “Backup.”

BACKUP. A compressible material used in the bottom of sealant reservoirs to reduce the depth of the sealant, thus improving its shape factor. Backup also serves to support the sealant against sag or indentation while curing.

BLEACHERS. Tiered or stepped seating facilities without backrests in which an area of 3 square feet (0.28 m2) or less is assigned per person.

BUILDING. Any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. Each portion of a building separated from other portions by a fire wall shall be considered as a separate building.

BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority, or their duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of building codes.

BUTT JOINT. A nonbonded plain, square joint, a keyed joint or a doweled joint between two members, where primarily movement is at right angles to the plane of the joint. Sealant in a butt joint will generally be in tension or compression, but not shear.

CAVITY WALL. A wall built of any combination of materials, so arranged as to provide a vertical air space within the wall.

COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A structure or building classified according to use by the standard building code as occupancy groups: A - Assembly, B - Business, E - Educational, F - Factory Industrial, I - Institutional, M - Mercantile, and R-Residential (except those already covered by the Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction).

CONSTRUCTION JOINT. The surface where two successive placements of concrete meet and are to be bonded; reinforcement is not interrupted and tie bars are used as required.

CONTRACTION JOINT. A formed or sawed groove in a concrete structure, extending normal to the surface and to a depth of at least one-fourth the thickness of a concrete element, for the purpose of creating a weakened plane that induces a crack as internal stresses develop due to drying shrinkage.

CONTROL JOINT. See “Contraction joint.”

CRAWL SPACE. The unconditioned space between the bottom surface of the lowest floor of a structure and the earth that is created when the lowest floor of the structure spans between structural supports rather than being directly supported by the earth beneath the floor.

CURING. For concrete, the maintenance of a satisfactory moisture content and temperature during its early stages so that desired properties may develop. For sealants, the maintenance of a satisfactory moisture content and temperature while the physical properties of the sealant are changed by chemical reaction.

CURING COMPOUND. A liquid that can be applied as a coating to the surface of newly placed concrete to retard the loss of water, or in the case of pigmented compounds, also to reflect heat so as to provide an opportunity for the concrete to develop its properties in a favorable temperature and moisture environment.

DETERIORATION. The physical manifestation of failure of a material or assembly (e.g., cracking, delamination, flaking, pitting, scaling) caused by environmental or internal autogenous influences during testing or service.

DIFFUSION. The movement of radon from areas of high concentration to areas of low concentration.

ELASTOMERIC SEALANT. A sealant whose macromolecular material returns rapidly to approximately its initial dimensions and shape after substantial deformation by a weak stress and release of the stress.

EMANATION. The gaseous elements produced by and given off from the radioactive disintegration of radium.

EQUILIBRIUM. The condition where the rate of decay of a radioactive parent isotope is exactly matched by the rate of decay of every intermediate daughter isotope.

EXISTING. As applied to a building or structure, one which was erected or permitted prior to the adoption of this standard.

FIELD-MOLDED SEALANT. A liquid or semisolid material molded into the desired shape in the joint into which it is installed.

FOOTING. That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and transmits load directly to the piles, or to the soil or supporting grillage.

FOUNDATION WALL. A wall below the first floor extending below the adjacent ground level and serving as a structural support for a wall, pier, column or other structural element.

GASKET. A deformable material clamped between essentially stationary faces to prevent the passage of air through an opening or joint.

GRADE. The top surface of the ground adjoining the exterior of a building.

GRADE BEAM. A reinforced concrete beam, usually at ground level, to form a foundation for the walls of a superstructure.

GRANDSTANDS. Tiered or stepped seating facilities where an area of more than 3 square feet (0.28 m2) is provided for each person.

GRANULAR SOIL. A soil with an air permeability greater than or equal to l0-12 m2.

GROUT. A mixture of cementitious material and water, with or without aggregate, proportioned to produce a pourable consistency without segregation of the constituents.

HIGH-RANGE WATER REDUCER. A chemical admixture capable of reducing the water content of concrete at least 12 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494 Type F and/or Type 0.

HOLLOW MASONRY WALL. A wall built of masonry units so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall.

HONEYCOMB. Voids left in concrete due to failure of the mortar to effectively fill the spaces among course aggregate particles.

ISOLATION JOINT. A nonbonded separation between adjoining parts of a structure, usually in a vertical plane, designed to allow relative movement in three directions in order to accommodate differential horizontal or vertical movement without the development of cracks elsewhere in the structure. May be either a butt joint or a lap joint, used to structurally separate the floor slab from other building elements.

KEYED. Fastened or fixed in position in a notch or other recess.

KEYWAY. A recess or groove in one lift or placement of concrete which is filled with concrete of the next placement, providing improved shear resistance at the joint.

LAITANCE. A layer of weak and nondurable material containing cement and fines from aggregates, brought by bleeding water to the outer surface of concrete.

LAP. The length by which one material overlays another at a lap joint.

LAP JOINT. A nonbonded joint in which the materials being joined override each other so that any movement of the materials is primarily parallel to the plane of the joint, putting sealants in shear rather than tension or compression. Formed slab joints that are not attached with a keyway are considered to be lap joints.

MANUFACTURED SANDS. Sands resulting from the crushing of rock, gravel or slag.

MASONRY. Construction composed of shaped or molded units, usually small enough to be handled by one person and composed of stone, ceramic brick or tile, concrete, glass, adobe, or the like.

MASTIC. A sealant with putty-like properties.

MEMBRANE. A flexible, continuous sheet. See also: “Membrane-forming,” “wring compound,” “Soil-gas-retarder membrane;” “Waterproofing membrane.”

MEMBRANE-FORMING CURING COMPOUND. A liquid material that, when applied over the surface of freshly placed concrete, forms a solid, impervious layer which holds the mixing water in the concrete.

MIDRANGE WATER REDUCER. A chemical admixture capable of reducing the water content of concrete from 6 to 15 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494 Type A and/or Type F.

NATURAL SANDS. Sands resulting from the natural disintegration and abrasion of rock.

NET-FREE AREA. When referring to foundation vents, the area determined by multiplying the overall width and height of the object and subtracting the total area obstructed by any solid object, such as screen, mesh, louvers, and frame of the vent.

OPEN AIR. When referring to reviewing stands, grandstands and bleachers, indicates a seating facility in which the side toward which the audience faces is without an enclosing wall.

PICOCURIES PER GRAM, pCi/g. a measure of radioactivity corresponding to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second per gram of dry weight of a sample.

PICOCURIES PER LITER, pCi/L. a measure of radioactivity corresponding to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second per liter of volume.

PLASTICIZER. See “Midrange water-reducer.”

POLYETHYLENE. A thermoplastic high-molecular-weight organic compound often used in sheet form as a water-vapor retarder.

POLYURETHANE SEALANT. A building sealant consisting primarily of a polyurethane compound.

POLYVINYL CHLORIDE. A synthetic resin used in the manufacture of pipes and nonmetallic waterstops.

PREFORMED SEALANT. A sealant functionally preshaped by the manufacturer so that only a minimum of field fabrication is required prior to installation.

PRESSURE SENSITIVE. Capable of adhering to a surface without the application of additional adhesives when pressed against it.

PSI. Pounds force per square inch.

RADIUM (Ra). A naturally occurring radioactive element resulting from the decay of uranium. For the purposes of this standard, radium applies to Radium-226. It is the parent of radon gas.

RADON. A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the Uranium-238 decay series. For the purposes of this standard radon applies to Radon-222; thus, it is the direct decay product of Radium-226.

RADON POTENTIAL. A measure of the potential of soils at a building site for contributing to indoor radon concentrations.

SEALANT. Any material used to seal joints or openings against passage of solids, liquids, or gases.

SHAFT. A vertical opening extending through one or more stories of a building, for utilities, an elevator, dumbwaiter, light, ventilation, plumbing or electrical installation or a similar purpose.

SHAPE FACTOR. The relationship between the depth and width of a field-molded sealant.

SOIL GAS-RETARDER MEMBRANE. A durable, flexible and non-deteriorating material, installed in a continuous sheet to retard the pressure-driven flow of soil gas through elements of a structure.

SOLID REINFORCED MASONRY. Masonry construction in which mortar, grout or concrete completely fills all joints and voids and in which steel reinforcement is embedded in such a manner that the materials act together in resisting forces.

STORY. That portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed. A structure may contain one or more buildings separated by fire-rated construction elements in accordance with prevailing building codes.

SUBGRADE. The soil prepared and compacted to support a structure.

SUPERPLASTICIZER. See “High-range water reducer.”

SUPERSTRUCTURE. All of that part of a structure that is above grade.

TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure which is erected, occupied, and disassembled or otherwise removed from the site within a total time period of 90 calendar days or less.

WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE. A liquid sealing compound (e.g., bituminous and paraffinic emulsions, coal tar cut-backs, etc.) or nonliquid protective coatings (e.g., sheet plastics, etc.) used separately or together in a manner which renders the structural surface to which they are applied essentially impervious to water in either the liquid or vapor state.

WATER-REDUCING ADMIXTURE. A chemical additive to concrete conforming to ASTM C94 capable of producing a reduction in mixing water or increase in flowability without causing undue set retardation or entrainment of air in the mortar or concrete.

WATERSTOP. A diaphragm used across a joint as a sealant, usually manufactured specifically to prevent the passage of water through joints in concrete structures.

WORKING LEVEL (WL). A measure of radioactive exposure equal to the total quantity of radon decay products in one liter of air that will result in the ultimate emission of 1.3 × 105 MeV (million electron volts) of energy from alpha particles. In perfect equilibrium, 1 WL equals 100 pCi/L (picoCuries per liter). It is often assumed that the air inside buildings is not in equilibrium, and that only half the radon daughters are moving freely in the air, while half are attached to dust or building surfaces. When this condition exists, an equilibrium ratio of 0.5 is said to exist. At an equilibrium ratio of 0.5, 1 WL = 200 pCi/L. For purposes of this standard, 1 WL is defined as equal to 200 pCi/L.

ZONE. That portion of a building in which the HVAC system is controllable from a single point.

CHAPTER E301
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR
PASSIVE CONTROLS
E301 General.

Construction to these standards will limit radon entry points through building floors, walls, and foundations and will limit mechanical depressurization of buildings, which can enhance radon entry. Structural radon barriers are primarily intended to stop the pressure-driven flow of soil gas through unsealed cracks and openings in the foundation and/or floor and into the building. Barriers can also be effective in controlling the diffusion of radon through materials and the emanation of radon from materials. An acceptable degree of redundancy and reliability is achieved only when these components are implemented as part of an integrated system of radon resistance as prescribed by this standard. All structures shall be isolated from the soil by an approved structural barrier as defined by the applicable portions of this standard. No crack, joint, duct, pipe, conduit, chase or other opening in the building foundation or floor shall be allowed to connect soil gas to a conditioned space or to the interior space of an enclosed space that is either adjacent to, or connected to, a conditioned space.

E302 Soil gas-retarder membrane.
E302.1 Membrane materials.

Acceptable soil gas-retarder membranes shall consist of a single layer of polyethylene, not less than 0.006-inch (6 mils) thick with a maximum perm rating of 0.3. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC), ethylene propylene diene ter polymer (EPDM), neoprene or other nondeteriorating, nonporous material may be used instead of polyethylene, provided the installed thickness of the alternate material has greater or equal tensile strength, resistance to water-vapor transmission, resistance to puncture, and resistance to deterioration determined in accordance with ASTM E154. The membrane shall be placed to minimize seams and to cover all of the soil below the building floor.

E302.2 Tape.

Tape used to install the soil-gas retarder shall have a minimum width of 2 inches (51 mm) and shall be pressure sensitive vinyl or other nondeteriorating pressure sensitive tape compatible with the surfaces being joined. Paper tape and/or cloth tape shall not be used for these purposes.

E302.3 Mastic.

Mastic used to install the soil-gas retarder shall be compatible with the surfaces being joined, and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for the materials, surface conditions and temperatures involved. Mastic may be used to join sections of membrane to one another or to elements of the building foundation, or to seal penetrations in the membrane.

E302.4 Installation.

The soil-gas retarder shall be placed under the entire soil-contact area of the floor in a manner that minimizes the required number of joints and seams. Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the membrane during the construction process. In buildings incorporating the subslab portions of an active soil-depressurization system, the soil-gas retarder serves an important second purpose: to prevent mastic, cement or other materials from blocking the pressure distribution manifolds or pits.

E302.5 Seams.

Seams between portions of the soil-gas retarder shall maintain a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) of lap when concrete is placed. This may be accomplished by securing the lapped edges of the membrane with tape or mastic or using larger unsecured overlaps prior to placing concrete.

E302.6 Slab edges and joints.

The soil-gas retarder shall fully cover the soil beneath the building floor. Where the slab edge is cast against a foundation wall or grade beam, the soil-gas retarder shall contact the foundation element, and shall not extend vertically into the slab more than one half of the slab thickness.

E302.7 Penetrations.

At all points where pipes, conduits, reinforcing bars or other objects pass through the soil-gas-retarder membrane, the membrane shall be fitted to within 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the penetration and sealed to the penetration. When penetrations occur within 24 inches (610 mm) of a soil-depressurization-system mat or pit, the gap between the penetrating object and the soil-gas retarder shall be taped closed. When necessary, to meet this requirement, a second layer of the membrane, cut so as to provide a minimum 12-inch (305 mm) lap on all sides, shall be placed over the object and shall be sealed to the soil-gas retarder with a continuous band of tape.

E302.8 Punctures, cuts and tears.

All damaged portions of the soil-gas-retarder membrane within 24 inches (610 mm) of any portion of a soil-depressurization-system mat or pit shall be sealed with tape or with a patch made from the same or compatible material, cut so as to provide a minimum 12-inch (305 mm) lap from any opening, and taped continuously about its perimeter.

E302.9 Mastics.

Mastic may be used to join sections of soil-gas retarder to one another or to elements of the building foundation, or to seal penetrations in the soil-gas retarder, provided that mastic is kept at least 24 inches (610 mm) from any portion of a soil-depressurization-system mat or pit. Only tape may be used to seal the soil-gas-retarder membrane within 24 inches (610 mm) of a soil-depressurization-system mat or pit.

E302.10 Repairs.

Where portions of an existing slab have been removed and are about to be replaced, a soil-gas-retarder membrane shall be carefully fitted to the opening, and all openings between the membrane and the soil closed with tape or mastic. Special care must be exercised to assure that mastic does not enter any portion of a soil-depressurization system located beneath the slab.

E303 Concrete floors in contact with soil gas.
E303.1 General.

Concrete slabs supported on soil or spanning over exposed soil, that are used as floors for conditioned space or enclosed spaces adjacent to or connected to conditioned spaces, shall be constructed in accordance with the following provisions of Section E303.

E303.2 Concrete for slabs.
E303.2.1 Compressive strength.

Design strength for all concrete mixes used in the construction of slab-on-grade floors shall be a minimum of 3,000 psi (21 MPa) at 28 days and shall be designed, delivered and placed in accordance with ASTM C94.

E303.2.2 Shrinkage control.

In order to limit the uncontrolled cracking of floor slabs, the concrete mix design, placing practices, and curing practices prescribed in this section shall be followed. All concrete slabs-on-grade or slabs spanning above exposed soil shall be designed, placed, finished, and cured in accordance with local governing codes and applicable portions of ACI 318, Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete; ACI 302, Guide for Concrete Floor and Slab Construction; and if fiber-reinforced concrete is used, the recommendations of the ACI Committee 544, State of the Art Report on Fiber Reinforced Concrete. ACI 302 and 544 may not be incorporated by reference for design.

E303.2.3 Mix design.

Mix design for all concrete used in the construction of slab-on-grade floors shall specify a maximum design slump not to exceed 4 inches (102 mm). On-site slumps shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm) provided that the total water added to the mix, including plant, transit, and site added water, does not exceed the total following parameters:

1.	For mixes using only natural sands, water content shall not exceed 275 pounds per cubic yard of concrete.

2.	For mixes using manufactured sands, water content shall not exceed 292 pounds per cubic yard of concrete.

E303.2.4 Slump and workability.

For concretes that do not contain midrange or high-range water reducers, concrete slump measured at the point of placement in accordance with ASTM C172, shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm). For concretes designed and mixed containing mid-range or high-range water reducers conforming with ASTM C494, slump measured at the point of placement in accordance with ASTM C172, shall not exceed 7 inches (178 mm) for mid-range and 8 inches (203 mm) for high-range water reducers.

E303.2.5 Hot weather placing and finishing.

All concrete shall be placed and finished in accordance with the provisions of ACI 301, Specifications for Structural Concrete for Buildings. When necessary, provision for wind breaks, shading, fog spraying, sprinkling, ponding or wet covering with a light colored material shall be made in advance of placement, and such protective measures shall be taken as quickly as concrete hardening and finishing operations will allow.

E303.2.6 Curing.

Concrete floors shall be cured by one of the means described below and shall not be subjected to loading until the architect or engineer has determined the slab to be structurally adequate for the loads imposed.

1.	Concrete floor slabs shall be cured by covering the entire slab surface for a period of seven days with clean, ponded water.

2.	Concrete floor slabs shall be cured by covering the entire slab surface for a period of seven days with a continuous mist or spray of clean, potable water.

3.	Concrete floor slabs shall be cured by covering the entire slab surface for a period of seven days with an impermeable sheet material conforming to ASTM C171.

4.	Concrete floor slabs shall be cured by covering the entire slab surface with a liquid membrane-forming compound that conforms with ASTM C309. Curing compounds shall be compatible with materials specified in Section E303.3.1.

E303.3 Sealing of construction joints, penetrations, cracks, and other connections.
E303.3.1 Sealants.

Sealants shall be selected and installed in compliance with ASTM C920, Standard Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants, and ASTM C 1193, Standard Guide for Use of Joint Sealants.

1.	Sealant materials shall be compatible with the materials they join, including curing compounds and admixtures, and with materials that will be applied over them, including floor finishing materials.

2.	Field-molded sealants shall be installed in sealant reservoirs proportioned, cleaned of laitance and prepared in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. For elastomeric sealants, this generally requires the installation of a bond breaker or backer rod.

3.	When the installed sealant is not protected by a finished floor or other protective surface, it shall be suitable to withstand the traffic to which it will be exposed.

4.	Waterstops shall be preformed from polyvinyl chloride or other noncorrosive material and shall be selected and installed in compliance with ACI 504R

E303.3.2 Joints.

All joints between sections of concrete floor slabs, between the floor slab and a wall or other vertical surface, or between a section of floor and another object that passes through the slab, shall be sealed to prevent soil gas entry in accordance with the provisions of this section. Joint design depends upon the amount and type of movement that the joint must withstand. Ideally, sealing should occur as late in the construction process as possible. No portion of any joint shall be covered or rendered inaccessible unless the seal has first been inspected and approved by the building official. All such joints shall be sealed prior to the structure being certified for occupancy.

1.	Butt joints. All nonbonded butt joints shall be sealed to prevent radon entry using an elastomeric sealant or a waterstop specified above. The sealant reservoir shall be sufficiently large to prevent failure of the sealant or waterstop, but in no case shall the sealant reservoir be less than 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch (6.4 mm by 6.4 mm) in cross section

2.	Lap joints. All nonbonded lap joints shall be sealed with either a field-molded or preformed elastomeric sealant or with a flexible waterstop as specified above. The lap joint shall be sufficiently large to prevent failure of the sealant or waterstop, but in no case shall the sealant reservoir be less than 1/2 inch by 1/2 inch (12.7 mm by 12.7 mm) in cross section.

3.	Isolation joints. All nonbonded isolation joints shall be sealed with either a field-molded or preformed elastomeric sealant or with a flexible waterstop as specified above. Isolation joints shall be sufficiently large to prevent failure of the sealant or waterstop, but in no case shall the sealant reservoir be less than 1/2 inch by 1/2 inch (12.7 mm by 12.7 mm) in cross section.

4.	Control or contraction joints. May be used to limit unplanned cracking of floor slabs. In locations where continued movement of the slab portions can be reasonably expected, flexible sealants must be installed in reservoirs complying with the requirements of above section on butt joints, or a flexible waterstop must be used.

5.	Construction joints. All bonded construction joints shall be sealed to prevent radon entry using either a rigid or an elastomeric sealant or a waterstop as specified above. Where movement of the joint is not prevented by continuous reinforcing and tie bars, flexible sealants must be installed in reservoirs complying with the requirements of above section on lap joints, or a flexible waterstop must be used.

E303.3.3 Cracks.

All cracks in concrete slabs supported on soil or spanning over exposed soil, that are used as floors for conditioned space or enclosed spaces adjacent to or connected to conditioned spaces, shall be sealed against radon entry in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section E303.3.1. Ideally, sealing should occur as late in the construction process as possible.

1.	Cracks greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) wide; all cracks that exhibit vertical displacement; all cracks that connect weakened zones in the slab such as vertical penetrations or re-entrant corners; and, all cracks that cross changes in materials or planes in the structure, shall be sealed with a flexible field-molded elastomeric sealant installed in accordance with above section on isolation joints.

2.	Cracks greater than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in width, that do not meet any of the conditions described in Item 1 above, shall be enlarged to contain a sealant reservoir not less than 1/2 inch by 1/4 inch (12.7 mm by 6.4 mm) in cross-section along the entire length of the crack; and shall be sealed with a flexible, field-molded elastomeric sealant installed in accordance with above section on butt joints.

3.	Cracks less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in width, that do not meet any of the conditions described in Item 1 above, may be left unsealed.

E303.3.4 Stakes, pipe penetrations and other small objects.

All objects that pass through the slab shall be sealed gas tight. A sealant reservoir, appropriately dimensioned to accommodate any differential movement between the object and the concrete, shall be formed continuously around the object, and the joint shall be sealed with a field molded elastomeric sealant as prescribed for isolation joints and in accordance with the provisions of Section E303.3.1. Where pipes or other penetrations are separated from the concrete by flexible sleeves, the sleeve shall be removed to provide bonding of the sealant to the object. Where stakes are used to support plumbing, electrical conduits or other objects that will penetrate the slab, the stakes shall be solid, non-porous and resistant to decay, corrosion and rust. Special care must be taken to avoid honeycombing between multiple or ganged penetrations.

1.	Large utility service openings through the slab shall be sealed gas-tight. For slab-on-grade construction, this can be accomplished by fully covering the exposed soil with a vapor-retarder membrane, covered to a minimum depth of 1 inch with an elastomeric sealant. Alternatively, the opening may be closed with an expansive concrete or hydraulic cement to within 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the top of the slab, and the remaining 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) filled with an elastomeric sealant. When the opening connects to a crawlspace, the opening shall be closed with sheet metal or other rigid impermeable materials and sealed with an elastomeric sealant compatible with the materials and conditions.

2.	For openings made through existing slabs, they must be sealed to meet the appropriate provisions of this section. If the opening is partially repaired with concrete, any resulting crack shall be sealed in accordance with the Section E303.3.3.

3.	Any sump located in a habitable portion of a building and connecting to the soil, either directly or through drainage piping, shall be fined with a gasketed lid. The lid shall be attached so as to provide a gas-tight seal between the sump and the access space above.

E304 Walls in contact with soil gas.
E304.1 General.

Walls separating below-grade conditioned space from the surrounding earth or from a crawlspace or other enclosed volume with an exposed earth floor shall be isolated from the soil by an approved structural baffler as described in Section E302 of this standard. Foundation walls consisting of cavity walls, or constructed of hollow masonry products or of any material in such a way as to create an air-space within the wall, shall be capped at the floor level of the first finished floor they intersect. The cap shall be either at least 8 inches (203 mm) of solid concrete or concrete filled block, or a cap that provides airflow resistance at least equal to the adjacent floor. No crack, honeycomb, joint duct, pipe, conduit chase or other opening in the wall shall be allowed to connect soil gas to a conditioned space or to an enclosed space adjacent to or connected to a conditioned space.

E304.2 Materials.

Walls governed by the provisions of this section shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, or solid reinforced masonry construction.

E305 Buildings with crawl spaces.
E305.1 General.

For the purpose of this standard, buildings with crawl spaces include all buildings with the floor supported above grade.

E305.1.1 Reinforced concrete floor systems.

A reinforced concrete floor constructed over crawl spaces shall conform to all applicable provisions of Section E304.

E305.1.2 Wood-framed floor systems.

Wood-framed floors spanning over soil that are used as floors for conditioned space, or enclosed spaces adjacent to or connected to conditioned spaces, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

E305.2 Materials.

Wood-framed floors constructed over a crawl space shall be constructed of American Plywood Association (APA) certified tongue-in-groove plywood, and otherwise comply with Paragraph 4.1.2 of Appendix C to Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Oriented structural board shall not be an acceptable substitute material.

E305.3 Utility penetrations.

All penetrations through the floor, including but not limited to plumbing pipes and wiring, shall be fully sealed to the floor structure with approved sealant materials as per Section E303.3.1. Large service openings through the slab, such as beneath bath tub drains, shall be sealed gastight. Where large openings are created, sheet metal or other rigid materials shall be used in conjunction with sealants to close and seal the openings.

E305.4 Vertical joints.

All vertical joints between the subfloor and foundation wall or the subfloor and any vertical plane of the building which extends from the crawlspace to the top of the subfloor shall be sealed with an approved sealant (see Section E303.3.1).

E305.5 Doors and service openings.

Doors, hatches or removable closures of any kind that can create an opening in the floor-plane should be avoided, but when required, shall be gasketed and installed with a latch or other permanent fastening device.

E305.6 Other radon-entry paths.

All openings which connect a crawlspace and construction cavities, such as the space between wall studs, hollow masonry or precast concrete units, or floor and ceiling planes, shall be closed and sealed with an approved sealant (see Section E303.3.1).

E305.7 Crawl space ventilation.

Crawl spaces shall be passively ventilated or shall be constructed with an active soil-depressurization system in compliance with Chapter 4. No portion of an air distribution system shall pass through a crawlspace.

E305.7.1 Required ventilation.

Crawl spaces shall be ventilated by openings through the perimeter wall connecting to the exterior of the foundation. Required vents shall have a combined net free area not less than 1 square inch (0.000645 m2) per 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) of crawl space, and shall conform to the following conditions:

1.	Openings shall be distributed uniformly around the outside walls of the crawl space.

2.	Vents shall be fitted with corrosion and decay-resistant wire mesh or grilles with openings not less than 1/4 inch (6 mm) nor more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in size. Vents shall not be fitted with operable louvers, dampers, or other closure mechanisms.

3.	Plumbing located in a ventilated crawlspace shall be protected from freezing with insulation and/or heat tape.

E305.7.2 Prohibited uses.

Crawl spaces shall not be used as an air-duct or plenum or to house any duct or fan that is part of a heating, ventilating or air-conditioning system.

E306 Space conditioning systems and ventilating.
E306.1 General.

All heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems shall be designed, installed, inspected and maintained in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE 62-1989, Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality, Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, and with the provisions of this section. Construction to the provisions of this section will limit radon entry points through mechanical depressurization of buildings, which can enhance radon entry. Additionally, ventilating systems shall be designed to meet all applicable codes and the provisions of this section for use of outside air of low radon concentration.

E306.2 Condensate drains.

All joints in condensate piping shall be solvent welded, soldered, or otherwise connected in a leakproof and gas-tight manner. Condensate drains shall be trapped and terminate in the building sewer or outside the building, a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) above finished grade. If the condensate piping penetrates a floor or wall separating enclosed space from the soil or from a crawl space, the penetration shall be sealed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 3. The condensate drain piping shall not terminate in a return plenum.

E306.3 Other piping.

When any piping penetrates a floor or wall separating enclosed space from the soil or from a crawl space, the penetration shall be sealed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 3. In the case of insulated piping, the insulation must be removed at the point of the seal and required seal must be made between the pipe and the building structure. Sealant must be compatible with the materials and anticipated operating temperatures. Piping shall not terminate in a return plenum.

E306.4 Plumbing and wiring chases.

Wherever piping or wiring is installed in a chase that is at any point in contact with the soil or a crawl space, the chase shall be sealed to the floor or wall where it first enters the structure, in accordance with the applicable portions of Chapter 3. Piping contained in such a chase shall be sealed to the chase at the interior plane of that floor or wall. No portion of any chase shall terminate in a return air duct or plenum. Where it is impractical or prohibited by another code to seal wiring into an electrical chase or conduit, the chase shall comply with all applicable portions of Chapter 3 or the conduit shall be entirely fabricated of gas-tight components and materials.

E307 Air distribution systems.
E307.1 Air distribution systems.

Any air duct, plenum, fan enclosure, or fan that is part of a building’s heating, ventilating or air-conditioning system shall be completely isolated from the soil gas by a structural barrier complying with the provisions of Chapter 3. Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems supplying spaces that have floors or walls in contact with soil or soil gas shall be designed to minimize air-pressure differences and eliminate negative pressures, that cause significant flow of soil gas through the structural barrier and into the building. Return ducts, plenums, and air handlers shall not be located in a crawl space.

E307.2 Exhaust fans, hoods, equipment, and appliances.

For each zone, the required volume of outside ventilation air shall be equal to or greater than the combined volume of air capable of being exhausted by all exhaust fans, hoods, equipment, and appliances installed in the zone. This amount may not be reduced by use factors unless devices are wired and switched in a manner that prevents their simultaneous operation.

E307.3 Combustion air ducts.

Ducts that provide combustion air to fuel-burning appliances and equipment shall be completely isolated from the soil-gas by a structural barrier complying with the provisions of Chapter 3.

CHAPTER E401
ACTIVE SOIL-DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEMS
E401 General.

A soil-depressurization system maintains a lower air pressure in the soil directly beneath the building floor and foundation than exists within the building. This not only draws radon away, but also causes the direction of the airflow through any possible failure in the structural barrier to be out of the building and into the soil-depressurization system. Soil depressurization systems may be installed beneath concrete slabs supported directly on the soil, or beneath the soil gas-retarder membrane in crawl spaces.

E401.1 Prohibited uses.

Soil-depressurization systems components may not extend beneath areas that are required to be depressurized by other codes for the protection of public health, for example rooms containing general anesthesia, pathogens, or poisonous chemicals. Soil depressurization systems may be installed beneath rooms that are required to be depressurized for other reasons, such as toilets and kitchens.

E402 System components.

An active soil-depressurization (ASD) system is comprised of the following components: pressure distribution system porous media or manifolds; a soil cover; one or more vents; a suction fan; and a system failure indicator.

E402.1 Pressure distribution media or manifolds.

A wide variety of means can be utilized to extend the low-pressure zone across the entire area beneath the structure. Acceptable means include synthetic ventilation mats, a system of perforated pipe, and an air-permeable gravel layer. Different types of pressure distribution media may be used in the same system, provided each complies with the installation requirements of this chapter. Pressure distribution media must be installed is such a way as to assure that they are never blocked by water.

1.	Ventilation mats shall have a soil contact area of at least 216 square inches (0.14 m2) per lineal foot and provide a cross-section profile of at least 9 square inches (0.006 m2).

2.	Perforated pipe may be used to construct pressure extension manifolds. These pipes may be installed directly under the soil cover or in gravel or a similar porous medium that provides an adequate airflow connection between the pipe and the subsoil and that protects the pipe from becoming blocked by soil.

3.	Continuous gravel layers of at least 4 inches (102 mm) thick are an acceptable pressure distribution medium, provided they completely cover the area of soil to be depressurized.

E402.2 Soil cover.

In slab-on-grade construction, the soil cover consists of the soil gas-retarder membrane and the concrete slab. In crawl spaces, the concrete slab may be omitted, providing the soil gas-retarder membrane will not be subjected to wear and damage due to required maintenance procedures. In all instances, the soil gas-retarder membrane shall be fully sealed to the radon vents in accordance with the provisions of Section E302.

E402.3 Radon vents.

Radon vents are gas-tight pipes that carry the soil gas to an area above and away from the building. Radon vent pipes shall be of a material approved by the governing local building code for plumbing vents.

E402.4 Suction fans.

Suction fans create the critical pressure difference between the subslab and indoors. Suction fans shall be designed for continuous operation. Fan performance is determined by the soil characteristics, the airflow characteristics of the pressure distribution system, and the system layout, and shall comply with the airflows and operating pressures determined by the system design, as determined using the large-building active soil-depressurization model, or with criteria below for alternate compliance method. The computer model program is available through the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Codes and Standards Office, 2601 Blair Stone Road, Tallahassee, Florida, 32399.

E402.5 Fan-failure indicator.

Each soil-depressurization system shall have a failure indicator labeled with the words “RADON REDUCTION SYSTEM FAN-FAILURE INDICATOR” mounted so as to be conveniently visible to the building occupants. The fan-failure indicator may be either a visual device consisting of a light of not less than 1/5 footcandle (2 lux) at the floor level, or an alarm that produces a minimum 60 db audible signal. The indicator shall be made to operate automatically when the pressure inside any radon vent pipe fitted with an operable fan is less than 0.40-inch water column (100 pascals) lower than the air pressure inside the building.

E403 ASD system design requirements.
E403.1 General.

All ASD systems must comply with a design shown by the large-building active soil-depressurization model to be capable of maintaining a 0.02-inch (5 pascal) pressure differential over 90 percent of the slab or crawlspace area.

E403.2 Ventilation mat systems.

Mat systems may be designed and installed in accordance with a design shown by the large-building active soil-depressurization model to be capable of maintaining a 5-pascal pressure differential over 90 percent of the slab area or with Section 503.2.2.

E403.2.1 Installation.

Radon ventilation mats shall be installed immediately prior to placing the soil gas-retarder membrane, to reduce the chance for soil to enter and block the mat. Mats shall be arranged in a pattern that provides at least two possible flow paths from any point on the mat to a radon vent pipe. Mats shall be placed with the filter material facing the compacted soil. Where sections of mat join, a minimum 6-inch (152 mm) long section of filter material at the end of one of the mats shall be loosened and the other piece of mat inserted between the loosened filter material and the first section of mat. The mats will be pressed tightly together at this lap and mechanically attached together with hog rings or metal pins driven through the mat and into the soil. Wire ties, which will puncture or tear the soil gas-retarder membrane, shall not be used to join the mats. When properly joined, the filter material will extend continuously across the joint and the full cross-sectional area of the mat will be preserved across the splice.

E403.2.2 Alternate compliance method.

Systems installed on sand or granular soil, can demonstrate compliance by meeting the following design limits:

1.	Mats shall be located at least 15 feet (4572 mm) and not more than 25 feet (7620 mm) from the outside edge of the floor.

2.	Mats shall be spaced not more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) on center.

3.	No portion of a building floor shall be isolated from a mat by a construction feature, such as an internal footing, grade beam, foundation wall, or other obstacle having a depth greater than the exterior foundation walls.

4.	No portion of a building floor shall be more than 35 feet (10 668 mm) from a mat.

5.	Mats shall be run parallel to the longest slab dimension unless obstructed by a construction feature, and arranged in a pattern that provides at least two possible flow paths from any point on the mat to a radon vent pipe.

E403.2.3 Radon vent connection.

The radon vent pipe shall join to the mat in a manner that does not restrict the full air-flow capacity of the pipe. Depending upon the thickness and effective net-free area of the ventilation mat, this may require enlarging the diameter of the vent pipe at the connection with a suitable flange, or increasing the net-free area of the mat by installing additional layers of mat or a layer of gravel beneath the connection point. The soil gas-retarder membrane shall be fully sealed to the radon vents in accordance with the provisions of Section 302.

E403.3 Perforated pipe systems.

Perforated pipes shall be of a material approved by the governing local building code for foundation drainage, and sized according to the air-flow estimated from the large-building active soil-depressurization model. Where perforated pipes are installed in gravel meeting ASTM D448, numbers 4 or 5 gravel, with not more than 5 percent passing a 3/8 inch (10 mm) screen.

E403.3.1 Installation.

Perforated pipe pressure distribution manifolds shall be installed only after the installation of all other utilities has been completed and immediately prior to the soil gas-retarder membrane. Pipes shall be installed with a row of perforations located at the bottom of the pipe in order to allow condensate to drain from the system. Pipes shall be arranged in a pattern that provides at least two possible flow paths from any point in the system to a radon vent pipe. Separate sections of pipe shall be solvent welded or mechanically fastened together.

E403.3.2 Radon vent connection.

The radon vent pipe shall join to the perforated pipe with a fitting that allows for the fill air-flow capacity of the vent pipe. The soil gas-retarder membrane shall be fully sealed to the radon vents in accordance with the provisions of Section E302.

E403.4 Continuous gravel layer systems.

Gravel used as the pressure distribution medium shall be installed only after the installation of all other utilities has been completed, and immediately prior to the soil gas-retarder membrane. Where regions of gravel are isolated from one another by interior foundation elements, separate suction points shall be provided in each region, or regions shall be interconnected with pipes run horizontally through the obstruction. The size and number of such pipes shall be sufficient to provide at least two-times the anticipated air-flow. In no case shall fewer than two pipes be used to interconnect one gravel area with another. These pipes shall be separated by a horizontal distance not less than one-half the length of the boundary between the connecting gravel areas.

E403.4.1 Radon vent connection.

The radon vent pipe shall join to the gravel layer with a “T” fitting that allows for the full airflow capacity of the vent pipe from either side of the “T.” The fitting shall be installed with two arms in the gravel and a single arm connected to the radon vent pipe. The soil-gas-retarder membrane shall be fully scaled to the radon vents in accordance with the provisions of Section E302.

E403.5 Radon vent pipe installation.

Radon vent pipes shall be solvent welded or otherwise joined to create a gas-tight connection from the soil-suction point to the vent termination point. They shall be sloped a minimum of 1/8 inch (3 mm) per foot in a manner that will drain all rain and condensate back to the soil, and shall be supported in compliance with regulations for plumbing vents.

E403.5.1 Labeling.

All portions of the radon vent pipe not permanently encased in a wall or chase shall be labeled to prevent accidental misuse. Labels shall consist of a pressure-sensitive 2-inch (51 mm) yellow band with the words “RADON REDUCTION SYSTEM” printed in black letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) in height. These labels shall be placed on every visible portion of the vent pipe at a spacing of not more than 3 feet (914 mm). The labels shall be placed so as to be visible from any direction.

The size of vent pipes shall be determined by application of appropriate engineering principles, based on air-flow rates predicted with the large-building active soil-depressurization model. For systems that comply with the alternate compliance method, Section E403.2.2, and are installed in buildings with straight runs of vent pipes no more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in height, the required number and size of vent pipes may be determined as follows:

1.	For up to 100 linear feet (30 480 mm) of ventilation mat use one 2-inch (51 mm) diameter pipe.

2.	For up to 200 linear feet (60 960 mm) of ventilation mat use one 3-inch (76 mm) diameter pipe, or two 2-inch (76 mm) diameter pipes.

3.	For up to 400 linear feet (121 920 mm) of ventilation mat use one 4-inch (102 mm) diameter pipe, or two 3-inch (76 mm) diameter pipes, or four 2-inch (30 480 mm) diameter pipes.

E403.5.2 Terminals.

Radon vent pipes shall terminate with a rain cap, installed above the roof of the structure, and shall be located in accordance with existing codes for toxic or noxious exhausts. If not specifically addressed or applicable, vent pipes shall be terminated in locations that minimize human exposure to their exhaust air, such that the location is:

1.	At least 12 inches (305 mm) above the surface of the roof;

2.	At least 10 feet (3048 mm) from any window, door, or other opening (e.g., operable skylight or air intake) to conditioned spaces of the structure; and

3.	Ten feet (3048 mm) from any opening into an adjacent building.

The total required distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] shall be measured either directly between the two points or be the sum of measurements made around the intervening obstacles. If the discharge point is within two feet of elevation of the opening into conditioned space, the distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] shall be the horizontal distance between the points.

E403.6 Suction fans.

Soil-depressurization system fans shall be designed to maintain the following minimum air-pressure differences at the lower opening of the radon vent pipe as compared to the air pressure of the conditioned space above:

1.	For systems using ventilation mats, 0.5 inch (0.52 kPa) water column.

2.	For systems using perforated pipe, 0.5 inch (0.52 kPa) water column.

3.	For systems using continuous gravel layers, 1.0 inch (0.2488 kPa) water column.

E403.6.1 Fan sizing.

Soil-depressurization systems that comply with the alternative compliance method, Section E403.2.2, and sizing, Section E403.5.2, may comply by sizing the fan as follows:

1.	For up to 100 lineal feet (30 480 mm) of ventilation mat the fan shall be rated for 50 cfm (24 L/s) at 1-inch (30 480 mm) water column.

2.	For 100 to 200 lineal feet (30 480 mm to 60 960 mm) of ventilation mat, the fan shall be rated for at least 100 cfm (30 480 mm) at 1-inch (30 480 mm) water column.

3.	For 200 to 400 lineal feet (60 960 mm to 121 920 mm) of ventilation mat, the fan shall be rated for at least 175 cfm (83 L/S) at 1-inch (0.2488 kPa) water column.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-f]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX F
RODENTPROOFING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION F101
GENERAL
F101.1 General.

Buildings or structures and the walls enclosing habitable or occupiable rooms and spaces in which persons live, sleep or work, or in which feed, food or foodstuffs are stored, prepared, processed, served or sold, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

F101.2 Foundation wall ventilation openings.

Foundation wall ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with perforated sheet metal plates no less than 0.070 inch (1.8 mm) thick, expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch (1.2 mm) thick, cast-iron grills or grating, extruded aluminum load-bearing vents or with hardware cloth of 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier. The openings therein shall not exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 mm).

F101.3 Foundation and exterior wall sealing.

Annular spaces around pipes, electric cables, conduits or other openings in the walls shall be protected against the passage of rodents by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete masonry or noncorrosive metal.

F101.4 Doors.

Doors on which metal protection has been applied shall be hinged so as to be free swinging. When closed, the maximum clearance between any door, door jambs and sills shall be not greater than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

F101.5 Windows and other openings.

Windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation located in exterior walls within 2 feet (610 mm) above the existing ground level immediately below such opening shall be covered for their entire height and width, including frame, with hardware cloth of at least 0.035-inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier.

F101.5.1 Rodent-accessible openings.

Windows and other openings for the purpose of light and ventilation in the exterior walls not covered in this chapter, accessible to rodents by way of exposed pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances, shall be covered with wire cloth of at least 0.035-inch (0.89 mm) wire. In lieu of wire cloth covering, said pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be blocked from rodent usage by installing solid sheet metal guards 0.024 inch (0.61 mm) thick or heavier. Guards shall be fitted around pipes, wires, conduits or other appurtenances. In addition, they shall be fastened securely to and shall extend perpendicularly from the exterior wall for a minimum distance of 12 inches (305 mm) beyond and on either side of pipes, wires, conduits or appurtenances.

F101.6 Pier and wood construction.
F101.6.1 Sill less than 12 inches above ground.

Buildings not provided with a continuous foundation shall be provided with protection against rodents at grade by providing either an apron in accordance with Section F101.6.1.1 or a floor slab in accordance with Section F101.6.1.2.

F101.6.1.1 Apron.

Where an apron is provided, the apron shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above, nor less than 24 inches (610 mm) below, grade. The apron shall not terminate below the lower edge of the siding material. The apron shall be constructed of an approved nondecayable, water-resistant rodentproofing material of required strength and shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the building. Where constructed of masonry or concrete materials, the apron shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness.

F101.6.1.2 Grade floors.

Where continuous concrete-grade floor slabs are provided, open spaces shall not be left between the slab and walls, and openings in the slab shall be protected.

F101.6.2 Sill at or above 12 inches above ground.

Buildings not provided with a continuous foundation and that have sills 12 inches (305 mm) or more above ground level shall be provided with protection against rodents at grade in accordance with any of the following:

1.	Section F101.6.1.1 or F101.6.1.2.

2.	By installing solid sheet metal collars at least 0.024 inch (0.6 mm) thick at the top of each pier or pile and around each pipe, cable, conduit, wire or other item that provides a continuous pathway from the ground to the floor.

3.	By encasing the pipes, cables, conduits or wires in an enclosure constructed in accordance with Section F101.6.1.1.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-g]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX G
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-h]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX H
SIGNS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION H101
GENERAL
H101.1 General.

A sign shall not be erected in a manner that would confuse or obstruct the view of or interfere with exit signs required by Chapter 10 or with official traffic signs, signals or devices. Signs and sign support structures, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.

H101.2 Signs exempt from permits.

The following signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a permit before erection:

1.	Painted nonilluminated signs.

2.	Temporary signs announcing the sale or rent of property.

3.	Signs erected by transportation authorities.

4.	Projecting signs not exceeding 2.5 square feet (0.23 m2).

5.	The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the repainting or repositioning of display matter shall not be deemed an alteration.

SECTION H102
DEFINITIONS
H102.1 General.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

COMBINATION SIGN. A sign incorporating any combination of the features of pole, projecting and roof signs.

DISPLAY SIGN. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.

ELECTRIC SIGN. A sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.

GROUND SIGN. A billboard or similar type of sign that is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a combination sign or pole sign, as defined by this code.

POLE SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground.

PORTABLE DISPLAY SURFACE. A display surface temporarily fixed to a standardized advertising structure that is regularly moved from structure to structure at periodic intervals.

PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign that projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.

ROOF SIGN. A sign erected on or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure.

SIGN. Any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall be constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise, whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner outdoors. Every sign shall be classified and conform to the requirements of that classification as set forth in this chapter.

SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign as defined in this code. A sign structure is permitted to be a single pole and is not required to be an integral part of the building.

WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.

SECTION H103
LOCATION
H103.1 Location restrictions.

Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or door or opening used as a means of egress or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape, nor be placed in such manner as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation.

SECTION H104
IDENTIFICATION
H104.1 Identification.

Every outdoor advertising display sign hereafter erected, constructed or maintained, for which a permit is required, shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued for said sign or other method of identification approved by the building official.

SECTION H105
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
H105.1 General requirements.

Signs shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions of this code for use of materials, loads and stresses.

H105.2 Permits, drawings and specifications.

Where a permit is required, as provided in Chapter 1, construction documents shall be required. These documents shall show the dimensions, material and required details of construction, including loads, stresses and anchors.

H105.3 Wind load.

Signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure as provided for in Chapter 16.

H105.4 Seismic load.

Reserved.

H105.5 Working stresses.

In outdoor advertising display signs, the allowable working stresses shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 16. The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners.

Exceptions:

1.	The allowable working stresses for steel and wood shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 22 and 23.

2.	The working strength of chains, cables, guys or steel rods shall not exceed one-fifth of the ultimate strength of such chains, cables, guys or steel.

H105.6 Attachment.

Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied.

SECTION H106
ELECTRICAL
H106.1 Illumination.

A sign shall not be illuminated by other than electrical means, and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70. Any open spark or flame shall not be used for display purposes unless specifically approved.

H106.1.1 Internally illuminated signs.

Except as provided for in Sections 402.16 and 2611, where internally illuminated signs have facings of wood or approved plastic, the area of such facing section shall be not more than 120 square feet (11.16 m2) and the wiring for electric lighting shall be entirely enclosed in the sign cabinet with a clearance of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the facing material. The dimensional limitation of 120 square feet (11.16 m2) shall not apply to sign facing sections made from flame-resistant-coated fabric (ordinarily known as “flexible sign face plastic”) that weighs less than 20 ounces per square yard (678 g/m2) and that, when tested in accordance with NFPA 701, meets the fire propagation performance requirements of both Test 1 and Test 2 or that, when tested in accordance with an approved test method, exhibits an average burn time of 2 seconds or less and a burning extent of 5.9 inches (150 mm) or less for 10 specimens.

H106.2 Electrical service.

Signs that require electrical service shall comply with NFPA 70.

SECTION H107
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS
H107.1 Use of combustibles.

Wood, approved plastic or plastic veneer panels as provided for in Chapter 26, or other materials of combustible characteristics similar to wood, used for moldings, cappings, nailing blocks, letters and latticing, shall comply with Section H109.1 and shall not be used for other ornamental features of signs, unless approved.

H107.1.1 Plastic materials.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, plastic materials that burn at a rate no faster than 2.5 inches per minute (64 mm/s) when tested in accordance with ASTM D635 shall be deemed approved plastics and can be used as the display surface material and for the letters, decorations and facings on signs and outdoor display structures.

H107.1.2 Electric sign faces.

Individual plastic facings of electric signs shall not exceed 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in area.

H107.1.3 Area limitation.

If the area of a display surface exceeds 200 square feet (18.6 m2), the area occupied or covered by approved plastics shall be limited to 200 square feet (18.6 m2) plus 50 percent of the difference between 200 square feet (18.6 m2) and the area of display surface. The area of plastic on a display surface shall not in any case exceed 1,100 square feet (102 m2).

H107.1.4 Plastic appurtenances.

Letters and decorations mounted on an approved plastic facing or display surface can be made of approved plastics.

SECTION H108
ANIMATED DEVICES
H108.1 Fail-safe device.

Signs that contain moving sections or ornaments shall have fail-safe provisions to prevent the section or ornament from releasing and falling or shifting its center of gravity more than 15 inches (381 mm). The fail-safe device shall be in addition to the mechanism and the mechanism’s housing that operate the movable section or ornament. The fail-safe device shall be capable of supporting the full dead weight of the section or ornament when the moving mechanism releases.

SECTION H109
GROUND SIGNS
H109.1 Height restrictions.

The structural frame of ground signs shall not be erected of combustible materials to a height of more than 35 feet (10 668 mm) above the ground. Ground signs constructed entirely of noncombustible material shall not be erected to a height of greater than 100 feet (30 480 mm) above the ground. Greater heights are permitted where approved and located so as not to create a hazard or danger to the public.

H109.2 Required clearance.

The bottom coping of every ground sign shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the ground or street level, which space can be filled with platform decorative trim or light wooden construction.

H109.3 Wood anchors and supports.

Where wood anchors or supports are embedded in the soil, the wood shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative.

SECTION H110
ROOF SIGNS
H110.1 General.

Roof signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other approved noncombustible material except as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1. Provisions shall be made for electric grounding of metallic parts. Where combustible materials are permitted in letters or other ornamental features, wiring and tubing shall be kept free and insulated therefrom. Roof signs shall be so constructed as to leave a clear space of not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) between the roof level and the lowest part of the sign and shall have at least 5 feet (1524 mm) clearance between the vertical supports thereof. No portion of any roof sign structure shall project beyond an exterior wall.

Exception: Signs on flat roofs with every part of the roof accessible.

H110.2 Bearing plates.

The bearing plates of roof signs shall distribute the load directly to or upon masonry walls, steel roof girders, columns or beams. The building shall be designed to avoid overstress of these members.

H110.3 Height of solid signs.

A roof sign having a solid surface shall not exceed, at any point, a height of 24 feet (7315 mm) measured from the roof surface.

H110.4 Height of open signs.

Open roof signs in which the uniform open area is not less than 40 percent of total gross area shall not exceed a height of 75 feet (22 860 mm) on buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction. On buildings of other construction types, the height shall not exceed 40 feet (12 192 mm). Such signs shall be thoroughly secured to the building upon which they are installed, erected or constructed by iron, metal anchors, bolts, supports, chains, stranded cables, steel rods or braces and they shall be maintained in good condition.

H110.5 Height of closed signs.

A closed roof sign shall not be erected to a height greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above the roof of buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction or more than 35 feet (10 668 mm) above the roof of buildings of Type 3, 4 or 5 construction.

SECTION H111
WALL SIGNS
H111.1 Materials.

Wall signs that have an area exceeding 40 square feet (3.72 m2) shall be constructed of metal or other approved noncombustible material, except for nailing rails and as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

H111.2 Exterior wall mounting details.

Wall signs attached to exterior walls of solid masonry, concrete or stone shall be safely and securely attached by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) diameter and shall be embedded at least 5 inches (127 mm). Wood blocks shall not be used for anchorage, except in the case of wall signs attached to buildings with walls of wood. A wall sign shall not be supported by anchorages secured to an unbraced parapet wall.

H111.3 Extension.

Wall signs shall not extend above the top of the wall or beyond the ends of the wall to which the signs are attached unless such signs conform to the requirements for roof signs, projecting signs or ground signs.

SECTION H112
PROJECTING SIGNS
H112.1 General.

Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and securely attached to a building or structure by metal supports such as bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. Staples or nails shall not be used to secure any projecting sign to any building or structure. The dead load of projecting signs not parallel to the building or structure and the load due to wind pressure shall be supported with chains, guys or steel rods having net cross-sectional dimension of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) diameter. Such supports shall be erected or maintained at an angle of at least 45 percent (0.78 rad) with the horizontal to resist the dead load and at angle of 45 percent (0.78 rad) or more with the face of the sign to resist the specified wind pressure. If such projecting sign exceeds 30 square feet (2.8 m2) in one facial area, there shall be provided at least two such supports on each side not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) apart to resist the wind pressure.

H112.2 Attachment of supports.

Supports shall be secured to a bolt or expansion screw that will develop the strength of the supporting chains, guys or steel rods, with a minimum 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) bolt or lag screw, by an expansion shield. Turnbuckles shall be placed in chains, guys or steel rods supporting projecting signs.

H112.3 Wall mounting details.

Chains, cables, guys or steel rods used to support the live or dead load of projecting signs are permitted to be fastened to solid masonry walls with expansion bolts or by machine screws in iron supports, but such supports shall not be attached to an unbraced parapet wall. Where the supports must be fastened to walls made of wood, the supporting anchor bolts must go through the wall and be plated or fastened on the inside in a secure manner.

H112.4 Height limitation.

A projecting sign shall not be erected on the wall of any building so as to project above the roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where there is no cornice wall; except that a sign erected at a right angle to the building, the horizontal width of which sign is perpendicular to such a wall and does not exceed 18 inches (457 mm), is permitted to be erected to a height not exceeding 2 feet (610 mm) above the roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where there is no cornice wall. A sign attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall.

H112.5 Additional loads.

Projecting sign structures that will be used to support an individual on a ladder or other servicing device, whether or not specifically designed for the servicing device, shall be capable of supporting the anticipated additional load, but not less than a 100-pound (445 N) concentrated horizontal load and a 300-pound (1334 N) concentrated vertical load applied at the point of assumed or most eccentric loading. The building component to which the projecting sign is attached shall also be designed to support the additional loads.

SECTION H113
MARQUEE SIGNS
H113.1 Materials.

Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other approved noncombustible material except as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

H113.2 Attachment.

Marquee signs shall be attached to approved marquees that are constructed in accordance with Section 3106.

H113.3 Dimensions.

Marquee signs, whether on the front or side, shall not project beyond the perimeter of the marquee.

H113.4 Height limitation.

Marquee signs shall not extend more than 6 feet (1829 mm) above, nor 1 foot (305 mm) below such marquee, but under no circumstances shall the sign or signs have a vertical dimension greater than 8 feet (2438 mm).

SECTION H114
PORTABLE SIGNS
H114.1 General.

Portable signs shall conform to requirements for ground, roof, projecting, flat and temporary signs where such signs are used in a similar capacity. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to require portable signs to have connections to surfaces, tie-downs or foundations where provisions are made by temporary means or configuration of the structure to provide stability for the expected duration of the installation.

TABLE 4-A

SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS IN SIGNS

MAXIMUM SIZE OF
EXPOSED PANEL
	MINIMUM
THICKNESS
OF GLASS
(inches)
	TYPE OF GLASS
Any dimension
(inches)
	Area
(square inches)

30	500	1/8	Plain, plate or wired
45	700	3/16	Plain, plate or wired
144	3,600	1/4	Plain, plate or wired
> 144	> 3,600	1/4	Wired glass

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

TABLE 4-B

THICKNESS OF PROJECTION SIGN

PROJECTION (feet)	MAXIMUM THICKNESS (feet)
5	2
4	2.5
3	3
2	3.5
1	4

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

SECTION H115
REFERENCED STANDARDS
ASTM D635—10	Test Method for Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of Burning of Plastics in a Horizontal Position	H107.1.1
NFPA 70—11	National Electrical Code	H106.1, H106.2
NFPA 701—10	Methods of Fire Test for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films	H106.1.1

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-i]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX I
PATIO COVERS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION I101
GENERAL
I101.1 General.

Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached from or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as carports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms.

SECTION I102
DEFINITION
I102.1 General.

The following term shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meaning shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

PATIO COVER. A structure with open or glazed walls that is used for recreational, outdoor living purposes associated with a dwelling unit.

SECTION I103
EXTERIOR WALLS AND OPENINGS
I103.1 Enclosure walls.

Enclosure walls shall be permitted to be of any configuration, provided the open or glazed area of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 percent of the area below a minimum of 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) of each wall, measured from the floor. Openings shall be permitted to be enclosed with insect screening, approved translucent or transparent plastic not more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness, glass conforming to the provisions of Chapter 24 or any combination of the foregoing.

I103.2 Light, ventilation and emergency egress.

Exterior openings of the dwelling unit required for light and ventilation shall be permitted to open into a patio structure. However, the patio structure shall be unenclosed if such openings are serving as emergency egress or rescue openings from sleeping rooms. Where such exterior openings serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio structure, unless unenclosed, shall be provided with exits conforming to the provision of Chapter 10.

SECTION I104
HEIGHT
I104.1 Height.

Patio covers shall be limited to one-story structures not more than 12 feet (3657 mm) in height.

SECTION I105
STRUCTURAL PROVISIONS
I105.1 Design loads.

Patio covers shall be designed and constructed to sustain, within the stress limits of this code, all dead loads plus a minimum vertical live load of 10 pounds per square foot (0.48 kN/m2). Such patio covers shall be designed to resist the minimum wind loads set forth in this code.

I105.2 Footings.

In areas with a frost depth of zero, a patio cover shall be permitted to be supported on a concrete slab on grade without footings, provided the slab conforms to the provisions of Chapter 19 of this code, is not less than 31/2 inches (89 mm) thick and further provided that the columns do not support loads in excess of 750 pounds (3.36 kN) per column.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-j]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX J
GRADING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION J101
GENERAL
J101.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern.

J101.2 Flood hazard areas.

Unless the applicant has submitted an engineering analysis, prepared in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered design professional, that demonstrates the proposed work will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood, grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, shall not be permitted in floodways that are in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated.

SECTION J102
DEFINITIONS
J102.1 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

BENCH. A relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

COMPACTION. The densification of a fill by mechanical means.

CUT. See “Excavation.”

DOWN DRAIN. A device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility.

EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.

EXCAVATION. The removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut.

FILL. Deposition of earth materials by artificial means.

GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface.

GRADE, EXISTING. The grade prior to grading.

GRADE, FINISHED. The grade of the site at the conclusion of all grading efforts.

GRADING. An excavation or fill or combination thereof.

KEY. A compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a slope.

SLOPE. An inclined surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

TERRACE. A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes.

SECTION J103
PERMITS REQUIRED
J103.1 Permits required.

Except as exempted in Section J103.2, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit therefor from the building official. A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures.

J103.2 Exemptions.

A grading permit shall not be required for the following:

1.	Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.

2.	Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.

3.	Cemetery graves.

4.	Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

5.	Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.

6.	Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.

7.	Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.

Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

SECTION J104
PERMIT APPLICATION AND SUBMITTALS
J104.1 Submittal requirements.

In addition to the provisions of Section 105.3, the applicant shall state the estimated quantities of excavation and fill.

J104.2 Site plan requirements.

In addition to the provisions of Section 107, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and finished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it complies with the requirements of this code. The plans shall show the existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to identify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this code.

J104.3 Geotechnical report.

A geotechnical report prepared by a registered design professional shall be provided. The report shall contain at least the following:

1.	The nature and distribution of existing soils.

2.	Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures.

3.	Soil design criteria for any structures or embankments required to accomplish the proposed grading.

4.	Where necessary, slope stability studies, and recommendations and conclusions regarding site geology.

Exception: A geotechnical report is not required where the building official determines that the nature of the work applied for is such that a report is not necessary.

SECTION J105
INSPECTIONS
J105.1 General.

Inspections shall be governed by Section 110 of this code.

J105.2 Special inspections.

The special inspection requirements of Section 1705.6 shall apply to work performed under a grading permit where required by the building official.

SECTION J106
EXCAVATIONS
J106.1 Maximum slope.

The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be not more than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope) unless the owner or the owner’s authorized agent furnishes a geotechnical report justifying a steeper slope.

Exceptions:

1.	A cut surface shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1.5 units horizontal to one unit vertical (67-percent slope) provided that all of the following are met:

1.1.	It is not intended to support structures or surcharges.

1.2.	It is adequately protected against erosion.

1.3.	It is no more than 8 feet (2438 mm) in height.

1.4.	It is approved by the building code official.

1.5.	Ground water is not encountered.

2.	A cut surface in bedrock shall be permitted to be at a slope of one unit horizontal to one unit vertical (100-percent slope).

SECTION J107
FILLS
J107.1 General.

Unless otherwise recommended in the geotechnical report, fills shall comply with the provisions of this section.

J107.2 Surface preparation.

The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, and scarifying the ground to provide a bond with the fill material.

J107.3 Benching.

Where existing grade is at a slope steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20-percent slope) and the depth of the fill exceeds 5 feet (1524 mm) benching shall be provided in accordance with Figure J107.3. A key shall be provided that is at least 10 feet (3048 mm) in width and 2 feet (610 mm) in depth.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE J107.3

BENCHING DETAILS

J107.4 Fill material.

Fill material shall not include organic, frozen or other deleterious materials. No rock or similar irreducible material greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in any dimension shall be included in fills.

J107.5 Compaction.

All fill material shall be compacted to 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1557, Modified Proctor, in lifts not exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in depth.

J107.6 Maximum slope.

The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope) shall be justified by a geotechnical report or engineering data.

SECTION J108
SETBACKS
J108.1 General.

Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in Figure J108.1, unless substantiating data is submitted justifying reduced setbacks.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE J108.1

DRAINAGE DIMENSIONS

J108.2 Top of slope.

The setback at the top of a cut slope shall be not less than that shown in Figure J108.1, or than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater.

J108.3 Slope protection.

Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the building official, shall be included. Such protection may include but shall not be limited to:

1.	Setbacks greater than those required by Figure J108.1.

2.	Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction.

3.	Erosion protection of the fill slopes.

4.	Provision for the control of surface waters.

SECTION J109
DRAINAGE AND TERRACING
J109.1 General.

Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section.

Exception: Drainage facilities and terracing need not be provided where the ground slope is not steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33-percent slope).

J109.2 Terraces.

Terraces at least 6 feet (1829 mm) in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot (9144 mm) vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. Suitable access shall be provided to allow for cleaning and maintenance.

Where more than two terraces are required, one terrace, located at approximately mid-height, shall be at least 12 feet (3658 mm) in width.

Swales or ditches shall be provided on terraces. They shall have a minimum gradient of one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) and shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness, or with other materials suitable to the application. They shall have a depth not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and a width not less than 5 feet (1524 mm).

A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (1256 m2) (projected) without discharging into a down drain.

J109.3 Interceptor drains.

Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of cut slopes receiving drainage from a tributary width greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm), measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of 1 foot (305 mm) and a minimum width of 3 feet (915 mm). The slope shall be approved by the building official, but shall be not less than one unit vertical in 50 units horizontal (2-percent slope). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the building official.

J109.4 Drainage across property lines.

Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other devices.

SECTION J110
EROSION CONTROL
J110.1 General.

The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control shall be permitted to consist of effective planting.

Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials.

Erosion control for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection.

J110.2 Other devices.

Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

SECTION J111
REFERENCED STANDARDS
ASTM D1557-12	Test Method for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using Modified Effort [56,000 ft-lb/ft3 (2,700kN-m/m3)].	J107.5

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-k]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX K
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

With the exception of Section K111, this appendix contains only administrative provisions that are intended to be used by a jurisdiction to implement and enforce NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code. Annex H of NFPA 70 also contains administrative and enforcement provisions, and these provisions may or may not be completely compatible with or consistent with Chapter 1 of the IBC, whereas the provisions in IBC Appendix K are compatible and consistent with Chapter 1 of the IBC and other ICC codes. Section K111 contains technical provisions that are unique to this appendix and are in addition to those of NFPA 70.

The provisions of Appendix K are specific to what might be designated as an Electrical Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement and could be implemented where other such provisions are not adopted.

SECTION K101
GENERAL
K101.1 Purpose.

A purpose of this code is to establish minimum requirements to safeguard public health, safety and general welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of electrical systems and equipment.

K101.2 Scope.

This code applies to the design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equipment.

SECTION K102
APPLICABILITY
K102.1 General.

The provisions of this code apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in Section K101.

K102.2 Existing installations.

Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in this code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, or prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, existing electrical systems and equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code.

K102.3 Maintenance.

Electrical systems, equipment, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe, hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by this code shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the electrical systems and equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require that the electrical systems and equipment be reinspected.

K102.4 Additions, alterations and repairs.

Additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to electrical systems and equipment shall conform to that required for new electrical systems and equipment without requiring that the existing electrical systems or equipment comply with all of the requirements of this code. Additions, alterations and repairs shall not cause existing electrical systems or equipment to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded.

Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing electrical systems and equipment shall meet the provisions for new construction, except where such work is performed in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is not hazardous and is approved.

K102.5 Subjects not regulated by this code.

Where no applicable standards or requirements are set forth in this code, or are contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction, compliance with applicable standards of nationally recognized standards as are approved shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent of this code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the building official to determine compliance with codes or standards for those activities or installations within the building official’s jurisdiction or responsibility.

SECTION K103
PERMITS
K103.1 Types of permits.

An owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace electrical systems or equipment, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work.

Exception: Where repair or replacement of electrical systems or equipment must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day of the department of electrical inspection.

K103.2 Work exempt from permit.

The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit:

1.	Listed cord- and plug-connected temporary decorative lighting.

2.	Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.

3.	Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location.

4.	Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories.

5.	Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done in violation of the provisions of this code or other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

SECTION K104
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
K104.1 Information on construction documents.

Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted where approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that such work will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official.

K104.2 Penetrations.

Construction documents shall indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical systems and shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking.

K104.3 Load calculations.

Where an addition or alteration is made to an existing electrical system, an electrical load calculation shall be prepared to determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the added load.

SECTION K105
ALTERNATIVE ENGINEERED DESIGN
K105.1 General.

The design, documentation, inspection, testing and approval of an alternative engineered design electrical system shall comply with this section.

K105.2 Design criteria.

An alternative engineered design shall conform to the intent of the provisions of this code and shall provide an equivalent level of quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Materials, equipment or components shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

K105.3 Submittal.

The registered design professional shall indicate on the permit application that the electrical system is an alternative engineered design. The permit and permanent permit records shall indicate that an alternative engineered design was part of the approved installation.

K105.4 Technical data.

The registered design professional shall submit sufficient technical data to substantiate the proposed alternative engineered design and to prove that the performance meets the intent of this code.

K105.5 Construction documents.

The registered design professional shall submit to the building official two complete sets of signed and sealed construction documents for the alternative engineered design. The construction documents shall include floor plans and a diagram of the work.

K105.6 Design approval.

Where the building official determines that the alternative engineered design conforms to the intent of this code, the electrical system shall be approved. If the alternative engineered design is not approved, the building official shall notify the registered design professional in writing, stating the reasons therefor.

K105.7 Inspection and testing.

The alternative engineered design shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the requirements of this code.

SECTION K106
REQUIRED INSPECTIONS
K106.1 General.

The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in this section.

K106.2 Underground.

Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping and conductors installed, and before backfill is put in place. Where excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the raceway, cable or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection shall be provided in the form of granular or selected material, approved running boards, sleeves or other means.

K106.3 Rough-in.

Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.

K106.4 Contractors’ responsibilities.

It shall be the responsibility of every contractor who enters into contracts for the installation or repair of electrical systems for which a permit is required to comply with adopted state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing.

SECTION K107
PREFABRICATED CONSTRUCTION
K107.1 Prefabricated construction.

Prefabricated construction is subject to Sections K107.2 through K107.5.

K107.2 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services.

Prior to the approval of a prefabricated construction assembly having concealed electrical work and the issuance of an electrical permit, the building official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly, indicating the complete details of the electrical system, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the building official to determine conformance to this code.

K107.3 Evaluation service.

The building official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency and review such agency’s evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to this code.

K107.4 Follow-up inspection.

Except where ready access is provided to electrical systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the building official shall conduct the in-plant inspections as frequently as necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the building official with the follow-up inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the electrical system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed.

K107.5 Test and inspection records.

Required test and inspection records shall be available to the building official at all times during the fabrication of the electrical system and the erection of the building; or such records as the building official designates shall be filed.

SECTION K108
TESTING
K108.1 Testing.

Electrical work shall be tested as required in this code. Tests shall be performed by the permit holder and observed by the building official.

K108.1.1 Apparatus, material and labor for tests.

Apparatus, material and labor required for testing an electrical system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder.

K108.1.2 Reinspection and testing.

Where any work or installation does not pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the building official for inspection and testing.

SECTION K109
RECONNECTION
K109.1 Connection after order to disconnect.

A person shall not make utility service or energy source connections to systems regulated by this code, which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such systems.

SECTION K110
CONDEMNING ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS
K110.1 Authority to condemn electrical systems.

Wherever the building official determines that any electrical system, or portion thereof, regulated by this code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the building official shall order in writing that such electrical systems either be removed or restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. A person shall not use or maintain a defective electrical system or equipment after receiving such notice.

Where such electrical system is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in this code shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice.

SECTION K111
ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS
K111.1 Adoption.

Electrical systems and equipment shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential or NFPA 70 as applicable, except as otherwise provided in this code.

[F] K111.2 Abatement of electrical hazards.

All identified electrical hazards shall be abated. All identified hazardous electrical conditions in permanent wiring shall be brought to the attention of the building official responsible for enforcement of this code. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances and other equipment that is modified or damaged and constitutes an electrical shock or fire hazard shall not be used.

[F] K111.3 Appliance and fixture listing.

Electrical appliances and fixtures shall be tested and listed in published reports of inspected electrical equipment by an approved agency and installed in accordance with all instructions included as part of such listing.

K111.4 Nonmetallic-sheathed cable.

The use of Type NM, NMC and NMS (nonmetallic sheathed) cable wiring methods shall not be limited based on height, number of stories or construction type of the building or structure.

K111.5 Cutting, notching and boring.

The cutting, notching and boring of wood and steel framing members, structural members and engineered wood products shall be in accordance with this code.

K111.6 Smoke alarm circuits.

Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by this code and installed within dwelling units shall not be connected as the only load on a branch circuit. Such alarms shall be supplied by branch circuits having lighting loads consisting of lighting outlets in habitable spaces.

K111.7 Equipment and door labeling.

Doors into electrical control panel rooms shall be marked with a plainly visible and legible sign stating ELECTRICAL ROOM or similar approved wording. The disconnecting means for each service, feeder or branch circuit originating on a switchboard or panelboard shall be legibly and durably marked to indicate its purpose unless such purpose is clearly evident.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-l]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX L
EARTHQUAKE RECORDING INSTRUMENTATION

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-m]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX M
TSUNAMI-GENERATED FLOOD HAZARD

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION M101
TSUNAMI-GENERATED FLOOD HAZARD
M101.1 General.

The purpose of this appendix is to provide tsunami regulatory criteria for those communities that have a tsunami hazard and have elected to develop and adopt a map of their tsunami hazard inundation zone.

M101.2 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

TSUNAMI HAZARD ZONE. The area vulnerable to being flooded or inundated by a design event tsunami as identified on a community’s Tsunami Hazard Zone Map.

TSUNAMI HAZARD ZONE MAP. A map adopted by the community that designates the extent of inundation by a design event tsunami. This map shall be based on the tsunami inundation map that is developed and provided to a community by either the applicable state agency or the National Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration (NOAA) under the National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program, but shall be permitted to utilize a different probability or hazard level.

M101.3 Establishment of tsunami hazard zone.

Where applicable, if a community has adopted a Tsunami Hazard Zone Map, that map shall be used to establish a community’s tsunami hazard zone.

M101.4 Construction within the tsunami hazard zone.

Construction of structures designated Risk Categories III and IV as specified under Section 1604.5 shall be prohibited within a tsunami hazard zone.

Exceptions:

1.	A vertical evacuation tsunami refuge shall be permitted to be located in a tsunami hazard zone provided it is constructed in accordance with FEMA P646.

2.	Community critical facilities shall be permitted to be located within the tsunami hazard zone when such a location is necessary to fulfill their function, providing suitable structural and emergency evacuation measures have been incorporated.

SECTION M102
REFERENCED STANDARDS
FEMA P646—12	Guidelines for Design of Structures for Vertical Evacuation from Tsunamis	M101.4

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-n]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX N
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION N101
GENERAL
N101.1 Scope.

A board of appeals shall be established within the jurisdiction for the purpose of hearing applications for modification of the requirements of this code pursuant to the provisions of Section 113 (Means of Appeals). The board shall be established and operated in accordance with this section, and shall be authorized to hear evidence from appellants and the code official pertaining to the application and intent of this code for the purpose of issuing orders pursuant to these provisions.

N101.2 Application for appeal.

Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code official within 20 days after the notice was served.

N101.2.1 Limitation of authority.

The board shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code or interpret the administration of this code.

N101.2.2 Stays of enforcement.

Appeals of notice and orders, other than Imminent Danger notices, shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.

N101.3 Membership of board.

The board shall consist of five voting members appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. Each member shall serve for [INSERT NUMBER OF YEARS] years or until a successor has been appointed. The board member’s terms shall be staggered at intervals, so as to provide continuity. The code official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall not vote on any matter before the board.

N101.3.1 Qualifications.

The board shall consist of five individuals, who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

N101.3.2 Alternate members.

The chief appointing authority is authorized to appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership, and shall be appointed for the same term or until a successor has been appointed.

N101.3.3 Vacancies.

Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made.

N101.3.4 Chairperson.

The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.

N101.3.5 Secretary.

The chief appointing authority shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings which shall set forth the reasons for the board’s decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote.

N101.3.6 Conflict of interest.

A member with any personal, professional or financial interest in a matter before the board shall declare such interest and refrain from participating in discussions, deliberations and voting on such matters.

N101.3.7 Compensation of members.

Compensation of members shall be determined by law.

N101.3.8 Removal from the board.

A member shall be removed from the board prior to the end of their terms only for cause. Any member with continued absence from regular meeting of the board may be removed at the discretion of the chief appointing authority.

N101.4 Rules and procedures.

The board shall establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties consistent with the provisions of this code and applicable state law. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be presented.

N101.5 Notice of meeting.

The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic intervals.

N101.5.1 Open hearing.

All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

N101.5.2 Quorum.

Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum.

N101.5.3 Postponed hearing.

When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

N101.6 Legal counsel.

The jurisdiction shall furnish legal counsel to the board to provide members with general legal advice concerning matters before them for consideration. Members shall be represented by legal counsel at the jurisdiction’s expense in all matters arising from service within the scope of their duties.

N101.7 Board decision.

The board shall only modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of three or more members.

N101.7.1 Resolution.

The decision of the board shall be by resolution. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the code official within three days and shall be open to the public for inspection. A certified copy shall be furnished to the appellant or the appellant’srepresentative and to the code official.

N101.7.2 Administration.

The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.

N101.8 Court review.

Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-appendix-o]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX O
PERFORMANCE-BASED APPLICATION
SECTION O101
GENERAL
O101.1 Introduction.

The following administrative provisions are excerpted from the ICC Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities and can be used in conjunction with the Alternate Methods provisions in Chapter 1, or for a review of submittals requiring a rational analysis or performance-based design. These provisions provide an established framework for the code official in terms of the design expertise needed, the necessary submittals, a review framework and related items.

O101.2 Qualifications.

Registered design professionals shall possess the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to demonstrate compliance with this code.

O101.3 Construction document preparation.

Construction documents required by this code shall be prepared in adequate detail and submitted for review and approval in accordance with Section 107.

O101.3.1 Review.

Construction documents submitted in accordance with this code shall be reviewed for code compliance with the appropriate code provisions in accordance with Section 107.

O101.4 Construction.

Construction shall comply with the approved construction documents submitted in accordance with this code, and shall be verified and approved to demonstrate compliance with this code.

O101.4.1 Facility operating policies and procedures.

Policies, operations, training and procedures shall comply with approved documents submitted in accordance with this code, and shall be verified and approved to demonstrate compliance with this code.

O101.4.2 Maintenance.

Maintenance of the performancebased design shall be ensured throughout the life of the building or portion thereof.

O101.4.3 Changes.

The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible to ensure that any change to the facility, process, or system does not increase the hazard level beyond that originally designed without approval and that changes shall be documented in accordance with the code.

O101.5 Documentation.

The registered design professional shall prepare appropriate documentation for the project that clearly provides the design approach and rationale for design submittal, construction and future use of the building, facility or process.

O101.5.1 Reports and manuals.

The design report shall document the steps taken in the design analysis, clearly identifying the criteria, parameters, inputs, assumptions, sensitivities and limitations involved in the analysis. The design report shall clearly identify bounding conditions, assumptions and sensitivities that clarify the expected uses and limitations of the performance analysis. This report shall verify that the design approach is in compliance with the applicable codes and acceptable methods and shall be submitted for concurrence by the code official prior to the construction documents being completed. The report shall document the design features to be incorporated based on the analysis.

The design report shall address the following:

1.	Project scope.

2.	Goals and objectives.

3.	Performance criteria.

4.	Hazard scenarios.

5.	Design fire loads and hazards.

6.	Final design.

7.	Evaluation.

8.	Bounding conditions and critical design assumptions.

9.	Critical design features.

10.	System design and operational requirements.

11.	Operational and maintenance requirements.

12.	Commissioning testing requirements and acceptance criteria.

13.	Frequency of certificate renewal.

14.	Supporting documents and references.

15.	Preliminary site and floor plans.

O101.5.2 Design submittal.

Applicable construction documents shall be submitted to the code official for review. The documents shall be submitted in accordance with the jurisdiction's procedures and in sufficient detail to obtain appropriate permits.

O101.6 Review.

Construction documents submitted in accordance with this code shall be reviewed for code compliance with the appropriate code provisions.

O101.6.1 Peer review.

The owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall be responsible for retaining and furnishing the services of a registered design professional or recognized expert, who will perform as a peer reviewer, where required and approved by the code official.

O101.6.2 Costs.

The costs of special services, including contract review, where required by the code official, shall be borne by the owner or the owner's authorized agent.

O101.7 Permits.

Prior to the start of construction, appropriate permits shall be obtained in accordance with the jurisdiction’s procedures and applicable codes.

O101.8 Verification of compliance.

Upon completion of the project, documentation shall be prepared that verifies performance and prescriptive code provisions have been met. Where required by the code official, the registered design professional shall file a report that verifies bounding conditions are met.

O101.9 Extent of documentation.

Approved construction documents, the operations and maintenance manual, inspection and testing records, and certificates of occupancy with conditions shall be included in the project documentation of the code official’s records.

O101.10 Analysis of change.

The registered design professional shall evaluate the existing building, facilities, premises, processes, contents and the applicable documentation of the proposed change as it affects portions of the building, facility, premises, processes and contents that were previously designed for compliance under a performance-based code. Prior to any change that was not documented in a previously approved design, the registered design professional shall examine the applicable design documents, bounding conditions, operation and maintenance manuals, and deed restrictions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-1-scope-and-administration]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION
SECTION101
SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
[A]101.1 Title.

These regulations shall be known as the Florida Building Code, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

[A]101.2 Scope.

The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

Exceptions:

1.	Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height, shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential.

2.	Code requirements that address snow loads and earthquake protection shall not be utilized or enforced.

[A]101.2.1 Appendices.

Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.

[A]101.3 Intent.

The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to provide a reasonable level of safety, public health and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide a reasonable level of safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.

[A]101.4 Referenced codes.

The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.9 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

[A]101.4.1 Gas.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

[A]101.4.2 Mechanical.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

[A]101.4.3 Plumbing.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.

[A]101.4.4 Property maintenance.

Reserved.

[A]101.4.5 Fire prevention.

For provisions related to fire prevention, refer to the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The Florida Fire Prevention Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

[A]101.4.6 Energy.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

[A]101.4.7 Existing buildings.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building shall apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings.

101.4.8 Accessibility.

For provisions related to accessibility, refer to the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

101.4.9 Manufactured buildings.

For additional administrative and special code requirements, see Section 458, Florida Building Code, Building, and Rule 61-41 F.A.C.

SECTION102
APPLICABILITY
[A]102.1 General.

Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.

102.1.1

The Florida Building Code does not apply to, and no code enforcement action shall be brought with respect to, zoning requirements, land use requirements and owner specifications or programmatic requirements which do not pertain to and govern the design, construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or demolition of public or private buildings, structures or facilities or to programmatic requirements that do not pertain to enforcement of the Florida Building Code. Additionally, a local code enforcement agency may not administer or enforce the Florida Building Code, Building to prevent the siting of any publicly owned facility, including, but not limited to, correctional facilities, juvenile justice facilities, or state universities, community colleges, or public education facilities, as provided by law.

102.2 Building.

INSIGHTS

The provisions of the Florida Building Code shall apply to the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every public and private building, structure or facility or floating residential structure, or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings, structures or facilities. Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy group in all buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions provided in the Florida Building Code, Existing Building. The following buildings, structures and facilities are exempt from the Florida Building Code as provided by law, and any further exemptions shall be as determined by the legislature and provided by law:

(a)	Building and structures specifically regulated and preempted by the federal government.

(b)	Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad.

(c)	Nonresidential farm buildings on farms.

(d)	Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes.

(e)	Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices, except that the provisions of Part II (Sections 553.501-553.513, Florida Statutes) relating to accessibility by persons with disabilities shall apply to such mobile or modular structures.

(f)	Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in Section 366.02, Florida Statutes, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity.

(g)	Temporary sets, assemblies, or structures used in commercial motion picture or television production, or any sound-recording equipment used in such production, on or off the premises.

(h)	Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term “chickee” means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other nonwood features.

(i)	Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet (23 m2) in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete.

(j)	Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system.

(k)	A building or structure having less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) which is constructed and owned by a natural person for hunting and which is repaired or reconstructed to the same dimension and condition as existed on January 1, 2011, if the building or structure:

1.	Is not rented or leased or used as a principal residence;

2.	Is not located within the 100-year flood plain according to the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s current Flood Insurance Rate Map; and

3.	Is not connected to an off-site electric power or water supply.

 INSIGHTS (1)
102.2.1

In addition to the requirements of Sections 553.79 and 553.80, Florida Statutes, facilities subject to the provisions of Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, and Part II of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes, shall have facility plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so under the requirements of Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, and Part II of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes, and the certification requirements of the federal government.

102.2.2

Residential buildings or structures moved into or within a county or municipality shall not be required to be brought into compliance with the state minimum building code in force at the time the building or structure is moved, provided:

1.	The building or structure is structurally sound and in occupiable condition for its intended use;

2.	The occupancy use classification for the building or structure is not changed as a result of the move;

3.	The building is not substantially remodeled;

4.	Current fire code requirements for ingress and egress are met;

5.	Electrical, gas and plumbing systems meet the codes in force at the time of construction and are operational and safe for reconnection; and

6.	Foundation plans are sealed by a professional engineer or architect licensed to practice in this state, if required by the Florida Building Code, Building for all residential buildings or structures of the same occupancy class.

102.2.3

The building official shall apply the same standard to a moved residential building or structure as that applied to the remodeling of any comparable residential building or structure to determine whether the moved structure is substantially remodeled. The cost of the foundation on which the moved building or structure is placed shall not be included in the cost of remodeling for purposes of determining whether a moved building or structure has been substantially remodeled.

102.2.4

This section does not apply to the jurisdiction and authority of the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services to inspect amusement rides or the Department of Financial Services to inspect state-owned buildings and boilers.

102.2.5

Each enforcement district shall be governed by a board, the composition of which shall be determined by the affected localities.

1.	At its own option, each enforcement district or local enforcement agency may adopt rules granting to the owner of a single-family residence one or more exemptions from the Florida Building Code relating to:

a.	Addition, alteration, or repairs performed by the property owner upon his or her own property, provided any addition or alteration shall not exceed 1,000 square feet (93 m2) or the square footage of the primary structure, whichever is less.

b.	Addition, alteration, or repairs by a nonowner within a specific cost limitation set by rule, provided the total cost shall not exceed $5,000 within any 12-month period.

c.	Building and inspection fees.

2.	However, the exemptions under subparagraph 1 do not apply to single-family residences that are located in mapped flood hazard areas, as defined in the code, unless the enforcement district or local enforcement agency has determined that the work, which is otherwise exempt, does not constitute a substantial improvement, including the repair of substantial damage, of such single-family residences.

3.	Each code exemption, as defined in sub-subparagraphs 1a, 1b, and 1c shall be certified to the local board 10 days prior to implementation and shall only be effective in the territorial jurisdiction of the enforcement district or local enforcement agency implementing it.

102.2.6

This section does not apply to swings and other playground equipment accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling.

Exception: Electrical service to such playground equipment shall be in accordance with Chapter 27 of this code.

[A]102.3 Application of references.

References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.

[A]102.4 Referenced codes and standards.

The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.4.1 and 102.4.2.

[A]102.4.1 Conflicts.

Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

[A]102.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.

Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code or the Florida Codes listed in Section 101.4, the provisions of this code or the Florida Codes listed in Section 101.4, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.

[A]102.5 Partial invalidity.

Reserved.

[A]102.6 Existing structures.

The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the Florida Building Code, Existing Building or the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[A]102.6.1 Buildings not previously occupied.

A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose in accordance with the laws in existence at the time of its completion shall comply with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Building or Florida Building Code, Residential, as applicable, for new construction or with any current permit for such occupancy.

[A]102.6.2 Buildings previously occupied.

The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

102.7 Relocation of manufactured buildings.

(1)	Relocation of an existing manufactured building does not constitute an alteration.

(2)	A relocated building shall comply with wind speed requirements of the new location, using the appropriate wind speed map. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Standard Building Code (prior to March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Standard Building Code shall be applicable. If the existing building was manufactured in compliance with the Florida Building Code (after March 1, 2002), the wind speed map of the Florida Building Code shall be applicable.

(3)	A relocated building shall comply with the flood hazard area requirements of the new location, if applicable.

102.8 Existing mechanical equipment.

An agency or local government may not require that existing mechanical equipment located on or above the surface of a roof be installed in compliance with the requirements of the Florida Building Code except during reroofing when the equipment is being replaced or moved and is not in compliance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code relating to roof-mounted mechanical units.

PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY

RESERVED

SECTION104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
[A]104.1 General.

Reserved.

[A]104.2 Applications and permits.

Reserved.

[A]104.2.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas.

Reserved.

[A]104.3 Notices and orders.

Reserved.

[A]104.4 Inspections.

Reserved.

[A]104.5 Identification.

Reserved.

[A]104.6 Right of entry.

Reserved.

[A]104.7 Department records.

Reserved.

[A]104.8 Liability.

Reserved.

[A]104.8.1 Legal defense.

Reserved.

[A]104.9 Approved materials and equipment.

Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

[A]104.9.1 Used materials and equipment.

The use of used materials that meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.

[A]104.10 Modifications.

Reserved.

[A]104.10.1 Flood hazard areas.

Reserved.

[A]104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed alternative meets all of the following:

1.	The alternative material, design or method of construction is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code.

2.	The material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this code as it pertains to the following:

2.1.	Quality.

2.2.	Strength.

2.3.	Effectiveness.

2.4.	Fire resistance.

2.5.	Durability.

2.6.	Safety.

Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is not approved, the building official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons why the alternative was not approved.

[A]104.11.1 Research reports.

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.

[A]104.11.2 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records.

SECTION105
PERMITS

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
[A]105.1 Required.

Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any impact-resistant coverings, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.

[A]105.1.1 Annual facility permit.

In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an existing electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or interior nonstructural office system(s), the building official is authorized to issue an annual permit for any occupancy to facilitate routine or emergency service, repair, refurbishing, minor renovations of service systems or manufacturing equipment installations/relocations. The building official shall be notified of major changes and shall retain the right to make inspections at the facility site as deemed necessary. An annual facility permit shall be assessed with an annual fee and shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. A separate permit shall be obtained for each facility and for each construction trade, as applicable. The permit application shall contain a general description of the parameters of work intended to be performed during the year.

[A]105.1.2 Annual permit records.

The person to whom an annual permit is issued shall keep a detailed record of alterations made under such annual permit. The building official shall have access to such records at all times or such records shall be filed with the building official as designated.

105.1.3 Food permit.

In accordance with Section 500.12, Florida Statutes, a food permit from the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services is required of any person who operates a food establishment or retail store.

105.1.4 Public swimming pool.

The local enforcing agency may not issue a building permit to construct, develop, or modify a public swimming pool without proof of application, whether complete or incomplete, for an operating permit pursuant to Section 514.031, Florida Statutes. A certificate of completion or occupancy may not be issued until such operating permit is issued. The local enforcing agency shall conduct their review of the building permit application upon filing and in accordance with Chapter 553, Florida Statutes. The local enforcing agency may confer with the Department of Health, if necessary, but may not delay the building permit application review while awaiting comment from the Department of Health.

[A]105.2 Work exempt from permit.

Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code. Permits shall not be required for the following:

Gas:

1.	Portable heating appliance.

2.	Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

Mechanical:

1.	Portable heating appliance.

2.	Portable ventilation equipment.

3.	Portable cooling unit.

4.	Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

5.	Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6.	Portable evaporative cooler.

7.	Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (0.75 kW) or less.

8.	The installation, replacement, removal or metering of any load management control device.

Plumbing:

1.	The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2.	The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

[A]105.2.1 Emergency repairs.

Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official.

[A]105.2.2 Minor repairs.

Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided the repairs do not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring systems or mechanical equipment or other work affecting public health or general safety, and such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes.

[A]105.2.3 Public service agencies.

Reserved.

[A]105.3 Application for permit.

To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the building department for that purpose.

Permit application forms shall be in the format prescribed by a local administrative board, if applicable, and must comply with the requirements of Sections 713.135(5) and (6), Florida Statutes.

Each application shall be inscribed with the date of application, and the code in effect as of that date. For a building permit for which an application is submitted prior to the effective date of the Florida Building Code, the state minimum building code in effect in the permitting jurisdiction on the date of the application governs the permitted work for the life of the permit and any extension granted to the permit.

Effective October 1, 2017, a local enforcement agency shall post each type of building permit application on its website. Completed applications must be able to be submitted electronically to the appropriate building department. Accepted methods of electronic submission include, but are not limited to, e-mail submission of applications in portable document format or submission of applications through an electronic fill-in form available on the building department’s website or through a third-party submission management software. Payments, attachments, or drawings required as part of the permit application may be submitted in person in a nonelectronic format, at the discretion of the building official.

[A]105.3.1 Action on application.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. When authorized through contractual agreement with a school board, in acting on applications for permits, the building official shall give first priority to any applications for the construction of, or addition or renovation to, any school or educational facility.

105.3.1.1

If a state university, Florida college or public school district elects to use a local government’s code enforcement offices, fees charged by counties and municipalities for enforcement of the Florida Building Code on buildings, structures, and facilities of state universities, state colleges, and public school districts shall not be more than the actual labor and administrative costs incurred for plans review and inspections to ensure compliance with the code.

105.3.1.2 

INSIGHTS

No permit may be issued for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or addition unless the applicant for such permit provides to the enforcing agency which issues the permit any of the following documents which apply to the construction for which the permit is to be issued and which shall be prepared by or under the direction of an engineer registered under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes:

1.	Plumbing documents for any new building or addition which requires a plumbing system with more than 250 fixture units or which costs more than $125,000.

2.	Fire sprinkler documents for any new building or addition which includes a fire sprinkler system which contains 50 or more sprinkler heads. Personnel as authorized by chapter 633 Florida Statutes, may design a new fire sprinkler system of 49 or fewer heads; may design the alteration of an existing fire sprinkler system if the alteration consists of the relocation, addition or deletion of 49 heads or fewer, notwithstanding the size of the existing fire sprinkler system; or may design the alteration of an existing fire sprinkler system if the alteration consists of the relocation or deletion of 249 or fewer sprinklers, notwithstanding the size of the existing fire sprinkler system, if there is no change of occupancy of the affected areas, as defined in this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, and there is no change in the water demand as defined in NFPA 13, “Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems,” and if the occupancy hazard classification as defined in NFPA 13 is reduced or remains the same as a result of the alteration.

3.	Heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning documents for any new building or addition which requires more than a 15-ton-per-system capacity which is designed to accommodate 100 or more persons or for which the system costs more than $125,000. This paragraph does not include any document for the replacement or repair of an existing system in which the work does not require altering a structural part of the building or for work on a residential one-, two-, three-, or four-family structure.

 An air-conditioning system may be designed by an installing air-conditioning contractor certified under Chapter 489, Florida Statutes, to serve any building or addition which is designed to accommodate fewer than 100 persons and requires an air-conditioning system with a value of $125,000 or less; and when a 15-ton-per system or less is designed for a singular space of a building and each 15-ton system or less has an independent duct system. Systems not complying with the above require design documents that are to be sealed by a professional engineer.

Example 1: When a space has two 10-ton systems with each having an independent duct system, the contractor may design these two systems since each unit (system) is less than 15 tons.

Example 2: Consider a small single-story office building which consists of six individual offices where each office has a single three-ton package air conditioning heat pump. The six heat pumps are connected to a single water cooling tower. The cost of the entire heating, ventilation and air-conditioning work is $47,000 and the office building accommodates fewer than 100 persons. Because the six mechanical units are connected to a common water tower, this is considered to be an 18-ton system.

Note: It was further clarified by the Commission that the limiting criteria of 100 persons and $125,000 apply to the building occupancy load and the cost for the total air-conditioning system of the building.

4.	Any specialized mechanical, electrical, or plumbing document for any new building or addition which includes a medical gas, oxygen, steam, vacuum, toxic air filtration, halon, or fire detection and alarm system which costs more than $5,000.

Exception: Simplified permitting process for fire alarm system projects.

(1)	As used in this section, the term:

(a)	“Contractor” means a person who is qualified to engage in the business of electrical or alarm system contracting pursuant to a certificate or registration issued by the department under Part II of Chapter 489, Florida Statutes.

(b)	“Fire alarm system project” means a fire alarm system alteration of a total of 20 or fewer initiating devices and notification devices, or the installation or replacement of a fire communicator connected to an existing fire alarm control panel in an existing commercial, residential, apartment, cooperative or condominium building.

(2)	A local enforcement agency:

(a)	May require a contractor, as a condition of obtaining a permit for a fire alarm system project, to submit a completed application and payment.

(b)	May not require a contractor to submit plans or specifications as a condition of obtaining a permit for a fire alarm system project.

(3)	A local enforcement agency must issue a permit for a fire alarm system project in person or electronically.

(4)	A local enforcement agency must require at least one inspection of a fire alarm system project to ensure compliance with applicable codes and standards. If a fire alarm system project fails an inspection, the contractor must take corrective action as necessary to pass inspection.

(5)	A contractor must keep a copy of the plans and specifications at a fire alarm system project worksite and make such plans and specifications available to the inspector at each inspection.

5.	Electrical documents. See Florida Statutes 471.003(2)(h).

 Documents requiring an engineer seal by this part shall not be valid unless a professional engineer who possesses a valid certificate of registration has signed, dated, and stamped such document as provided in Section 471.025, Florida Statutes.

6.	All public swimming pools and public bathing places defined by and regulated under Chapter 514, Florida Statutes.

 INSIGHTS (1)
105.3.1.3 Reviewing application for building permit.

1.	When reviewing an application for a building permit, a local government may not request additional information from the applicant more than three times, unless the applicant waives such limitation in writing.

2.	If a local government requests additional information from an applicant and the applicant submits the requested additional information to the local government within 30 days after receiving the request, the local government must, within 15 days after receiving such information:

a.	Determine if the application is properly completed;

b.	Approve the application;

c.	Approve the application with conditions;

d.	Deny the application; or

e.	Advise the applicant of information, if any, that is needed to deem the application properly completed or to determine the sufficiency of the application.

3.	If a local government makes a second request for additional information from the applicant and the applicant submits the requested additional information to the local government within 30 days after receiving the request, the local government must, within 10 days after receiving such information:

a.	Determine if the application is properly completed;

b.	Approve the application;

c.	Approve the application with conditions;

d.	Deny the application; or

e.	Advise the applicant of information, if any, that is needed to deem the application properly completed or to determine the sufficiency of the application.

4.	Before a third request for additional information may be made, the applicant must be offered an opportunity to meet with the local government to attempt to resolve outstanding issues. If a local government makes a third request for additional information from the applicant and the applicant submits the requested additional information to the local government within 30 days after receiving the request, the local government must, within 10 days after receiving such information unless the applicant waived the local government's limitation in writing, determine that the application is complete and:

a.	Approve the application;

b.	Approve the application with conditions; or

c.	Deny the application.

5.	If the applicant believes the request for additional information is not authorized by ordinance, rule, statute, or other legal authority, the local government, at the applicant’s request, must process the application and either approve the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the application.

[A]105.3.2 Time limitation of application.

An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

105.3.3

An enforcing authority may not issue a building permit for any building construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair or addition unless the permit either includes on its face or there is attached to the permit the following statement: “NOTICE: In addition to the requirements of this permit, there may be additional restrictions applicable to this property that may be found in the public records of this county, and there may be additional permits required from other governmental entities such as water management districts, state agencies, or federal agencies.”

105.3.4 

INSIGHTS

A building permit for a single-family residential dwelling must be issued within 30 working days of application therefor unless unusual circumstances require a longer time for processing the application or unless the permit application fails to satisfy the Florida Building Code or the enforcing agency’s laws or ordinances.

 INSIGHTS (1)
105.3.5 Identification of minimum premium policy.

Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 440, Florida Statutes, Workers’ Compensation, every employer shall, as a condition to receiving a building permit, show proof that it has secured compensation for its employees as provided in Sections 440.10 and 440.38, Florida Statutes.

105.3.6 Asbestos removal.

Moving, removal or disposal of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where the owner occupies the building, the building is not for sale or lease, and the work is performed according to the owner-builder limitations provided in this paragraph. To qualify for exemption under this paragraph, an owner must personally appear and sign the building permit application. The permitting agency shall provide the person with a disclosure statement in substantially the following form:

Disclosure Statement: State law requires asbestos abatement to be done by licensed contractors. You have applied for a permit under an exemption to that law. The exemption allows you, as the owner of your property, to act as your own asbestos abatement contractor even though you do not have a license. You must supervise the construction yourself. You may move, remove or dispose of asbestos-containing materials on a residential building where you occupy the building and the building is not for sale or lease, or the building is a farm outbuilding on your property. If you sell or lease such building within 1 year after the asbestos abatement is complete, the law will presume that you intended to sell or lease the property at the time the work was done, which is a violation of this exemption. You may not hire an unlicensed person as your contractor. Your work must be done according to all local, state and federal laws and regulations which apply to asbestos abatement projects. It is your responsibility to make sure that people employed by you have licenses required by state law and by county or municipal licensing ordinances.

105.3.7 Applicable Code for Manufactured Buildings.

Manufacturers should be permitted to complete all buildings designed and approved prior to the effective date of a new code edition, provided a clear signed contract is in place. The contract shall provide specific data mirroring that required by an application for permit, specifically, without limitation, date of execution, building owner or dealer, and anticipated date of completion. However, the construction activity must commence within 6 months of the contract’s execution. The contract is subject to verification by the Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

105.3.8

A local government may not require a contract between a builder and an owner for the issuance of a building permit or as a requirement for the submission of a building permit application.

105.4 Conditions of the permit.
105.4.1 Permit intent.

A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of this code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 6 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 6 months after the time the work is commenced.

105.4.1.1

If work has commenced and the permit is revoked, becomes null and void, or expires because of lack of progress or abandonment, a new permit covering the proposed construction shall be obtained before proceeding with the work.

105.4.1.2

If a new permit is not obtained within 180 days from the date the initial permit became null and void, the building official is authorized to require that any work which has been commenced or completed be removed from the building site. Alternately, a new permit may be issued on application, providing the work in place and required to complete the structure meets all applicable regulations in effect at the time the initial permit became null and void and any regulations which may have become effective between the date of expiration and the date of issuance of the new permit.

105.4.1.3

Work shall be considered to be in active progress when the permit has received an approved inspection within 180 days. This provision shall not be applicable in case of civil commotion or strike or when the building work is halted due directly to judicial injunction, order or similar process.

105.4.1.4 

INSIGHTS

The fee for renewal reissuance and extension of a permit shall be set forth by the administrative authority.

 INSIGHTS (1)
105.5 Additional options for closing a permit.

Pursuant to Section 553.79(15), Florida Statutes, a property owner, regardless of whether the property owner is the one listed on the application for the building permit, may close a building permit by complying with the following requirements:

1.	The property owner may retain the original contractor listed on the permit or hire a different contractor appropriately licensed in this state to perform the work necessary to satisfy the conditions of the permit and to obtain any necessary inspection in order to close the permit. If a contractor other than the original contractor listed on the permit is hired by the property owner to close the permit, such contractor is not liable for any defects in the work performed by the original contractor and is only liable for the work that he or she performs.

2.	The property owner may assume the role of an ownerbuilder, in accordance with Sections 489.103(7) and 489.503(6), Florida Statutes.

3.	If a building permit is expired and its requirements have been substantially completed, as determined by the local enforcement agency, the permit may be closed without having to obtain a new building permit, and the work required to close the permit may be done pursuant to the building code in effect at the time the local enforcement agency received the application for the permit, unless the contractor has sought and received approval from the local enforcement agency for an alternative material, design or method of construction.

4.	A local enforcement agency may close a building permit 6 years after the issuance of the permit, even in the absence of a final inspection, if the local enforcement agency determines that no apparent safety hazard exists.

For purposes of this section, the term “close” means that the requirements of the permit have been satisfied.

[A]105.6 Denial or revocation.

Whenever a permit required under this section is denied or revoked because the plan, or the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of a building, is found by the local enforcing agency to be not in compliance with the Florida Building Code, the local enforcing agency shall identify the specific plan or project features that do not comply with the applicable codes, identify the specific code chapters and sections upon which the finding is based, and provide this information to the permit applicant. If the local building code administrator or inspector finds that the plans are not in compliance with the Florida Building Code, the local building code administrator or inspector shall identify the specific plan features that do not comply with the applicable codes, identify the specific code chapters and sections upon which the finding is based, and provide this information to the local enforcing agency. The local enforcing agency shall provide this information to the permit applicant.

Pursuant to Section 553.79(16), Florida Statutes, a local enforcement agency may not deny issuance of a building permit to; issue a notice of violation to; or fine, penalize, sanction or assess fees against an arm’s-length purchaser of a property for value solely because a building permit applied for by a previous owner of the property was not closed. The local enforcement agency shall maintain all rights and remedies against the property owner and contractor listed on the permit.

Pursuant to Section 553.79(16), Florida Statutes, a local enforcement agency may not deny issuance of a building permit to a contractor solely because the contractor is listed on other building permits that were not closed.

[A]105.7 Placement of permit.

The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project.

105.8 Notice of commencement.

In accordance with Section 713.135, Florida Statutes, when any person applies for a building permit, the authority issuing such permit shall print on the face of each permit card in no less than 14-point, capitalized, boldfaced type: “WARNING TO OWNER: YOUR FAILURE TO RECORD A NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT MAY RESULT IN YOUR PAYING TWICE FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO YOUR PROPERTY. A NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT MUST BE RECORDED AND POSTED ON THE JOB SITE BEFORE THE FIRST INSPECTION. IF YOU INTEND TO OBTAIN FINANCING, CONSULT WITH YOUR LENDER OR AN ATTORNEY BEFORE RECORDING YOUR NOTICE OF COMMENCEMENT.”

105.9 Asbestos.

The enforcing agency shall require each building permit for the demolition or renovation of an existing structure to contain an asbestos notification statement which indicates the owner’s or operator’s responsibility to comply with the provisions of Section 469.003, Florida Statutes, and to notify the Department of Environmental Protection of his or her intentions to remove asbestos, when applicable, in accordance with state and federal law.

105.10 Certificate of protective treatment for prevention of termites.

A weather-resistant job-site posting board shall be provided to receive duplicate treatment certificates as each required protective treatment is completed, providing a copy for the person the permit is issued to and another copy for the building permit files. The treatment certificate shall provide the product used, identity of the applicator, time and date of the treatment, site location, area treated, chemical used, percent concentration and number of gallons used, to establish a verifiable record of protective treatment. If the soil chemical barrier method for termite prevention is used, final exterior treatment shall be completed prior to final building approval.

105.11 Notice of termite protection.

A permanent sign which identifies the termite treatment provider and need for reinspection and treatment contract renewal shall be provided. The sign shall be posted near the water heater or electric panel.

105.12 Work starting before permit issuance.

Upon approval of the building official, the scope of work delineated in the building permit application and plan may be started prior to the final approval and issuance of the permit, provided any work completed is entirely at risk of the permit applicant and the work does not proceed past the first required inspection.

105.13 Phased permit approval.

After submittal of the appropriate construction documents, the building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. Corrections may be required to meet the requirements of the technical codes.

105.14 Permit issued on basis of an affidavit.

Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity to the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity to the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes.

105.14.1 Affidavits in flood hazard areas.

Permit issued on basis of an affidavit shall not extend to the flood load and flood resistance requirements of the Florida Building Code and the building official shall review and inspect those requirements.

105.15 Opening protection.

When any activity requiring a building permit, not including roof covering replacement or repair work associated with the prevention of degradation of the residence, that is applied for on or after July 1, 2008, and for which the estimated cost is $50,000 or more for a site built single-family detached residential structure that is located in the wind-borne debris region as defined in this code and that has an insured value of $750,000 or more, or, if the site built single-family detached residential structure is uninsured or for which documentation of insured value is not presented, has a just valuation for the structure for purposes of ad valorem taxation of $750,000 or more; opening protections as required within this code or Florida Building Code, Residential for new construction shall be provided.

Exception: Single family residential structures permitted subject to the Florida Building Code are not required to comply with this section.

105.16 Inspection of existing residential building not impacted by construction.

(a)	A local enforcing agency, and any local building code administrator, inspector, or other official or entity, may not require as a condition of issuance of a one- or two-family residential building permit the inspection of any portion of a building, structure, or real property that is not directly impacted by the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of the building, structure, or real property for which the permit is sought.

(b)	This subsection does not apply to a building permit sought for:

1.	A substantial improvement as defined in s. 161.54, Florida Statutes or as defined in the Florida Building Code.

2.	A change of occupancy as defined in the Florida Building Code.

3.	A conversion from residential to nonresidential or mixed use pursuant to s. 553.507(2)(a), Florida Statutes or as defined in the Florida Building Code.

4.	A historic building as defined in the Florida Building Code.

(c)	This subsection does not prohibit a local enforcing agency, or any local building code administrator, inspector, or other official or entity, from:

1.	Citing any violation inadvertently observed in plain view during the ordinary course of an inspection conducted in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a).

2.	Inspecting a physically nonadjacent portion of a building, structure, or real property that is directly impacted by the construction, erection, alteration, modification, repair, or demolition of the building, structure, or real property for which the permit is sought in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a).

3.	Inspecting any portion of a building, structure, or real property for which the owner or other person having control of the building, structure, or real property has voluntarily consented to the inspection of that portion of the building, structure, or real property in accordance with the prohibition in paragraph (a).

4.	Inspecting any portion of a building, structure, or real property pursuant to an inspection warrant issued in accordance with ss. 933.20-933.30, Florida Statutes.

105.17 Streamlined low-voltage alarm system installation permitting.

INSIGHTS

(1)	As used in this section, the term:

(a)	“Contractor” means a person who is qualified to engage in the business of electrical or alarm system contracting pursuant to a certificate or registration issued by the department under Part II of Chapter 489, Florida Statutes.

(b)	“Low-voltage alarm system project” means a project related to the installation, maintenance, inspection, replacement, or service of a new or existing alarm system, as defined in s. 489.505, Florida Statutes, including video cameras and closed-circuit television systems used to signal or detect a burglary, fire, robbery or medical emergency, that is hardwired and operating at low voltage, as defined in the National Electrical Code Standard 70, Current Edition, or a new or existing low-voltage electric fence. The term also includes ancillary components or equipment attached to a low-voltage alarm system or low-voltage electric fence, including, but not limited to, home-automation equipment, thermostats, closed-circuit television systems, access controls, battery recharging devices, and video cameras.

(c)	“Low-voltage electric fence” means an alarm system, as defined in s. 489.505, that consists of a fence structure and an energizer powered by a commercial storage battery not exceeding 12 volts which produces an electric charge upon contact with the fence structure.

(d)	“Wireless alarm system” means a burglar alarm system or smoke detector that is not hardwired.

(2)	Notwithstanding any provision of this code, this section applies to all low-voltage alarm system projects for which a permit is required by a local enforcement agency. However, a permit is not required to install, maintain, inspect, replace, or service a wireless alarm system, including any ancillary components or equipment attached to the system.

(3)	A low-voltage electric fence must meet all of the following requirements to be permitted as a low-voltage alarm system project and no further permit shall be required for the low-voltage alarm system project other than as provided in this section:

(a)	The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact must not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 and depicted in Figure 102 of International Electrotechnical Commission Standard No. 60335-2-76, Current Edition.

(b)	A nonelectric fence or wall must completely enclose the low-voltage electric fence. The low-voltage electric fence may be up to 2 feet higher than the perimeter nonelectric fence or wall.

(c)	The low-voltage electric fence must be identified using warning signs attached to the fence at intervals of not more than 60 feet.

(d)	The low-voltage electric fence shall not be installed in an area zoned exclusively for single-family or multi-family residential use.

(e)	The low-voltage electric fence shall not enclose the portions of a property which are used for residential purposes.

(4)	This section does not apply to the installation or replacement of a fire alarm if a plan review is required.

(5)	A local enforcement agency shall make uniform basic permit labels available for purchase by a contractor to be used for the installation or replacement of a new or existing alarm system at a cost as indicated in s. 553.793, Florida Statutes. The local enforcement agency may not require the payment of any additional fees, charges, or expenses associated with the installation or replacement of a new or existing alarm.

(a)	A local enforcement agency may not require a contractor, as a condition of purchasing a label, to submit information other than identification information of the licensee and proof of registration or certification as a contractor.

(b)	A label is valid for 1 year after the date of purchase and may only be used within the jurisdiction of the local enforcement agency that issued the label. A contractor may purchase labels in bulk for one or more unspecified current or future projects.

(6)	A contractor shall post an unused uniform basic permit label in a conspicuous place on the premises of the low-voltage alarm system project site before commencing work on the project.

(7)	A contractor is not required to notify the local enforcement agency before commencing work on a low-voltage alarm system project. However, a contractor must submit a Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project as provided under subsection (7) to the local enforcement agency within 14 days after completing the project. A local enforcement agency may take disciplinary action against a contractor who fails to timely submit a Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project.

(8)	The Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project may be submitted electronically or by facsimile if all submissions are signed by the owner, tenant, contractor, or authorized representative of such persons. The Uniform Notice of a Low-Voltage Alarm System Project shall be in the format prescribed by the local enforcement agency and must comply with the requirements of s. 553.793(7), Florida Statutes.

(9)	A local enforcement agency may coordinate directly with the owner or customer to inspect a low-voltage alarm system to ensure compliance with applicable codes and standards. If a low-voltage alarm system project fails an inspection, the contractor must take corrective action as necessary to pass inspection.

(10)	A municipality, county, district, or other entity of local government may not adopt or maintain in effect any ordinance or rule regarding a low-voltage alarm system project that is inconsistent with this section.

(11)	A uniform basic permit label shall not be required for the subsequent maintenance, inspection, or service of an alarm system that was permitted in accordance with this section.

 The provisions of this act are not intended to impose new or additional licensure requirements on persons licensed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 489, Florida Statutes.

 INSIGHTS (1)
SECTION106
FLOOR AND ROOF DESIGN LOADS
[A]106.1 Live loads posted.

In commercial or industrial buildings, for each floor or portion thereof designed for live loads exceeding 50 psf (2.40 kN/m2), such design live loads shall be conspicuously posted by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent in that part of each story in which they apply, using durable signs. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notices.

[A]106.2 Issuance of certificate of occupancy.

A certificate of occupancy required by Section 111 shall not be issued until the floor load signs, required by Section 106.1, have been installed.

[A]106.3 Restrictions on loading.

It shall be unlawful to place, or cause or permit to be placed, on any floor or roof of a building, structure or portion thereof, a load greater than is permitted by this code.

SECTION107
SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
[A]107.1 General.

INSIGHTS

Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by Chapter 471, Florida Statutes or Chapter 481, Florida Statutes. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.

 INSIGHTS (1)
[A]107.2 Construction documents.

Construction documents shall be in accordance with Sections 107.2.1 through 107.2.6.

[A]107.2.1 Information on construction documents.

Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted where approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official.

[A]107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings.

Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance to this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

[A]107.2.3 Means of egress.

The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress including the path of the exit discharge to the public way in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

[A]107.2.4 Exterior wall envelope.

Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

107.2.5 Exterior balcony and elevated walking surfaces.

Where balcony or other elevated walking surfaces are exposed to water from direct or blowing rain or irrigation, and the structural framing is protected by an impervious moisture barrier, the construction documents shall include details for all elements of the impervious moisture barrier system. The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions.

[A]107.2.6 Site plan.

The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan where the application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted.

[A]107.2.6.1 Design flood elevations.

Where design flood elevations are not specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1.

107.2.6.2

For the purpose of inspection and record retention, site plans for a building may be maintained in the form of an electronic copy at the worksite. These plans must be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative, as required by the Florida Building Code.

[A]107.2.7 Structural information.

The construction documents shall provide the information specified in Section 1603.

[A]107.3 Examination of documents.

The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying submittal documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.

Exceptions:

1.	Building plans approved pursuant to Section 553.77(5), Florida Statutes, and state-approved manufactured buildings are exempt from local codes enforcing agency plan reviews except for provisions of the code relating to erection, assembly or construction at the site. Erection, assembly and construction at the site are subject to local permitting and inspections. Photocopies of plans approved according to Rule 61-41.009, Florida Administrative Code, shall be sufficient for local permit application documents of record for the modular building portion of the permitted project.

2.	Industrial construction on sites where design, construction and fire safety are supervised by appropriate design and inspection professionals and which contain adequate in-house fire departments and rescue squads is exempt, subject to local government option, from review of plans and inspections, providing owners certify that applicable codes and standards have been met and supply appropriate approved drawings to local building and fire-safety inspectors.

[A]107.3.1 Approval of construction documents.

When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative.

[A]107.3.2 Previous approvals.

This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned.

[A]107.3.3 Phased approval.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

[A]107.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.

Reserved.

[A]107.3.4.1 Deferred submittals.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official.

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the deferred submittal documents have been approved by the building official.

107.3.4.2

Certifications by contractors authorized under the provisions of Section 489.115(4)(b), Florida Statutes, shall be considered equivalent to sealed plans and specifications by a person licensed under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, or Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, by local enforcement agencies for plans review for permitting purposes relating to compliance with the windresistance provisions of the code or alternate methodologies approved by the Florida Building Commission for one- and two-family dwellings. Local enforcement agencies may rely upon such certification by contractors that the plans and specifications submitted conform to the requirements of the code for wind resistance. Upon good cause shown, local government code enforcement agencies may accept or reject plans sealed by persons licensed under Chapters 471, 481 or 489, Florida Statutes.

107.3.5 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings.

The examination of the documents by the building official shall include the following minimum criteria and documents: a floor plan; site plan; foundation plan; floor/roof framing plan or truss layout; all fenestration penetrations; flashing; and rough opening dimensions; and all exterior elevations:

Commercial Buildings:

Building:

1.	Site requirements:

Parking

Fire access

Vehicle loading

Driving/turning radius

Fire hydrant/water supply/post indicator valve (PIV)

Set back/separation (assumed property lines)

Location of specific tanks, water lines and sewer lines

Flood hazard areas, flood zones, and design flood elevations

2.	Occupancy group and special occupancy requirements shall be determined.

3.	Minimum type of construction shall be determined (see Table 504.3a).

4.	Fire-resistant construction requirements shall include the following components:

Fire-resistant separations

Fire-resistant protection for type of construction

Protection of openings and penetrations of rated walls

Fire blocking and draftstopping and calculated fire resistance

5.	Fire suppression systems shall include:

Early warning smoke evacuation systems

Schematic fire sprinklers

Standpipes

Pre-engineered systems

Riser diagram.

6.	Life safety systems shall be determined and shall include the following requirements:

Occupant load and egress capacities

Early warning

Smoke control

Stair pressurization

Systems schematic

7.	Occupancy load/egress requirements shall include:

Occupancy load

Gross

Net

Means of egress

Exit access

Exit

Exit discharge

Stairs construction/geometry and protection

Doors

Emergency lighting and exit signs

Specific occupancy requirements

Construction requirements

Horizontal exits/exit passageways

8.	Structural requirements shall include:

Soil conditions/analysis

Termite protection

Design loads

Wind requirements

Building envelope

Impact resistant coverings or systems

Structural calculations (if required)

Foundation

Flood requirements in accordance with Section 1612, including lowest floor elevations, enclosures, flood damage-resistant materials

Wall systems

Floor systems

Roof systems

Threshold inspection plan

Stair systems

9.	Materials shall be reviewed and shall at a minimum include the following:

Wood

Steel

Aluminum

Concrete

Plastic

Glass

Masonry

Gypsum board and plaster

Insulating (mechanical)

Roofing

Insulation

10.	Accessibility requirements shall include the following:

Site requirements

Accessible route

Vertical accessibility

Toilet and bathing facilities

Drinking fountains

Equipment

Special occupancy requirements

Fair housing requirements

11.	Interior requirements shall include the following:

Interior finishes (flame spread/smoke development)

Light and ventilation

Sanitation

12.	Special systems:

Elevators

Escalators

Lifts

13.	Swimming pools:

Barrier requirements

Spas

Wading pools

14.	Location and installation details. The specific location and installation details of each fire door, fire damper, ceiling damper and smoke damper shall be shown and properly identified on the building plans by the designer.

Electrical:

1.	Electrical:

Wiring

Services

Feeders and branch circuits

Overcurrent protection

Grounding

Wiring methods and materials

GFCIs

2.	Equipment

3.	Special occupancies

4.	Emergency systems

5.	Communication systems

6.	Low voltage

7.	Load calculations

8.	Design flood elevation

Plumbing:

1.	Minimum plumbing facilities

2.	Fixture requirements

3.	Water supply piping

4.	Sanitary drainage

5.	Water heaters

6.	Vents

7.	Roof drainage

8.	Back flow prevention

9.	Irrigation

10.	Location of water supply line

11.	Grease traps

12.	Environmental requirements

13.	Plumbing riser

14.	Design flood elevation

Mechanical:

1.	Energy calculations

2.	Exhaust systems:

Clothes dryer exhaust

Kitchen equipment exhaust

Specialty exhaust systems

3.	Equipment

4.	Equipment location

5.	Make-up air

6.	Roof-mounted equipment

7.	Duct systems

8.	Ventilation

9.	Combustion air

10.	Chimneys, fireplaces and vents

11.	Appliances

12.	Boilers

13.	Refrigeration

14.	Bathroom ventilation

15.	Laboratory

16.	Design flood elevation

Gas:

1.	Gas piping

2.	Venting

3.	Combustion air

4.	Chimneys and vents

5.	Appliances

6.	Type of gas

7.	Fireplaces

8.	LP tank location

9.	Riser diagram/shutoffs

10.	Design flood elevation

Demolition:

1.	Asbestos removal

Residential (one- and two-family):

1.	Site requirements:

Set back/separation (assumed property lines)

Location of septic tanks

2.	Fire-resistant construction (if required)

3.	Fire

4.	Smoke detector locations

5.	Egress:

Egress window size and location stairs construction requirements

6.	Structural requirements shall include:

Wall section from foundation through roof, including assembly and materials connector tables wind requirements structural calculations (if required)

Flood hazard areas, flood zones, design flood elevations, lowest floor elevations, enclosures, equipment, and flood damage-resistant materials

7.	Accessibility requirements:

Show/identify

Accessible bath

8.	Impact resistant coverings or systems

Exemptions:

Plans examination by the building official shall not be required for the following work:

1.	Replacing existing equipment such as mechanical units, water heaters, etc.

2.	Reroofs

3.	Minor electrical, plumbing and mechanical repairs

4.	Annual maintenance permits

5.	Prototype plans:

Except for local site adaptions, siding, foundations and/or modifications.

Except for structures that require waiver.

6.	Manufactured buildings plan except for foundations and modifications of buildings on site.

[A]107.4 Amended construction documents.

Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.

[A]107.5 Retention of construction documents.

One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.

107.6 Affidavits.

INSIGHTS

The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings, show the structural design and that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The building official shall ensure that any person conducting plans review is qualified as a plans examiner under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, and that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes.

 INSIGHTS (1)
107.6.1 Building permits issued in flood hazard areas on the basis of an affidavit.

Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Parts 59 and 60), the authority granted to the building official to issue permits, to rely on inspections, and to accept plans and construction documents on the basis of affidavits and plans submitted pursuant to Sections 105.14 and 107.6, shall not extend to the flood load and flood-resistance construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.

107.6.2 Affidavits provided pursuant to Section 553.791, Florida Statutes.

For a building or structure in a flood hazard area, the building official shall review any affidavit certifying compliance with the flood load and flood-resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code.

SECTION108
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
[A]108.1 General.

The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

[A]108.2 Conformance.

Temporary structures and uses shall comply with the requirements in Section 3103.

[A]108.3 Temporary power.

The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in NFPA 70.

[A]108.4 Termination of approval.

The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

SECTION109
FEES
[A]109.1 Payment of fees.

A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.

[A]109.2 Schedule of permit fees.

On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority.

[A]109.3 Building permit valuations.

The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official.

[A]109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance.

Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the building official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.

[A]109.5 Related fees.

Reserved.

[A]109.6 Refunds.

Reserved.

SECTION110
INSPECTIONS
[A]110.1 General.

Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain exposed and provided with access for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent to cause the work to remain exposed and provided with access for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

[A]110.2 Preliminary inspection.

Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

[A]110.3 Required inspections.

The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent shall make the following inspections, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes. The building official shall determine the timing and sequencing of when inspections occur and what elements are inspected at each inspection.

Building

1.	Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and shall at a minimum include the following building components:

•	Stem-wall

•	Monolithic slab-on-grade

•	Piling/pile caps

•	Footers/grade beams

1.1.	In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification shall be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction.

2.	Framing inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components:

•	Window/door framing

•	Vertical cells/columns

•	Lintel/tie beams

•	Framing/trusses/bracing/connectors

•	Draft stopping/fire blocking

•	Curtain wall framing

•	Energy insulation

•	Accessibility

•	Verify rough opening dimensions are within tolerances.

3.	Sheathing inspection. To be made either as part of a dry-in inspection or done separately at the request of the contractor after all roof and wall sheathing and fasteners are complete and shall at a minimum include the following building components:

•	Roof sheathing

•	Wall sheathing

•	Sheathing fasteners

•	Roof/wall dry-in

4.	Exterior wall coverings. Shall at a minimum include the following building components in progress inspections:

•	Exterior wall coverings and veneers

•	Soffit coverings

5.	Roofing inspection. Shall at a minimum include the following building components:

•	Dry-in

•	Insulation

•	Roof coverings

•	Flashing

6.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.

6.1.	In flood hazard areas, as part of the final inspection, a final certification of the lowest floor elevation or the elevation to which a building is dry floodproofed, as applicable, shall be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction.

7.	Swimming pool inspection. First inspection to be made after excavation and installation of reinforcing steel, bonding and main drain and prior to placing of concrete.

 Final inspection to be made when the swimming pool is complete and all required enclosure requirements are in place.

 In order to pass final inspection and receive a certificate of completion, a residential swimming pool must meet the requirements relating to pool safety features as described in Section 454.2.17 of this code.

8.	Demolition inspections. First inspection to be made after all utility connections have been disconnected and secured in such manner that no unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall exist during or after demolition operations.

 Final inspection to be made after all demolition work is completed.

9.	Manufactured building inspections. The building department shall inspect construction of foundations; connecting buildings to foundations; installation of parts identified on plans as site installed items, joining the modules, including utility crossovers; utility connections from the building to utility lines on site; and any other work done on site which requires compliance with the Florida Building Code. Additional inspections may be required for public educational facilities (see Section 453.27.20 of this code).

10.	Where impact-resistant coverings or impact-resistant systems are installed, the building official shall schedule adequate inspections of impact-resistant coverings or impact-resistant systems to determine the following:

 The system indicated on the plans was installed.

 The system is installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the product approval.

Electrical

1.	Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place.

2.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.

3.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.

4.	Existing Swimming Pools. To be made after all repairs or alterations are complete, all required electrical equipment, GFCI protection, and equipotential bonding are in place on said alterations or repairs.

Plumbing

1.	Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place.

2.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes.

3.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.

Note: See Section 312 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing for required tests.

Mechanical

1.	Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place.

2.	Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.

3.	Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.

Gas

1.	Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected.

2.	Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test.

3.	Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans.

[A]110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.3 Lowest floor elevation.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.4 Frame inspection.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.5 Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection.

Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspections shall be made after lathing, gypsum board and gypsum panel products, interior and exterior, are in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board and gypsum panel product joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

Exception: Gypsum board and gypsum panel products that are not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly.

110.3.6 Weather-exposed balcony and walking surface waterproofing.

Where balcony or other elevated walking surfaces are exposed to water from direct or blowing rain or irrigation, and the structural framing is protected by an impervious moisture barrier, all elements of the impervious-moisture-barrier system shall not be concealed until inspected and approved.

[A]110.3.7 Fire- and smoke-resistant penetrations.

Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

[A]110.3.8 Energy efficiency inspections.

Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R- and U-values, fenestration U-value, duct system R-value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency.

[A]110.3.9 Other inspections.

In addition to the inspections specified in Sections 110.3 through 110.3.8, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety.

[A]110.3.10 Special inspections.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.11 Final inspection.

Reserved.

[A]110.3.11.1 Flood hazard documentation.

Reserved.

110.3.12 Termites.

Building components and building surroundings required to be protected from termite damage in accordance with Section 1503.7, Section 2304.12.6 or Section 2304.12.2.8, specifically required to be inspected for termites in accordance with Section 2114, or required to have chemical soil treatment in accordance with Section 1816 shall not be covered or concealed until the release from the building official has been received.

110.3.13 Impact-resistant coverings or systems.

Where impact-resistant coverings or systems are installed to meet requirements of this code, the building official shall schedule adequate inspections of impact-resistant coverings or systems to determine the following:

1.	The system indicated on the plans was installed.

2.	The system is installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the product approval.

[A]110.4 Inspection agencies.

Reserved.

[A]110.5 Inspection requests.

It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code.

[A]110.6 Approval required.

Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.

110.7 Shoring.

For threshold buildings, shoring and associated formwork or falsework shall be designed and inspected by a Florida licensed professional engineer prior to any required mandatory inspections by the threshold building inspector.

110.8 Threshold building.
110.8.1

During new construction or during repair or restoration projects in which the structural system or structural loading of a building is being modified, the enforcing agency shall require a special inspector to perform structural inspections on a threshold building pursuant to a structural inspection plan prepared by the engineer or architect of record. The structural inspection plan must be submitted to the enforcing agency prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a threshold building. The purpose of the structural inspection plans is to provide specific inspection procedures and schedules so that the building can be adequately inspected for compliance with the permitted documents. The special inspector may not serve as a surrogate in carrying out the responsibilities of the building official, the architect, or the engineer of record. The contractor’s contractual or statutory obligations are not relieved by any action of the special inspector.

110.8.2

The special inspector shall determine that a professional engineer who specializes in shoring design has inspected the shoring and reshoring for conformance with the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcing agency. A fee simple title owner of a building, which does not meet the minimum size, height, occupancy, occupancy classification, or number-of-stories criteria which would result in classification as a threshold building under s. 553.71(7), Florida Statutes may designate such building as a threshold building, subject to more than the minimum number of inspections required by the Florida Building Code.

110.8.3

The fee owner of a threshold building shall select and pay all costs of employing a special inspector, but the special inspector shall be responsible to the enforcement agency. The inspector shall be a person certified, licensed or registered under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, as an engineer or under Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, as an architect.

110.8.4

Each enforcement agency shall require that, on every threshold building:

110.8.4.1

The special inspector, upon completion of the building and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, file a signed and sealed statement with the enforcement agency in substantially the following form: “To the best of my knowledge and belief, the above described construction of all structural load-bearing components complies with the permitted documents, and the shoring and reshoring conforms to the shoring and reshoring plans submitted to the enforcement agency.”

110.8.4.2

Any proposal to install an alternate structural product or system to which building codes apply be submitted to the enforcement agency for review for compliance with the codes and made part of the enforcement agency’s recorded set of permit documents.

110.8.4.3

All shoring and reshoring procedures, plans and details be submitted to the enforcement agency for recordkeeping. Each shoring and reshoring installation shall be supervised, inspected and certified to be in compliance with the shoring documents by the contractor.

110.8.4.4

All plans for the building which are required to be signed and sealed by the architect or engineer of record contain a statement that, to the best of the architect’s or engineer’s knowledge, the plans and specifications comply with the applicable minimum building codes and the applicable fire-safety standards as determined by the local authority in accordance with this section and Chapter 633, Florida Statutes.

110.8.5

No enforcing agency may issue a building permit for construction of any threshold building except to a licensed general contractor, as defined in Section 489.105(3)(a), Florida Statutes, or to a licensed building contractor, as defined in Section 489.105(3)(b), Florida Statutes, within the scope of her or his license. The named contractor to whom the building permit is issued shall have the responsibility for supervision, direction, management and control of the construction activities on the project for which the building permit was issued.

110.8.6

The building department may allow a special inspector to conduct the minimum structural inspection of threshold buildings required by this code, Section 553.73, Florida Statutes, without duplicative inspection by the building department. The building official is responsible for ensuring that any person conducting inspections is qualified as a building inspector under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, or certified as a special inspector under Chapter 471 or 481, Florida Statutes. Inspections of threshold buildings required by Section 553.79(5), Florida Statutes, are in addition to the minimum inspections required by this code.

110.9 Mandatory structural inspections for condominium and cooperative buildings.

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.1 General.

INSIGHTS

The Legislature finds that maintaining the structural integrity of a building throughout its service life is of paramount importance in order to ensure that buildings are structurally sound so as to not pose a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. As such, the Legislature finds that the imposition of a statewide structural inspection program for aging condominium and cooperative buildings in this state is necessary to ensure that such buildings are safe for continued use.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.2 

INSIGHTS

As used in this section, the terms:

(a)	“Milestone inspection” means a structural inspection of a building, including an inspection of load-bearing walls and the primary structural members and primary structural systems as those terms are defined in s. 627.706, Florida Statutes, by a licensed architect or engineer authorized to practice in this state for the purposes of attesting to the life safety and adequacy of the structural components of the building and, to the extent reasonably possible, determining the general structural condition of the building as it affects the safety of such building, including a determination of any necessary maintenance, repair, or replacement of any structural component of the building. The purpose of such inspection is not to determine if the condition of an existing building is in compliance with the Florida Building Code or the fire safety code.

(b)	“Substantial structural deterioration” means substantial structural distress that negatively affects a building’s general structural condition and integrity. The term does not include surface imperfections such as cracks, distortion, sagging, deflections, misalignment, signs of leakage, or peeling of finishes unless the licensed engineer or architect performing the phase one or phase two inspection determines that such surface imperfections are a sign of substantial structural deterioration.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.3 

INSIGHTS

A condominium association under Chapter 718, Florida Statutes, and a cooperative association under Chapter 719, Florida Statutes, must have a milestone inspection performed for each building that is three stories or more in height by December 31 of the year in which the building reaches 30 years of age, based on the date the certificate of occupancy for the building was issued, and every 10 years thereafter. If the building is located within 3 miles of a coastline as defined in s. 376.031, Florida Statutes, the condominium association or cooperative association must have a milestone inspection performed by December 31 of the year in which the building reaches 25 years of age, based on the date the certificate of occupancy for the building was issued, and every 10 years thereafter. The condominium association or cooperative association must arrange for the milestone inspection to be performed and is responsible for ensuring compliance with the requirements of this section. The condominium association or cooperative association is responsible for all costs associated with the inspection. This subsection does not apply to a single- family, two-family, or three-family dwelling with three or fewer habitable stories above ground.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.4 

INSIGHTS

If a milestone inspection is required under this section and the building’s certificate of occupancy was issued on or before July 1, 1992, the building’s initial milestone inspection must be performed before December 31, 2024. If the date of issuance for the certificate of occupancy is not available, the date of issuance of the building’s certificate of occupancy shall be the date of occupancy evidenced in any record of the local building official.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.5 

INSIGHTS

Upon determining that a building must have a milestone inspection, the local enforcement agency must provide written notice of such required inspection to the condominium association or cooperative association by certified mail, return receipt requested.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.6 

INSIGHTS

Within 180 days after receiving the written notice under Section 110.9.5, the condominium association or cooperative association must complete phase one of the milestone inspection. For purposes of this section, completion of phase one of the milestone inspection means the licensed engineer or architect who performed the phase one inspection submitted the inspection report by e-mail, United States Postal Service, or commercial delivery service to the local enforcement agency.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.7 

INSIGHTS

A milestone inspection consists of two phases:

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.7.1 

INSIGHTS

For phase one of the milestone inspection, a licensed architect or engineer authorized to practice in this state shall perform a visual examination of habitable and nonhabitable areas of a building, including the major structural components of a building, and provide a qualitative assessment of the structural conditions of the building. If the architect or engineer finds no signs of substantial structural deterioration to any building components under visual examination, phase two of the inspection, as provided in Section 110.9.7.2, is not required. An architect or engineer who completes a phase one milestone inspection shall prepare and submit an inspection report pursuant to Section 110.9.8.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.7.2 

INSIGHTS

A phase two of the milestone inspection must be performed if any substantial structural deterioration is identified during phase one. A phase two inspection may involve destructive or nondestructive testing at the inspector’s direction. The inspection may be as extensive or as limited as necessary to fully assess areas of structural distress in order to confirm that the building is structurally sound and safe for its intended use and to recommend a program for fully assessing and repairing distressed and damaged portions of the building. When determining testing locations, the inspector must give preference to locations that are the least disruptive and most easily repairable while still being representative of the structure. An inspector who completes a phase two milestone inspection shall prepare and submit an inspection report pursuant to Section 110.9.8.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.8 

INSIGHTS

Upon completion of a phase one or phase two milestone inspection, the architect or engineer who performed the inspection must submit a sealed copy of the inspection report with a separate summary of, at minimum, the material findings and recommendations in the inspection report to the condominium association or cooperative association, and to the building official of the local government which has jurisdiction. The inspection report must, at a minimum, meet all of the following criteria:

(a)	Bear the seal and signature, or the electronic signature, of the licensed engineer or architect who performed the inspection.

(b)	Indicate the manner and type of inspection forming the basis for the inspection report.

(c)	Identify any substantial structural deterioration, within a reasonable professional probability based on the scope of the inspection, describe the extent of such deterioration, and identify any recommended repairs for such deterioration.

(d)	State whether unsafe or dangerous conditions, as those terms are defined in the Florida Building Code, were observed.

(e)	Recommend any remedial or preventive repair for any items that are damaged but are not substantial structural deterioration.

(f)	Identify and describe any items requiring further inspection.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.9 

INSIGHTS

The association must distribute a copy of the inspector-prepared summary of the inspection report to each condominium unit owner or cooperative unit owner, regardless of the findings or recommendations in the report, by United States mail or personal delivery and by electronic transmission to unit owners who previously consented to received notice by electronic transmission; must post a copy of the inspector-prepared summary in a conspicuous place on the condominium or cooperative property; and must publish the full report and inspector-prepared summary on the association’s website, if the association is required to have a website.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.10 

INSIGHTS

A local enforcement agency may prescribe timelines and penalties with respect to compliance with this section.

 INSIGHTS (1)
110.9.11 

INSIGHTS

A board of county commissioners may adopt an ordinance requiring that a condominium or cooperative association schedule or commence repairs for substantial structural deterioration within a specified timeframe after the local enforcement agency receives a phase two inspection report; however, such repairs must be commenced within 365 days after receiving such report. If an association fails to submit proof to the local enforcement agency that repairs have been scheduled or have commenced for substantial structural deterioration identified in a phase two inspection report within the required timeframe, the local enforcement agency must review and determine if the building is unsafe for human occupancy.

 INSIGHTS (1)
SECTION111
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
[A]111.1 Use and occupancy.

A building or structure shall not be used or occupied, and a change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall not be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction.

Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits in accordance with Section 105.2.

[A]111.2 Certificate issued.

After the building official inspects the building or structure and does not find violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

1.	The building permit number.

2.	The address of the structure.

3.	The name and address of the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

4.	A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

5.	A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

6.	For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, a statement that documentation of the as-built lowest floor elevation has been provided and is retained in the records of the authority having jurisdiction

7.	The name of the building official.

8.	The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

9.	The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.

10.	The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.

11.	The design occupant load.

12.	If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.

13.	Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

[A]111.3 Temporary occupancy.

The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.

[A]111.4 Revocation.

The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

111.5 Certificate of completion.

A certificate of completion is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy a building, such as shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

SECTION112
SERVICE UTILITIES
[A]112.1 Connection of service utilities.

A person shall not make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official.

[A]112.2 Temporary connection.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power.

[A]112.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities.

The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 101.4 in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such utility connection has been made without the approval required by Section 112.1 or 112.2. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.

SECTION113
BOARD OF APPEALS

RESERVED

SECTION114
VIOLATIONS

RESERVED

SECTION115
STOP WORK ORDER
[A]115.1 Authority.

Where the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

[A]115.2 Issuance.

The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, the owner’s authorized agent or the person performing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.

[A]115.3 Unlawful continuance.

Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

SECTION116
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

RESERVED

SECTION117
VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
117.1 Flood hazard areas.

Pursuant to Section 553.73(5), Florida Statutes, the variance procedures adopted in the local flood plain management ordinance shall apply to requests submitted to the building official for variances to the provisions of Section 1612.4 of the Florida Building Code, Building or, as applicable, the provisions of Section R322 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. This section shall not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-10]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 10
MEANS OF EGRESS
SECTION 1001
ADMINISTRATION
1001.1 General.

Buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with a means of egress system as required by this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design, construction and arrangement of means of egress components required to provide an approved means of egress from structures and portions thereof.

1001.2 Minimum requirements.

It shall be unlawful to alter a building or structure in a manner that will reduce the number of exits or the minimum width or required capacity of the means of egress to less than required by this code.

[F] 1001.3 Maintenance.

Means of egress shall be maintained in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 1001.4 Fire safety and evacuation plans.

Fire safety and evacuation plans shall be provided for all occupancies and buildings where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Such fire safety and evacuation plans shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 1002
DEFINITIONS
1002.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS.

AISLE.

AISLE ACCESSWAY.

ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE.

AREA OF REFUGE.

BLEACHERS.

BREAKOUT.

COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL.

CORRIDOR.

DOOR, BALANCED.

EGRESS COURT.

EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING.

EXIT.

EXIT ACCESS.

EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY.

EXIT ACCESS RAMP.

EXIT ACCESS STAIRWAY.

EXIT DISCHARGE.

EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF.

EXIT, HORIZONTAL.

EXIT PASSAGEWAY.

EXTERIOR EXIT RAMP.

EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY.

FIRE EXIT HARDWARE.

FIXED SEATING.

FLIGHT.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS.

FLOOR AREA, NET.

FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING.

GRANDSTAND.

GUARD.

HANDRAIL.

INTERIOR EXIT RAMP.

INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY.

LOW ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR.

MEANS OF EGRESS.

MEANS OF ESCAPE.

MERCHANDISE PAD.

NOSING.

OCCUPANT LOAD.

OPEN-ENDED CORRIDOR.

PANIC HARDWARE.

PHOTOLUMINESCENT.

POWER-ASSISTED DOOR.

POWER-OPERATED DOOR.

PUBLIC WAY.

RAMP.

SCISSOR STAIRWAY.

SELF-LUMINOUS.

SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY SEATING.

STAIR.

STAIRWAY.

STAIRWAY, SPIRAL.

WINDER.

SECTION 1003
GENERAL MEANS OF EGRESS
1003.1 Applicability.

The general requirements specified in Sections 1003 through 1015 shall apply to all three elements of the means of egress system, in addition to those specific requirements for the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge detailed elsewhere in this chapter.

1003.2 Ceiling height.

The means of egress shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Sloped ceilings in accordance with Section 1208.2.

2.	Ceilings of dwelling units and sleeping units within residential occupancies in accordance with Section 1208.2.

3.	Allowable projections in accordance with Section 1003.3.

4.	Stair headroom in accordance with Section 1011.3.

5.	Door height in accordance with Section 1010.1.1.

6.	Ramp headroom in accordance with Section 1012.5.2.

7.	The clear height of floor levels in vehicular and pedestrian traffic areas of public and private parking garages in accordance with Section 406.1.2.

8.	Areas above and below mezzanine floors in accordance with Section 505.2.

1003.3 Protruding objects.

Protruding objects on circulation paths shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1003.3.1 through 1003.3.4.

1003.3.1 Headroom.

Protruding objects are permitted to extend below the minimum ceiling height required by Section 1003.2 where a minimum headroom of 80 inches (2032 mm) is provided over any walking surface, including walks, corridors, aisles and passageways. Not more than 50 percent of the ceiling area of a means of egress shall be reduced in height by protruding objects.

Exception: Door closers, overhead door stops, frame stops, power door operators and electromagnetic door locks shall be permitted to project into the opening height not lower than 78 inches (1981 mm).

A barrier shall be provided where the vertical clearance is less than 80 inches (2032 mm) high. The leading edge of such a barrier shall be located 27 inches (686 mm) maximum above the floor.

1003.3.2 Post-mounted objects.

A free-standing object mounted on a post or pylon shall not overhang that post or pylon more than 4 inches (102 mm) where the lowest point of the leading edge is more than 27 inches (686 mm) and less than 80 inches (2032 mm) above the walking surface. Where a sign or other obstruction is mounted between posts or pylons and the clear distance between the posts or pylons is greater than 12 inches (305 mm), the lowest edge of such sign or obstruction shall be 27 inches (686 mm) maximum or 80 inches (2032 mm) minimum above the finished floor or ground.

Exception: These requirements shall not apply to sloping portions of handrails between the top and bottom riser of stairs and above the ramp run.

1003.3.3 Horizontal projections.

Objects with leading edges more than 27 inches (685 mm) and not more than 80 inches (2030 mm) above the floor shall not project horizontally more than 4 inches (102 mm) into the circulation path.

Exception: Handrails are permitted to protrude 41/2 inches (114 mm) from the wall.

1003.3.4 Clear width.

Protruding objects shall not reduce the minimum clear width of accessible routes (see the Florida Building Code, Accessibility).

1003.4 Floor surface.

Walking surfaces of the means of egress shall have a slip-resistant surface and be securely attached.

1003.5 Elevation change.

Where changes in elevation of less than 12 inches (305 mm) exist in the means of egress, sloped surfaces shall be used. Where the slope is greater than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope), ramps complying with Section 1012 shall be used. Where the difference in elevation is 6 inches (152 mm) or less, the ramp shall be equipped with either handrails or floor finish materials that contrast with adjacent floor finish materials.

Exceptions:

1.	A single step with a maximum riser height of 7 inches (178 mm) is permitted for buildings with occupancies in Groups F, H, R-2, R-3, S and U at exterior doors not required to be accessible by Chapter 11.

2.	A stair with a single riser or with two risers and a tread is permitted at locations not required to be accessible by Chapter 11 where the risers and treads comply with Section 1011.5, the minimum depth of the tread is 13 inches (330 mm) and not less than one handrail complying with Section 1014 is provided within 30 inches (762 mm) of the centerline of the normal path of egress travel on the stair.

3.	A step is permitted in aisles serving seating that has a difference in elevation less than 12 inches (305 mm) at locations not required to be accessible by Chapter 11, provided that the risers and treads comply with Section 1029.14 and the aisle is provided with a handrail complying with Section 1029.16.

Throughout a story in a Group I-2 occupancy, any change in elevation in portions of the means of egress that serve nonambulatory persons shall be by means of a ramp or sloped walkway.

1003.5.1 Accessibility.

For accessibility provisions related to changes in levels, see the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1003.6 Means of egress continuity.

The path of egress travel along a means of egress shall not be interrupted by a building element other than a means of egress component as specified in this chapter. Obstructions shall not be placed in the minimum width or required capacity of a means of egress component except projections permitted by this chapter. The minimum width or required capacity of a means of egress system shall not be diminished along the path of egress travel.

1003.7 Elevators, escalators and moving walks.

Elevators, escalators and moving walks shall not be used as a component of a required means of egress from any other part of the building.

Exception: Elevators used as an accessible means of egress in accordance with Section 1009.

SECTION 1004
OCCUPANT LOAD
1004.1 Design occupant load.

In determining means of egress requirements, the number of occupants for whom means of egress facilities are provided shall be determined in accordance with this section.

1004.2 Cumulative occupant loads.

Where the path of egress travel includes intervening rooms, areas or spaces, cumulative occupant loads shall be determined in accordance with this section.

1004.2.1 Intervening spaces or accessory areas.

Where occupants egress from one or more rooms, areas or spaces through others, the design occupant load shall be the combined occupant load of interconnected accessory or intervening spaces. Design of egress path capacity shall be based on the cumulative portion of occupant loads of all rooms, areas or spaces to that point along the path of egress travel.

1004.2.2 Adjacent levels for mezzanines.

That portion of the occupant load of a mezzanine with required egress through a room, area or space on an adjacent level shall be added to the occupant load of that room, area or space.

1004.2.3 Adjacent stories.

Other than for the egress components designed for convergence in accordance with Section 1005.6, the occupant load from separate stories shall not be added.

1004.3 Multiple function occupant load.

Where an area under consideration contains multiple functions having different occupant load factors, the design occupant load for such area shall be based on the floor area of each function calculated independently.

1004.4 Multiple occupancies.

Where a building contains two or more occupancies, the means of egress requirements shall apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy of that space. Where two or more occupancies utilize portions of the same means of egress system, those egress components shall meet the more stringent requirements of all occupancies that are served.

1004.5 Areas without fixed seating.

The number of occupants shall be computed at the rate of one occupant per unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.5. For areas without fixed seating, the occupant load shall be not less than that number determined by dividing the floor area under consideration by the occupant load factor assigned to the function of the space as set forth in Table 1004.5. Where an intended function is not listed in Table 1004.5, the building official shall establish a function based on a listed function that most nearly resembles the intended function.

Exception: Where approved by the building official, the actual number of occupants for whom each occupied space, floor or building is designed, although less than those determined by calculation, shall be permitted to be used in the determination of the design occupant load.

TABLE 1004.5

MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA ALLOWANCES PER OCCUPANT

FUNCTION OF SPACE	OCCUPANT LOAD FACTORa
Accessory storage areas, mechanical
equipment room
	300 gross
Agricultural building	300 gross
Aircraft hangars	500 gross
Airport terminal	
 Baggage claim	20 gross
 Baggage handling	300 gross
 Concourse	100 gross
 Waiting areas	15 gross
Assembly	
 Gaming floors (keno, slots, etc.)	11 gross
 Exhibit gallery and museum	30 net
Assembly with fixed seats	See Section 1004.6
Assembly without fixed seats	
 Concentrated (chairs only—not fixed)	7 net
 Standing space	5 net
 Unconcentrated (tables and chairs)	15 net
Bowling centers, allow 5 persons for each lane including 15 feet of runway, and for additional areas	7 net
Business areas
Concentrated business use areas
	150 gross
See Section 1004.8

Courtrooms—other than fixed seating areas	40 net
Day care	35 net
Dormitories	50 gross
Educational	
 Classroom area	20 net
 Shops and other vocational room areas	50 net
Exercise rooms	50 gross
Group H-5 Fabrication and manufacturing areas	200 gross
Industrial areas	100 gross
Institutional areas	
 Inpatient treatment areas	240 gross
 Outpatient areas	100 gross
 Sleeping areas	120 gross
Kitchens, commercial	200 gross
Library	
 Reading rooms	50 net
 Stack area	100 gross
Locker rooms	50 gross
Mall buildings—covered and open	See Section 402.8.2
Mercantile	60 gross
 Storage, stock, shipping areas	300 gross
Parking garages	200 gross
Residential	200 gross
Skating rinks, swimming pools	
 Rink and pool	50 gross
 Decks	15 gross
Stages and platforms	15 net
Warehouses	500 gross

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Floor area in square feet per occupant.

1004.5.1 Increased occupant load.

The occupant load permitted in any building, or portion thereof, is permitted to be increased from that number established for the occupancies in Table 1004.5, provided that all other requirements of the code are met based on such modified number and the occupant load does not exceed one occupant per 7 square feet (0.65 m2) of occupiable floor space. Where required by the building official, an approved aisle, seating or fixed equipment diagram substantiating any increase in occupant load shall be submitted. Where required by the building official, such diagram shall be posted.

1004.6 Fixed seating.

For areas having fixed seats and aisles, the occupant load shall be determined by the number of fixed seats installed therein. The occupant load for areas in which fixed seating is not installed, such as waiting spaces, shall be determined in accordance with Section 1004.5 and added to the number of fixed seats.

The occupant load of wheelchair spaces and the associated companion seat shall be based on one occupant for each wheelchair space and one occupant for the associated companion seat provided in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

For areas having fixed seating without dividing arms, the occupant load shall be not less than the number of seats based on one person for each 18 inches (457 mm) of seating length.

The occupant load of seating booths shall be based on one person for each 24 inches (610 mm) of booth seat length measured at the backrest of the seating booth.

1004.7 Outdoor areas.

Yards, patios, occupied roofs, courts and similar outdoor areas accessible to and usable by the building occupants shall be provided with means of egress as required by this chapter. The occupant load of such outdoor areas shall be assigned by the building official in accordance with the anticipated use. Where outdoor areas are to be used by persons in addition to the occupants of the building, and the path of egress travel from the outdoor areas passes through the building, means of egress requirements for the building shall be based on the sum of the occupant loads of the building plus the outdoor areas.

Exceptions:

1.	Outdoor areas used exclusively for service of the building need only have one means of egress.

2.	Both outdoor areas associated with Group R-3 and individual dwelling units of Group R-2.

1004.8 Concentrated business use areas.

The occupant load factor for concentrated business use shall be applied to telephone call centers, trading floors, electronic data processing centers and similar business use areas with a higher density of occupants than would normally be expected in a typical business occupancy environment. Where approved by the building official, the occupant load for concentrated business use areas shall be the actual occupant load, but not less than one occupant per 50 square feet (4.65 m2) of gross occupiable floor space.

1004.9 Posting of occupant load.

Every room or space that is an assembly occupancy shall have the occupant load of the room or space posted in a conspicuous place, near the main exit or exit access doorway from the room or space, for the intended configurations. Posted signs shall be of an approved legible permanent design and shall be maintained by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

SECTION 1005
MEANS OF EGRESS SIZING
1005.1 General.

All portions of the means of egress system shall be sized in accordance with this section.

Exception: Aisles and aisle accessways in rooms or spaces used for assembly purposes complying with Section 1029.

1005.2 Minimum width based on component.

The minimum width, in inches (mm), of any means of egress components shall be not less than that specified for such component, elsewhere in this code.

1005.3 Required capacity based on occupant load.

The required capacity, in inches (mm), of the means of egress for any room, area, space or story shall be not less than that determined in accordance with Sections 1005.3.1 and 1005.3.2:

1005.3.1 Stairways.

The capacity, in inches, of means of egress stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the occupant load served by such stairways by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) per occupant. Where stairways serve more than one story, only the occupant load of each story considered individually shall be used in calculating the required capacity of the stairways serving that story.

Exceptions:

1.	For other than Group H and I-2 occupancies, the capacity, in inches, of means of egress stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the occupant load served by such stairways by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.2 inch (5.1 mm) per occupant in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

2.	Facilities with smoke-protected assembly seating shall be permitted to use the capacity factors in Table 1029.6.2 indicated for stepped aisles for exit access or exit stairways where the entire path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is provided with a smoke control system complying with Section 909.

3.	Facilities with open-air assembly seating shall be permitted to the capacity factors in Section 1029.6.3 indicated for stepped aisles for exit access or exit stairways where the entire path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is open to the outdoors.

1005.3.2 Other egress components.

The capacity, in inches, of means of egress components other than stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the occupant load served by such component by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.2 inch (5.1 mm) per occupant.

Exceptions:

1.	For other than Group H and I-2 occupancies, the capacity, in inches, of means of egress components other than stairways shall be calculated by multiplying the occupant load served by such component by a means of egress capacity factor of 0.15 inch (3.8 mm) per occupant in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

2.	Facilities with smoke-protected assembly seating shall be permitted to use the capacity factors in Table 1029.6.2 indicated for level or ramped aisles for means of egress components other than stairways where the entire path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is provided with a smoke control system complying with Section 909.

3.	Facilities with open-air assembly seating shall be permitted to the capacity factors in Section 1029.6.3 indicated for level or ramped aisles for means of egress components other than stairways where the entire path for means of egress from the seating to the exit discharge is open to the outdoors.

1005.4 Continuity.

The minimum width or required capacity of the means of egress required from any story of a building shall not be reduced along the path of egress travel until arrival at the public way.

1005.5 Distribution of minimum width and required capacity.

Where more than one exit, or access to more than one exit, is required, the means of egress shall be configured such that the loss of any one exit, or access to one exit, shall not reduce the available capacity or width to less than 50 percent of the required capacity or width.

1005.6 Egress convergence.

Where the means of egress from stories above and below converge at an intermediate level, the capacity of the means of egress from the point of convergence shall be not less than the largest minimum width or the sum of the required capacities for the stairways or ramps serving the two adjacent stories, whichever is larger.

1005.7 Encroachment.

Encroachments into the required means of egress width shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.

1005.7.1 Doors.

Doors, when fully opened, shall not reduce the required width by more than 7 inches (178 mm). Doors in any position shall not reduce the required width by more than one-half.

Exceptions:

1.	Surface-mounted latch release hardware shall be exempt from inclusion in the 7-inch maximum (178 mm) encroachment where both of the following conditions exist:

1.1.	The hardware is mounted to the side of the door facing away from the adjacent wall where the door is in the open position.

1.2.	The hardware is mounted not less than 34 inches (865 mm) nor more than 48 inches (1219 mm) above the finished floor.

2.	The restrictions on door swing shall not apply to doors within individual dwelling units and sleeping units of Group R-2 occupancies and dwelling units of Group R-3 occupancies.

1005.7.2 Other projections.

Handrail projections shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 1014.8. Other nonstructural projections such as trim and similar decorative features shall be permitted to project into the required width not more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) on each side.

Exception: Projections are permitted in corridors within Group I-2 Condition 1 in accordance with Section 407.4.3.

1005.7.3 Protruding objects.

Protruding objects shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 1003.3.

SECTION 1006
NUMBER OF EXITS AND
EXIT ACCESS DOORWAYS
1006.1 General.

The number of exits or exit access doorways required within the means of egress system shall comply with the provisions of Section 1006.2 for spaces, including mezzanines, and Section 1006.3 for stories.

1006.2 Egress from spaces.

Rooms, areas or spaces, including mezzanines, within a story or basement shall be provided with the number of exits or access to exits in accordance with this section.

1006.2.1 Egress based on occupant load and common path of egress travel distance.

Two exits or exit access doorways from any space shall be provided where the design occupant load or the common path of egress travel distance exceeds the values listed in Table 1006.2.1. The cumulative occupant load from adjacent rooms, areas or spaces shall be determined in accordance with Section 1004.2.

Exceptions:

1.	The number of exits from foyers, lobbies, vestibules or similar spaces need not be based on cumulative occupant loads for areas discharging through such spaces, but the capacity of the exits from such spaces shall be based on applicable cumulative occupant loads.

2.	Care suites in Group I-2 occupancies complying with Section 407.4.

3.	Unoccupied mechanical rooms and penthouses are not required to comply with the common path of egress travel distance measurement.

TABLE 1006.2.1

SPACES WITH ONE EXIT OR EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY

OCCUPANCY	MAXIMUM OCCUPANT
LOAD OF SPACE
	MAXIMUM COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL DISTANCE (feet)
Without Sprinkler System
(feet)
	With Sprinkler System
(feet)

Occupant Load
OL ≤ 30	OL > 30
A,c E, M	49	75	75	75a
B	49	100	75	100a
F	49	75	75	100a
H-1, H-2, H-3	3	NP	NP	25b
H-4, H-5	10	NP	NP	75b
I-1, I-2,d I-4	10	NP	NP	75a
I-3	10	NP	NP	100a
R-1	10	NP	NP	75a
R-2	49	NP	NP	125a
R-3e	49	NP	NP	125a
R-4e	20	75	75	125a
Sf	29	100	75	100a
U	49	100	75	75a

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

NP = Not Permitted.

a.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. See Section 903 for occupancies where automatic sprinkler systems are permitted in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

b.	Group H occupancies equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

c.	For a room or space used for assembly purposes having fixed seating, see Section 1029.8.

d.	For the travel distance limitations in Group I-2, see Section 407.4.

e.	The common path of egress travel distance shall only apply in a Group R-3 occupancy located in a mixed occupancy building or within a Group R-3 or R-4 congregate living facility.

f.	The length of common path of egress travel distance in a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be not more than 100 feet.

1006.2.1.1 Three or more exits or exit access doorways.

Three exits or exit access doorways shall be provided from any space with an occupant load of 501 to 1,000. Four exits or exit access doorways shall be provided from any space with an occupant load greater than 1,000.

1006.2.2 Egress based on use.

The numbers, configuration and types of components of exits or access to exits shall be provided in the uses described in Sections 1006.2.2.1 through 1006.2.2.6.

1006.2.2.1 Boiler, incinerator and furnace rooms.

Two exit access doorways are required in boiler, incinerator and furnace rooms where the area is over 500 square feet (46 m2) and any fuel-fired equipment exceeds 400,000 British thermal units (Btu) (422 000 KJ) input capacity. Where two exit access doorways are required, one is permitted to be a fixed ladder or an alternating tread device. Exit access doorways shall be separated by a horizontal distance equal to one-half the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the room.

1006.2.2.2 Refrigeration machinery rooms.

Machinery rooms larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall have not less than two exits or exit access doorways. Where two exit access doorways are required, one such doorway is permitted to be served by a fixed ladder or an alternating tread device. Exit access doorways shall be separated by a horizontal distance equal to one-half the maximum horizontal dimension of the room.

All portions of machinery rooms shall be within 150 feet (45 720 mm) of an exit or exit access doorway. An increase in exit access travel distance is permitted in accordance with Section 1017.1.

Exit or exit access doorways shall swing in the direction of egress travel and shall be equipped with panic hardware, regardless of the occupant load served. Exit or exit access doorways shall be tight fitting and self-closing.

1006.2.2.3 Refrigerated rooms or spaces.

Rooms or spaces having a floor area larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2), containing a refrigerant evaporator and maintained at a temperature below 68°F (20°C), shall have access to not less than two exits or exit access doorways.

Exit access travel distance shall be determined as specified in Section 1017.1, but all portions of a refrigerated room or space shall be within 150 feet (45 720 mm) of an exit or exit access doorway where such rooms are not protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. Egress is allowed through adjoining refrigerated rooms or spaces.

Exception: Where using refrigerants in quantities limited to the amounts based on the volume set forth in the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

1006.2.2.4 Electrical rooms.

The location and number of exit or exit access doorways shall be provided for electrical rooms in accordance with Section 110.26 of NFPA 70 for electrical equipment rated 1,000 volts or less, and Section 110.33 of NFPA 70 for electrical equipment rated over 1,000 volts. Panic hardware shall be provided where required in accordance with Section 1010.2.9.2.

1006.2.2.5 Group I-4 means of egress.

Day care facilities, rooms or spaces where care is provided for more than 10 children that are 21/2 years of age or less, shall have access to not less than two exits or exit access doorways.

1006.2.2.6 Vehicular ramps.

Vehicular ramps shall not be considered as an exit access ramp unless pedestrian facilities are provided.

1006.3 Egress from stories or occupied roofs.

The means of egress system serving any story or occupied roof shall be provided with the number of separate and distinct exits or access to exits based on the aggregate occupant load served in accordance with this section. Where stairways serve more than one story, only the occupant load of each story considered individually shall be used in calculating the required number of exits or access to exits serving that story.

1006.3.1 Adjacent story.

The path of egress travel to an exit shall not pass through more than one adjacent story.

Exception: The path of egress travel to an exit shall be permitted to pass through more than one adjacent story in any of the following:

1.	In Group R-1, R-2 or R-3 occupancies, exit access stairways and ramps connecting four stories or less serving and contained within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit or live/work unit.

2.	Exit access stairways serving and contained within a Group R-3 congregate residence or a Group R-4 facility.

3.	Exit access stairways and ramps in open parking garages that serve only the parking garage.

4.	Exit access stairways and ramps serving open-air assembly seating complying with the exit access travel distance requirements of Section 1029.7.

5.	Exit access stairways and ramps between the balcony, gallery or press box and the main assembly floor in occupancies such as theaters, places of religious worship, auditoriums and sports facilities.

1006.3.2 Egress based on occupant load.

Each story and occupied roof shall have the minimum number of separate and distinct exits, or access to exits, as specified in Table 1006.3.2. A single exit or access to a single exit shall be permitted in accordance with Section 1006.3.3. The required number of exits, or exit access stairways or ramps providing access to exits, from any story or occupied roof shall be maintained until arrival at the exit discharge or a public way.

TABLE 1006.3.2

MINIMUM NUMBER OF EXITS OR ACCESS TO EXITS PER STORY

OCCUPANT LOAD
PER STORY
	MINIMUM NUMBER OF EXITS OR
ACCESS TO EXITS FROM STORY

1-500	2
501-1,000	3
More than 1,000	4
1006.3.3 Single exits.

A single exit or access to a single exit shall be permitted from any story or occupied roof where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The occupant load, number of dwelling units and common path of egress travel distance do not exceed the values in Table 1006.3.3(1) or 1006.3.3(2).

2.	Rooms, areas and spaces complying with Section 1006.2.1 with exits that discharge directly to the exterior at the level of exit discharge, are permitted to have one exit or access to a single exit.

3.	Parking garages where vehicles are mechanically parked shall be permitted to have one exit or access to a single exit.

4.	Group R-3 and R-4 occupancies shall be permitted to have one exit or access to a single exit.

5.	Individual single-story or multistory dwelling units shall be permitted to have a single exit or access to a single exit from the dwelling unit provided that both of the following criteria are met:

5.1.	The dwelling unit complies with Section 1006.2.1 as a space with one means of egress.

5.2.	Either the exit from the dwelling unit discharges directly to the exterior at the level of exit discharge, or the exit access outside the dwelling unit’s entrance door provides access to not less than two approved independent exits.

TABLE 1006.3.3(1)

STORIES WITH ONE EXIT OR ACCESS TO ONE EXIT FOR R-2 OCCUPANCIES

STORY	OCCUPANCY	MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
DWELLING UNITS
	MAXIMUM COMMON PATH OF
EGRESS TRAVEL DISTANCE

Basement, first, second or third story above grade plane	R-2a, b	4 dwelling units	125 feet
Fourth story above grade plane and higher	NP	NA	NA

For SI: 1 foot = 3048 mm.

NP = Not Permitted.

NA = Not Applicable.

a.	Buildings classified as Group R-2 equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and provided with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section 1030.

b.	This table is used for R-2 occupancies consisting of dwelling units. For R-2 occupancies consisting of sleeping units, use Table 1006.3.3(2).

TABLE 1006.3.3(2)

STORIES WITH ONE EXIT OR ACCESS TO ONE EXIT FOR OTHER OCCUPANCIES

STORY	OCCUPANCY	MAXIMUM OCCUPANT
LOAD PER STORY
	MAXIMUM COMMON PATH OF
EGRESS TRAVEL DISTANCE
(feet)

First story above or below grade plane	A, Bb, E Fb, M, U	49	75
H-2, H-3	3	25
H-4, H-5, I, R-1, R-2a, c, R-4	10	75
Sb, d	29	75
Second story above grade plane	B, F, M, Sd	29	75
Third story above grade plane and higher	NP	NA	NA

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

NP = Not Permitted.

NA = Not Applicable.

a.	Buildings classified as Group R-2 equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and provided with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section 1030.

b.	Group B, F and S occupancies in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall have a maximum exit access travel distance of 100 feet.

c.	This table is used for R-2 occupancies consisting of sleeping units. For R-2 occupancies consisting of dwelling units, use Table 1006.3.3(1).

d.	The length of exit access travel distance in a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be not more than 100 feet.

1006.3.3.1 Mixed occupancies.

Where one exit, or exit access stairway or ramp providing access to exits at other stories, is permitted to serve individual stories, mixed occupancies shall be permitted to be served by single exits provided each individual occupancy complies with the applicable requirements of Table 1006.3.3(1) or 1006.3.3(2) for that occupancy. Where applicable, cumulative occupant loads from adjacent occupancies shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Section 1004.2. In each story of a mixed occupancy building, the maximum number of occupants served by a single exit shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the calculated number of occupants of the space divided by the allowable number of occupants indicated in Table 1006.3.3(2) for each occupancy does not exceed one. Where dwelling units are located on a story with other occupancies, the actual number of dwelling units divided by four plus the ratio from the other occupancy does not exceed one.

SECTION 1007
EXIT AND EXIT ACCESS
DOORWAY CONFIGURATION
1007.1 General.

Exits, exit access doorways, and exit access stairways and ramps serving spaces, including individual building stories, shall be separated in accordance with the provisions of this section.

1007.1.1 Two exits or exit access doorways.

Where two exits, exit access doorways, exit access stairways or ramps, or any combination thereof, are required from any portion of the exit access, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be served measured in a straight line between them. Interlocking or scissor stairways shall be counted as one exit stairway.

Exceptions:

1.	Where interior exit stairways or ramps are interconnected by a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated corridor conforming to the requirements of Section 1020, the required exit separation shall be measured along the shortest direct line of travel within the corridor.

2.	Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the separation distance shall be not less than one-third of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the area served.

3.	In Group R1 and R2 occupancies, the distance between exits is not applicable to common nonlooped exit access corridors in a building that has corridor doors from the guestroom or guest suite or dwelling unit, which are arranged so that the exits are located in opposite directions from such doors.

1007.1.1.1 Measurement point.

The separation distance required in Section 1007.1.1 shall be measured in accordance with the following:

1.	The separation distance to exit or exit access doorways shall be measured to any point along the width of the doorway.

2.	The separation distance to exit access stairways shall be measured to the closest riser.

1007.1.2 Three or more exits or exit access doorways.

Where access to three or more exits is required, not less than two exit or exit access doorways shall be arranged in accordance with the provisions of Section 1007.1.1. Additional required exit or exit access doorways shall be arranged a reasonable distance apart so that if one becomes blocked, the others will be available.

1007.1.3 Remoteness of exit access stairways or ramps.

Where two exit access stairways or ramps provide the required means of egress to exits at another story, the required separation distance shall be maintained for all portions of such exit access stairways or ramps.

1007.1.3.1 Three or more exit access stairways or ramps.

Where more than two exit access stairways or ramps provide the required means of egress, not less than two shall be arranged in accordance with Section 1007.1.3.

SECTION 1008
MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
1008.1 Means of egress illumination.

Illumination shall be provided in the means of egress in accordance with Section 1008.2. Under emergency power, means of egress illumination shall comply with Section 1008.3.

1008.2 Illumination required.

The means of egress serving a room or space shall be illuminated at all times that the room or space is occupied.

Exceptions:

1.	Occupancies in Group U.

2.	Aisle accessways in Group A.

3.	Dwelling units and sleeping units in Groups R-1, R-2 and R-3.

4.	Sleeping units of Group I occupancies.

1008.2.1 Illumination level under normal power.

The means of egress illumination level shall be not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface. Along exit access stairways, exit stairways and at their required landings, the illumination level shall not be less than 10 footcandles at the walking surface when the stairway is in use.

Exception: For auditoriums, theaters, concert or opera halls and similar assembly occupancies, the illumination at the walking surface is permitted to be reduced during performances by one of the following methods provided that the required illumination is automatically restored upon activation of a premises’ fire alarm system:

1.	Externally illuminated walking surfaces shall be permitted to be illuminated to not less than 0.2 footcandle (2.15 lux).

2.	Steps, landings and the sides of ramps shall be permitted to be marked with self-luminous materials in accordance with Sections 1025.2.1, 1025.2.2 and 1025.2.4 by systems listed in accordance with UL 1994.

1008.2.2 Group I-2.

In Group I-2 occupancies where two or more exits are required, on the exterior landings required by Section 1010.1.5, means of egress illumination levels for the exit discharge shall be provided such that failure of any single lighting unit shall not reduce the illumination level on that landing to less than 1 footcandle (11 lux).

1008.2.3 Exit discharge.

Illumination shall be provided along the path of travel for the exit discharge from each exit to the public way.

Exception: Illumination shall not be required where the path of exit discharge meets both of the following requirements:

1.	The path of exit discharge is illuminated from the exit to a safe dispersal area complying with Section 1028.5.

2.	A dispersal area shall be illuminated to a level not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface.

1008.3 Emergency power for illumination.

The power supply for means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises’ electrical supply.

1008.3.1 General.

In the event of power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more exits or access to exits, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:

1.	Aisles.

2.	Corridors.

3.	Exit access stairways and ramps.

1008.3.2 Buildings.

In the event of power supply failure in buildings that require two or more exits or access to exits, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:

1.	Interior exit access stairways and ramps.

2.	Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.

3.	Exit passageways.

4.	Vestibules and areas on the level of discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.2.

5.	Exterior landings as required by Section 1010.1.5 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.

1008.3.3 Rooms and spaces.

In the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:

1.	Electrical equipment rooms.

2.	Fire command centers.

3.	Fire pump rooms.

4.	Generator rooms.

5.	Public restrooms with an area greater than 300 square feet (27.87 m2).

1008.3.4 Duration.

The emergency power system shall provide power for a duration of not less than 90 minutes and shall consist of storage batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in accordance with Section 2702.

1008.3.5 Illumination level under emergency power.

Emergency lighting facilities shall be arranged to provide initial illumination that is not less than an average of 1 footcandle (11 lux) and a minimum at any point of 0.1 footcandle (1 lux) measured along the path of egress at floor level. Illumination levels shall be permitted to decline to 0.6 footcandle (6 lux) average and a minimum at any point of 0.06 footcandle (0.6 lux) at the end of the emergency lighting time duration. A maximum-to-minimum illumination uniformity ratio of 40 to 1 shall not be exceeded. In Group I-2 occupancies, failure of any single lighting unit shall not reduce the illumination level to less than 0.2 foot-candle (2.2 lux).

SECTION 1009
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS
1009.1 Accessible means of egress required.

Accessible means of egress shall be provided in accordance with the applicable sections of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1009.2 Continuity and components.

Reserved.

1009.3 Stairways.

Reserved.

1009.4 Elevators.

Reserved.

1009.5 Platform lifts.

Reserved.

1009.6 Areas of refuge.

Reserved.

1009.7 Exterior areas for assisted rescue.

Reserved.

1009.8 Two-way communication.

Reserved.

1009.9 Signage.

Reserved.

1009.10 Directional signage.

Reserved.

1009.11 Instructions.

Reserved.

SECTION 1010
DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES
1010.1 General.

Doors in the means of egress shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1010.1.1 through 1010.3.5. Exterior exit doors shall also comply with the requirements of Section 1022.2. Gates in the means of egress shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1010.4 through 1010.4.1. Turnstiles in the means of egress shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1010.5 through 1010.5.4.

Doors, gates and turnstiles provided for egress purposes in numbers greater than required by this code shall comply with the requirements of this section.

Doors in the means of egress shall be readily distinguishable from the adjacent construction and finishes such that the doors are easily recognizable as doors. Mirrors or similar reflecting materials shall not be used on means of egress doors. Means of egress doors shall not be concealed by curtains, drapes, decorations or similar materials.

For accessibility provisions related to doors, refer to the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1010.1.1 Size of doors.

The required capacity of each door opening shall be sufficient for the occupant load thereof and shall provide a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches (813 mm). The clear opening width of doorways with swinging doors shall be measured between the face of the door and the frame stop, with the door open 90 degrees (1.57 rad). Where this section requires a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches (813 mm) and a door opening includes two door leaves without a mullion, one leaf shall provide a minimum clear opening width of 32 inches (813 mm). In Group I-2, doors serving as means of egress doors where used for the movement of beds shall provide a minimum clear opening width of 411/2 inches (1054 mm). The minimum clear height of door openings shall be not less than 80 inches (2032 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	In Group R-2 and R-3 dwelling and sleeping units that are not required to be an Accessible unit, the minimum width shall not apply to door openings that are not part of the required means of egress.

2.	In Group I-3, door openings to resident sleeping units that are not required to be an Accessible unit shall have a minimum clear opening width of 28 inches (711 mm).

3.	Door openings to storage closets less than 10 square feet (0.93 m2) in area shall not be limited by the minimum clear opening width.

4.	The maximum width of door leaves in revolving doors that comply with Section 1010.3.1 shall not be limited.

5.	The maximum width of door leaves in power-operated doors that comply with Section 1010.3.2 shall not be limited.

6.	Door openings within a dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall have a minimum clear opening height of 78 inches (1981 mm).

7.	In dwelling and sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible units, exterior door openings other than the required exit door shall have a minimum clear opening height of 76 inches (1930 mm).

8.	In Group I-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies, in dwelling and sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible units, the minimum clear opening widths shall not apply to interior egress doors.

9.	Door openings required to be accessible intended for user passage shall have a minimum clear opening width of 31.75 inches (806 mm).

10.	Buildings that are 400 square feet (37 m2) or less and that are intended for use in conjunction with one- and two-family residences are not subject to the door height and width requirements of this code.

11.	Doors to walk-in freezers and coolers less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in area shall have a maximum width of 60 inches (1524 mm) nominal.

12.	The minimum clear opening width shall not apply to doors for nonaccessible showers or sauna compartments.

13.	The minimum clear opening width shall not apply to the doors for nonaccessible toilet stalls.

1010.1.1.1 Projections into clear opening.

There shall not be projections into the required clear opening width lower than 34 inches (864 mm) above the floor or ground. Projections into the clear opening width between 34 inches (864 mm) and 80 inches (2032 mm) above the floor or ground shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm).

Exception: Door closers, overhead door stops, frame stops, power door operators, and electromagnetic door locks shall be permitted to project into the opening height not lower than 78 inches (1980 mm) minimum above the floor.

1010.1.2 Egress door types.

Egress doors shall be of the side-hinged swinging door, pivoted door or balanced door types.

Exceptions:

1.	Private garages, office areas, factory and storage areas with an occupant load of 10 or less.

2.	Group I-3 occupancies used as a place of detention.

3.	Critical or intensive care patient rooms within suites of health care facilities.

4.	Doors within or serving a single dwelling unit in Groups R-2 and R-3.

5.	In other than Group H occupancies, revolving doors complying with Section 1010.3.1.

6.	In other than Group H occupancies, special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding door assemblies complying with Section 1010.3.3.

7.	Power-operated doors in accordance with Section 1010.3.2.

8.	Doors serving a bathroom within an individual sleeping unit in Group R-1.

9.	In other than Group H occupancies, manually operated horizontal sliding doors are permitted in a means of egress from spaces with an occupant load of 10 or less.

1010.1.2.1 Direction of swing.

Side-hinged swinging doors, pivoted doors and balanced doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel where serving a room or area containing an occupant load of 50 or more persons or a Group H occupancy.

1010.1.3 Forces to unlatch and open doors.

The forces to unlatch doors shall comply with the following:

1.	Where door hardware operates by push or pull, the operational force to unlatch the door shall not exceed 15 pounds (66.7N).

2.	Where door hardware operates by rotation, the operational force to unlatch the door shall not exceed 28 inch-pounds (315 N-cm).

The forces to open doors shall comply with the following:

1.	For interior swinging egress doors that are manually operated, other than doors required to be fire rated, the force for pushing or pulling open the door shall not exceed 5 pounds (22 N).

2.	For other swinging doors, sliding doors or folding doors, and doors required to be fire rated, the door shall require not more than a 30-pound (133 N) force to be set in motion and shall move to a fullopen position when subjected to not more than a 15- pound (67 N) force.

1010.1.3.1 Location of applied forces.

Forces shall be applied to the latch side of the door.

1010.1.3.2 Manual horizontal sliding doors.

Where a manual horizontal sliding door is required to latch, the latch or other mechanism shall prevent the door from rebounding into a partially open position when the door is closed.

1010.1.4 Floor elevation.

There shall be a floor or landing on each side of a door. Such floor or landing shall be at the same elevation on each side of the door. Landings shall be level except for exterior landings, which are permitted to have a slope not to exceed 0.25 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

Exceptions:

1.	Doors serving individual dwelling units in Groups R-2 and R-3 where the following apply:

1.1.	A door is permitted to open at the top step of an interior flight of stairs, provided the door does not swing over the top step.

1.2.	Screen doors and storm doors are permitted to swing over stairs or landings.

2.	Exterior doors as provided for in Section 1003.5, Exception 1, and Section 1022.2, which are not on an accessible route.

3.	In Group R-3 occupancies not required to be Accessible units, the landing at an exterior doorway shall be not more than 73/4 inches (197 mm) below the top of the threshold, provided the door, other than an exterior storm or screen door, does not swing over the landing.

4.	Variations in elevation due to differences in finish materials, but not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).

5.	Reserved.

6.	Doors serving equipment spaces not required to be accessible in accordance with Chapter 11 and serving an occupant load of five or less shall be permitted to have a landing on one side to be not more than 7 inches (178 mm) above or below the landing on the egress side of the door.

1010.1.5 Landings at doors.

Landings shall have a width not less than the width of the stairway or the door, whichever is greater. Doors in the fully open position shall not reduce a required dimension by more than 7 inches (178 mm). Where a landing serves an occupant load of 50 or more, doors in any position shall not reduce the landing to less than one-half its required width. Landings shall have a length measured in the direction of travel of not less than 44 inches (1118 mm).

Exception: Landing length in the direction of travel in Groups R-3 and U and within individual units of Group R-2 need not exceed 36 inches (914 mm).

1010.1.6 Thresholds.

Thresholds at doorways shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) in height above the finished floor or landing for sliding doors serving dwelling units or 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) above the finished floor or landing for other doors. Raised thresholds and floor level changes greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) at doorways shall be beveled with a slope not greater than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope).

Exceptions:

1.	In occupancy Group R-2 or R-3, threshold heights for sliding and side-hinged exterior doors shall be permitted to be up to 73/4 inches (197 mm) in height if all of the following apply:

1.1.	The door is not part of the required means of egress.

1.2.	The door is not part of an accessible route as required by Chapter 11.

2.	For exterior doors serving dwelling units, or sleeping units, thresholds at doorways shall be allowed at a height necessary to comply with the water resistance requirements of Section 1709.5.

1010.1.7 Door arrangement.

Space between two doors in a series shall be 48 inches (1219 mm) minimum plus the width of a door swinging into the space. Doors in a series shall swing either in the same direction or away from the space between the doors.

Exceptions:

1.	The minimum distance between horizontal sliding power-operated doors in a series shall be 48 inches (1219 mm).

2.	Storm and screen doors serving individual dwelling units in Groups R-2 and R-3 need not be spaced 48 inches (1219 mm) from the other door.

3.	Doors within individual dwelling units in Groups R-2 and R-3.

1010.2 Door operations.

Except as specifically permitted by this section, egress doors shall be readily openable from the egress side without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

1010.2.1 Unlatching.

The unlatching of any door or leaf shall not require more than one operation. Manual bolts are not permitted.

Exceptions:

1.	Places of detention or restraint.

2.	Doors with manual bolts, automatic flush bolts, and constant latching bolts as permitted by Section 1010.2.4, Item 4.

3.	Doors from individual dwelling units and sleeping units of Group R occupancies as permitted by Section 1010.2.4, Item 5.

1010.2.2 Hardware.

Door handles, pulls, latches, locks and other operating devices on doors required to be accessible by Chapter 11 shall not require tight grasping, tight pinching or twisting of the wrist to operate.

1010.2.3 Hardware height.

Door handles, pulls, latches, locks and other operating devices shall be installed 34 inches (864 mm) minimum and 48 inches (1219 mm) maximum above the finished floor. Locks used only for security purposes and not used for normal operation are permitted at any height.

Exception: Access doors or gates in barrier walls and fences protecting pools, spas and hot tubs shall be permitted to have operable parts of the release of latch on self-latching devices at 54 inches (1370 mm) maximum above the finished floor or ground, provided the self-latching devices are not also self-locking devices operated by means of a key, electronic opener or integral combination lock.

1010.2.4 Locks and latches.

Locks and latches shall be permitted to prevent operation of doors where any of the following exist:

1.	Places of detention or restraint.

2.	In Group I-1, Condition 2 and Group I-2 occupancies where the clinical needs of persons receiving care require containment or where persons receiving care pose a security threat, provided that all clinical staff can readily unlock doors at all times, and all such locks are keyed to keys carried by all clinical staff at all times or all clinical staff have the codes or other means necessary to operate the locks at all times.

3.	In buildings in occupancy Group A having an occupant load of 300 or less, Groups B, F, M and S, and in places of religious worship, the main door or doors are permitted to be equipped with key-operated locking devices from the egress side provided:

3.1.	The locking device is readily distinguishable as locked.

3.2.	A readily visible durable sign is posted on the egress side on or adjacent to the door stating: THIS DOOR TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN THIS SPACE IS OCCUPIED. The sign shall be in letters 1 inch (25 mm) high on a contrasting background.

3.3.	The use of the key-operated locking device is revocable by the building official for due cause.

4.	Manual bolts, automatic flush bolts, and constant latching bolts on the inactive leaf of a pair of doors in accordance with Table 1010.2.4, provided that the inactive leaf does not have a doorknob, panic hardware, or similar operating hardware.

5.	Doors from individual dwelling or sleeping units of Group R occupancies having an occupant load of 10 or less are permitted to be equipped with a night latch, dead bolt or security chain, provided such devices are openable from the inside without the use of a key or tool.

6.	Fire doors after the minimum elevated temperature has disabled the unlatching mechanism in accordance with listed fire door test procedures.

7.	Doors serving roofs not intended to be occupied shall be permitted to be locked, preventing entry to the building from the roof, provided that when accessing the roof from the building the locks do not automatically lock, preventing re-entry into the building from the roof.

8.	Other than egress courts, where occupants must egress from an exterior space through the building for means of egress, exit access doors shall be permitted to be equipped with an approved locking device where installed and operated in accordance with all of the following:

8.1.	The maximum occupant load shall be posted where required by Section 1004.9. Such signage shall be permanently affixed inside the building and shall be posted in a conspicuous space near all the exit access doorways.

8.2.	A weatherproof telephone or two-way communication system installed in accordance with Section 1009 shall be located adjacent to not less than one required exit access door on the exterior side.

8.3.	The egress door locking device is readily distinguishable as locked and shall be a keyoperated locking device.

8.4.	A clear window or glazed door opening, not less than 5 square feet (0.46 m2) in area, shall be provided at each exit access door to determine if there are occupants using the outdoor area.

8.5.	A readily visible, durable sign shall be posted on the interior side on or adjacent to each locked required exit access door serving the exterior area stating, “THIS DOOR TO REMAIN UNLOCKED WHEN THE OUTDOOR AREA IS OCCUPIED.” The letters on the sign shall be not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) high on a contrasting background.

8.6.	The occupant load of the occupied exterior area shall not exceed 300 occupants in accordance with Section 1004.

9.	Locking devices are permitted on doors to balconies, decks or other exterior spaces serving individual dwelling or sleeping units.

10.	Locking devices are permitted on doors to balconies, decks or other exterior spaces of 250 square feet (23.23 m2) or less serving a private office space.

TABLE 1010.2.4

MANUAL BOLTS, AUTOMATIC FLUSH BOLTS AND CONSTANT LATCHING BOLTS ON THE INACTIVE LEAF OF A PAIR OF DOORS

APPLICATION WITH A PAIR OF DOORS
WITH AN ACTIVE LEAF AND INACTIVE LEAF
	THE PAIR OF
DOORS ARE
REQUIRED TO
COMPLY WITH
SECTION 716	PERMITTED USES OF MANUAL BOLTS, AUTOMATIC FLUSH
BOLTS, AND CONSTANT LATCHING BOLTS ON THE
INACTIVE LEAF OF A PAIR OF DOORS
Surface or Flush
Mounted Manual Bolts
	Automatic
Flush Bolts
	Constant
Latching Bolts

Group B, F or S occupancies with occupant load less than 50	No	P	P	P
Yes	NP	NP b	P
Group B, F or S occupancies where the building is equipped
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section
903.3.1.1 and the inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress
capacity requirements
	No	P	P	P
Yes	NP	NPb	P
Group I-2 patient care rooms where the inactive leaf is not
needed to meet egress capacity requirements
	No	NP	NPb	P
Yes	NP	NPb	P

Any occupancy where panic hardware is not required, egress
doors are used in pairs and both leaves are required to meet
egress capacity requirements
	No	NP	P	NP
Yes	NP	NPb	NP
Storage or equipment rooms where the inactive leaf is not
needed to meet egress capacity requirements
	No	Pa	P	P
Yes	Pa	P	P

P = Permitted; NP = Not Permitted.

a. Not permitted on corridor doors in Group I-2 healthcare occupancies where corridor doors are required to be positive latching.

b. Permitted where both doors are self-closing or automatic-closing and are provided with a coordinator that causes the inactive leaf to be closed prior to the active leaf.

1010.2.5

Reserved.

1010.2.6

Reserved.

1010.2.7 Stairway doors.

Interior stairway means of egress doors shall be openable from both sides without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

Exceptions:

1.	Stairway discharge doors shall be openable from the egress side and shall only be locked from the opposite side.

2.	This section shall not apply to doors arranged in accordance with Section 403.5.3.

3.	Stairway exit doors are permitted to be locked from the side opposite the egress side, provided they are openable from the egress side and capable of being unlocked simultaneously without unlatching upon a signal from the fire command center, if present, or a signal by emergency personnel from a single location inside the main entrance to the building.

4.	Stairway exit doors shall be openable from the egress side and shall only be locked from the opposite side in Group B, F, M and S occupancies where the only interior access to the tenant space is from a single exit stairway where permitted in Section 1006.3.3.

5.	Stairway exit doors shall be openable from the egress side and shall only be locked from the opposite side in Group R-2 occupancies where the only interior access to the dwelling unit is from a single exit stairway where permitted in Section 1006.3.3.

1010.2.8 Locking arrangements in educational occupancies.

In Group E occupancies, Group B educational occupancies and Group I-4 occupancies, egress doors from classrooms, offices and other occupied rooms with locking arrangements designed to keep intruders from entering the room shall comply with all of the following conditions:

1.	The door shall be capable of being unlocked from outside the room with a key or other approved means.

2.	The door shall be openable from within the room in accordance with Section 1010.2.

3.	Modifications shall not be made to listed panic hardware, fire door hardware or door closer.

4.	Modifications to fire door assemblies shall be in accordance with NFPA 80.

Remote locking or unlocking of doors from an approved location shall be permitted in addition to the unlocking operation in Item 1.

1010.2.9 Panic and fire exit hardware.

Swinging doors serving a Group H occupancy and swinging doors serving rooms or spaces with an occupant load of 50 or more in a Group A or E occupancy shall not be provided with a latch or lock other than panic hardware or fire exit hardware.

Exceptions:

1.	A main exit of a Group A occupancy shall be permitted to be locking in accordance with Section 1010.2.4, Item 3.

2.	Doors provided with panic hardware or fire exit hardware serving a Group A or E occupancy shall be permitted to be electronically locked in accordance with Section 1010.2.11 or 1010.2.12.

3.	Outdoor gates from residential and commercial swimming pools or swimming pool decks, except where the pool deck serves as a portion of the means of egress of a building or has an occupant load of 300 or greater.

4.	Courtrooms shall be permitted to be locked in accordance with Section 1010.2.13, Exception 2.

5.	Exit access doors serving occupied exterior areas shall be permitted to be locked in accordance with Section 1010.2.4, Item 8.

1010.2.9.1 Refrigeration machinery room.

Refrigeration machinery rooms larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall have not less than two exit or exit access doorways that swing in the direction of egress travel and shall be equipped with panic hardware or fire exit hardware.

1010.2.9.2 Rooms with electrical equipment.

Exit or exit access doors serving transformer vaults, rooms designated for batteries or energy storage systems, or modular data centers shall be equipped with panic hardware or exit hardware. Rooms containing electrical equipment rated 800 amperes or more and that contain overcurrent devices, switching devices or control devices and where the exit or exit access door is less than 25 feet (7620 mm) from the equipment working space as required by NFPA 70, such doors shall not be provided with a latch or lock other than panic hardware or exit hardware. The doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel.

1010.2.9.3 Installation.

Where panic or fire exit hardware is installed, it shall comply with the following:

1.	Panic hardware shall be listed in accordance with UL 305.

2.	Fire exit hardware shall be listed in accordance with UL 10C and UL 305.

3.	The actuating portion of the releasing device shall extend not less than one-half of the door leaf width.

4.	The maximum unlatching force shall not exceed 15 pounds (67 N).

1010.2.9.4 Balanced doors.

If balanced doors are used and panic hardware is required, the panic hardware shall be the push-pad type and the pad shall not extend more than one-half the width of the door measured from the latch side.

1010.2.10 Monitored or recorded egress.

Where electrical systems that monitor or record egress activity are incorporated, the locking system shall comply with Section 1010.2.11, 1010.2.12, 1010.2.13, 1010.2.14 or 1010.2.15 or shall be readily openable from the egress side without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

1010.2.11 Door hardware release of electrically locked egress doors.

Door hardware release of electric locking systems shall be permitted on doors in the means of egress within any occupancy except in Group H where installed and operated in accordance with all of the following:

1.	The door hardware that is affixed to the door leaf has an obvious method of operation that is readily operated under all lighting conditions.

2.	The door hardware is capable of being operated with one hand and shall comply with Section 1010.2.1.

3.	Operation of the door hardware directly interrupts the power to the electric lock and unlocks the door immediately.

4.	Loss of power to the electric locking system automatically unlocks the door.

5.	Where panic or fire exit hardware is required by Section 1010.2.9, operation of the panic or fire exit hardware also releases the electric lock.

6.	The locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294.

1010.2.12 Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors.

Sensor release of electric locking systems shall be permitted on doors located in the means of egress with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-4, M, R-1 or R-2 where installed and operated in accordance with all of the following criteria:

1.	The sensor shall be installed on the egress side, arranged to detect an occupant approaching the doors, and shall cause the electric locking system to unlock.

2.	The electric locks shall be arranged to unlock by a signal from or loss of power to the sensor.

3.	Loss of power to the lock or locking system shall automatically unlock the electric lock.

4.	The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be provided to the manual unlocking device and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that reads “PUSH TO EXIT.” When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result in direct interruption of power to the electric lock—independent of other electronics—and the electric lock shall remain unlocked for not less than 30 seconds.

5.	Activation of the building fire alarm system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the electric lock, and the electric lock shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset.

6.	Activation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the electric lock. The electric lock shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset.

7.	The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294.

1010.2.13 Delayed egress.

Delayed egress locking systems shall be permitted to be installed on doors serving Group B, F, I, M, R, S and U occupancies in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or an approved automatic smoke or heat detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

Exceptions:

1.	Delayed egress locking systems shall be permitted to be installed on doors serving Group E occupancies that have an occupant load of 10 or fewer and that are in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or an approved automatic smoke or heat detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

2.	In courtrooms in Group A-3 and B occupancies, delayed egress locking systems shall be permitted to be installed on exit or exit access doors, other than the main exit or exit access door, in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

1010.2.13.1 Delayed egress locking system.

The delayed egress locking system shall be installed and operated in accordance with all of the following:

1.	The delay electronics of the delayed egress locking system shall deactivate upon actuation of the automatic sprinkler system or automatic fire detection system, allowing immediate, free egress.

2.	The delay electronics of the delayed egress locking system shall deactivate upon loss of power controlling the lock or lock mechanism, allowing immediate free egress.

3.	The delayed egress locking system shall have the capability of being deactivated at the fire command center and other approved locations.

4.	An attempt to egress shall initiate an irreversible process that shall allow such egress in not more than 15 seconds when a physical effort to exit is applied to the egress side door hardware for not more than 3 seconds. Initiation of the irreversible process shall activate an audible signal in the vicinity of the door. Once the delay electronics have been deactivated, rearming the delay electronics shall be by manual means only.

Exception: Where approved, a delay of not more than 30 seconds is permitted on a delayed egress door.

5.	The egress path from any point shall not pass through more than one delayed egress locking system.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group I-1, Condition 2, Group I-2 or I-3 occupancies, the egress path from any point in the building shall pass through not more than two delayed egress locking systems, provided that the combined delay does not exceed 30 seconds.

2.	In Group I-1, Condition 1, or I-4 occupancies, the egress path from any point in the building shall pass through not more than two delayed egress locking systems, provided that the combined delay does not exceed 30 seconds and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

6.	A sign shall be provided on the door and shall be located above and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the door exit hardware:

6.1.	For doors that swing in the direction of egress, the sign shall read: PUSH UNTIL ALARM SOUNDS. DOOR CAN BE OPENED IN 15 [30] SECONDS.

6.2.	For doors that swing in the opposite direction of egress, the sign shall read: PULL UNTIL ALARM SOUNDS. DOOR CAN BE OPENED IN 15 [30] SECONDS.

6.3.	The sign shall comply with the visual character requirements in the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

Exception: Where approved, in Group I occupancies, the installation of a sign is not required where care recipients who because of clinical needs require restraint or containment as part of the function of the treatment area.

7.	Emergency lighting shall be provided on the egress side of the door.

8.	The delayed egress locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294.

1010.2.14 Controlled egress doors in Groups I-1 and I-2.

INSIGHTS

Electric locking systems, including electro-mechanical locking systems and electromagnetic locking systems, shall be permitted to be locked in the means of egress in Group I-1 or I-2 occupancies where the clinical needs of persons receiving care require their containment. Controlled egress doors shall be permitted in such occupancies where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or an approved automatic smoke or heat detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, provided that the doors are installed and operate in accordance with all of the following:

1.	The door locks shall unlock on actuation of the automatic sprinkler system or automatic smoke detection system.

2.	The door locks shall unlock on loss of power controlling the lock or lock mechanism.

3.	The door locking system shall be installed to have the capability of being unlocked by a switch located at the fire command center, a nursing station or other approved location. The switch shall directly break power to the lock.

4.	A building occupant shall not be required to pass through more than one door equipped with a controlled egress locking system before entering an exit.

5.	The procedures for unlocking the doors shall be described and approved as part of the emergency planning and preparedness required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

6.	All clinical staff shall have the keys, codes or other means necessary to operate the locking systems.

7.	Emergency lighting shall be provided at the door.

8.	The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294.

Exceptions:

1.	Items 1 through 4 shall not apply to doors to areas occupied by persons who, because of clinical needs, require restraint or containment as part of the function of a psychiatric or cognitive treatment area.

2.	Items 1 through 4 shall not apply to doors to areas where a listed egress control system is utilized to reduce the risk of child abduction from nursery and obstetric areas of a Group I-2 hospital.

 INSIGHTS (1)
1010.2.15 Locking arrangements in buildings within correctional facilities.

In buildings within correctional and detention facilities, doors in means of egress serving rooms or spaces occupied by persons whose movements are controlled for security reasons shall be permitted to be locked where equipped with egress control devices that shall unlock manually and by not less than one of the following means:

1.	Activation of an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Activation of an approved manual fire alarm box.

3.	A signal from a constantly attended location.

1010.2.16 Elevator lobby exit access doors.

In other thanhigh-rise buildings and Group I-3, R-3 and R-4 occupancies, electrically locked exit access doors providing egress from elevator lobbies shall be permitted where all the following conditions are met:

1.	For all occupants of the floor, the path of exit access travel to not less than two exits is not required to pass through the elevator lobby.

2.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and a fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907. Elevator lobbies shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.

3.	Activation of the building fire alarm system by other than a manual fire alarm box shall automatically unlock the electric locks providing exit access from the elevator lobbies, and the electric locks shall remain unlocked until the system is reset.

4.	The electric locks shall unlock on loss of power to the electric lock or electrical locking system.

5.	The electric locks shall have the capability of being unlocked by a switch located at the fire command center, security station, or other approved location.

6.	A two-way communication system complying with Chapter 7 of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility shall be located in the elevator lobby adjacent to the electrically locked exit access door and connected to an approved constantly attended station. This constantly attended station shall have the capability of unlocking the electric locks of the elevator lobby exit access doors.

7.	Emergency lighting shall be provided in the elevator lobby on both sides of the electrically locked door.

8.	The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294.

1010.3 Special doors.

Special doors and security grilles shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1010.1.3.1 through 1010.1.3.4.

1010.3.1 Revolving doors.

Revolving doors shall comply with the following:

1.	Revolving doors shall comply with BHMA A156.27 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Each revolving door shall be capable of breakout in accordance with BHMA A156.27 and shall provide an aggregate width of not less than 36 inches (914 mm).

3.	A revolving door shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the foot or top of stairways or escalators. A dispersal area shall be provided between the stairways or escalators and the revolving doors.

4.	The revolutions per minute (rpm) for a revolving door shall not exceed the maximum rpm as specified in BHMA A156.27. Manual revolving doors shall comply with Table 1010.3.1(1). Automatic or power-operated revolving doors shall comply with Table 1010.3.1(2).

5.	An emergency stop switch shall be provided near each entry point of power or automatic operated revolving doors within 48 inches (1220 mm) of the door and between 34 inches (864 mm) and 48 inches (1220 mm) above the floor. The activation area of the emergency stop switch button shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in diameter and shall be red.

6.	Each revolving door shall have a side-hinged swinging door that complies with Section 1010.1 in the same wall and within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the revolving door.

7.	Revolving doors shall not be part of an accessible route required by Chapter 11.

TABLE 1010.3.1(1)

MAXIMUM DOOR SPEED MANUAL REVOLVING DOORS

REVOLVING DOOR MAXIMUM
NOMINAL DIAMETER (FT-IN)
	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE
REVOLVING DOOR SPEED (RPM)

6-0	12
7-0	11
8-0	10
9-0	9
10-0	8

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

TABLE 1010.3.1(2)

MAXIMUM DOOR SPEED AUTOMATIC OR POWER-OPERATED REVOLVING DOORS

REVOLVING DOOR MAXIMUM
NOMINAL DIAMETER (FT-IN)
	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE
REVOLVING DOOR SPEED (RPM)

8-0	7.2
9-0	6.4
10-0	5.7
11-0	5.2
12-0	4.8
12-6	4.6
14-0	4.1
16-0	3.6
17-0	3.4
18-0	3.2
20-0	2.9
24-0	2.4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

1010.3.1.1 Egress component.

A revolving door used as a component of a means of egress shall comply with Section 1010.3.1 and the following three conditions:

1.	Revolving doors shall not be given credit for more than 50 percent of the minimum width or required capacity.

2.	Each revolving door shall be credited with a capacity based on not more than a 50-person occupant load.

3.	Each revolving door shall provide for egress in accordance with BHMA A156.27 with a breakout force of not more than 130 pounds (578 N).

1010.3.1.2 Other than egress component.

A revolving door used as other than a component of a means of egress shall comply with Section 1010.3.1. The breakout force of a revolving door not used as a component of a means of egress shall not be more than 180 pounds (801 N).

Exception: A breakout force in excess of 180 pounds (801 N) is permitted if the breakout force is reduced to not more than 130 pounds (578 N) when not less than one of the following conditions is satisfied:

1.	There is a power failure or power is removed to the device holding the door wings in position.

2.	There is an actuation of the automatic sprinkler system where such system is provided.

3.	There is an actuation of a smoke detection system that is installed in accordance with Section 907 to provide coverage in areas within the building that are within 75 feet (22 860 mm) of the revolving doors.

4.	There is an actuation of a manual control switch, in an approved location and clearly identified, that reduces the breakout force to not more than 130 pounds (578 N).

1010.3.2 Power-operated doors.

Where means of egress doors are operated or assisted by power, the design shall be such that in the event of power failure, the door is capable of being opened manually to permit means of egress travel or closed where necessary to safeguard means of egress. The forces required to open these doors manually shall not exceed those specified in Section 1010.1.3, except that the force to set the door in motion shall not exceed 50 pounds (220 N). The door shall be capable of opening from any position to the full width of the opening in which such door is installed when a force is applied to the door on the side from which egress is made. Power-operated swinging doors, power-operated sliding doors and power-operated folding doors shall comply with BHMA A156.10. Power-assisted swinging doors and low-energy power-operated swinging doors shall comply with BHMA A156.19. Low-energy power-operated sliding doors and low-energy power-operated folding doors shall comply with BHMA A156.38.

Exceptions:

1.	Occupancies in Group I-3.

2.	Special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors complying with Section 1010.3.3.

3.	For a biparting door in the emergency breakout mode, a door leaf located within a multiple-leaf opening shall be exempt from the minimum 32-inch (813 mm) single-leaf requirement of Section 1010.1.1, provided a minimum 32-inch (813 mm) clear opening is provided when the two biparting leaves meeting in the center are broken out.

1010.3.3 Special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors.

In other than Group H occupancies, special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding door assemblies permitted to be a component of a means of egress in accordance with Exception 6 to Section 1010.1.2 shall comply with all of the following criteria:

1.	The doors shall be power operated and shall be capable of being operated manually in the event of power failure.

2.	The doors shall be openable by a simple method without special knowledge or effort from the egress side or sides.

3.	The force required to operate the door shall not exceed 30 pounds (133 N) to set the door in motion and 15 pounds (67 N) to close the door or open it to the minimum required width.

4.	The door shall be openable with a force not to exceed 15 pounds (67 N) when a force of 250 pounds (1100 N) is applied perpendicular to the door adjacent to the operating device.

5.	The door assembly shall comply with the applicable fire protection rating and, where rated, shall be self-closing or automatic closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4, shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 80 and shall comply with Section 716.

6.	The door assembly shall have an integrated standby power supply.

7.	The door assembly power supply shall be electrically supervised.

8.	The door shall open to the minimum required width within 10 seconds after activation of the operating device.

1010.3.4 Security grilles.

In Groups B, F, M and S, horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles are permitted at the main exit and shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort during periods that the space is occupied. The grilles shall remain secured in the full-open position during the period of occupancy by the general public. Where two or more exits oraccess to exits are required, not more than one-half of the exits or exit access doorways shall be equipped with horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles.

1010.3.5 Protection devices for emergency escape and rescue openings.

The temporary installation or closure of storm shutters, panels and other approved hurricane protection devices shall be permitted on emergency escape and rescue openings and egress doors in Group R occupancies during the threat of a storm. Such devices shall not be required to comply with the operational constraints of Section 1030.4 or 1010.2. While such protection is provided, at least one means of escape from the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be provided. The means of escape shall be within the first floor of the dwelling or dwelling unit and shall not be located within a garage without a side-hinged door leading directly to the exterior. Occupants in any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be able to access the means of escape without passing through a lockable door not under their control.

1010.4 Gates.

Gates serving the means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. Gates used as a component in a means of egress shall conform to the applicable requirements for doors.

Exception: Horizontal sliding or swinging gates exceeding the 4-foot (1219 mm) maximum leaf width limitation are permitted in fences and walls surrounding a stadium.

1010.4.1 Stadiums.

Panic hardware is not required on gates surrounding stadiums where such gates are under constant immediate supervision while the public is present, and where safe dispersal areas based on 3 square feet (0.28 m2) per occupant are located between the fence and enclosed space. Such required safe dispersal areas shall not be located less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the enclosed space. See Section 1028.5 for means of egress from safe dispersal areas.

1010.5 Turnstiles and similar devices.

Turnstiles or similar devices that restrict travel to one direction shall not be placed so as to obstruct any required means of egress, except where permitted in accordance with Sections 1010.5.1, 1010.5.2 and 1010.5.3.

1010.5.1 Capacity.

Each turnstile or similar device shall be credited with a capacity based on not more than a 50-person occupant load where all of the following provisions are met:

1.	Each device shall turn free in the direction of egress travel when primary power is lost and on the manual release by an employee in the area.

2.	Such devices are not given credit for more than 50 percent of the required egress capacity or width.

3.	Each device is not more than 39 inches (991 mm) high.

4.	Each device has not less than 161/2 inches (419 mm) clear width at and below a height of 39 inches (991 mm) and not less than 22 inches (559 mm) clear width at heights above 39 inches (991 mm).

1010.5.1.1 Clear width.

INSIGHTS

Where located as part of an accessible route, turnstiles shall have not less than 36 inches (914 mm) clear at and below a height of 34 inches (864 mm), not less than 32 inches (813 mm) clear width between 34 inches (864 mm) and 80 inches (2032 mm) and shall consist of a mechanism other than a revolving device.

 INSIGHTS (1)
1010.5.2 Security access turnstiles.

Security access turnstiles that inhibit travel in the direction of egress utilizing a physical barrier shall be permitted to be considered as a component of the means of egress, provided that all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The building is protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Each security access turnstile lane configuration has a minimum clear passage width of 22 inches (560 mm).

3.	Any security access turnstile lane configuration providing clear passage width of less than 32 inches (810 mm) shall be credited with a maximum egress capacity of 50 persons.

4.	Any security access turnstile lane configuration providing a clear passage width of 32 inches (810 mm) or more shall be credited with a maximum egress capacity as calculated in accordance with Section 1005.

5.	Each secured physical barrier shall automatically retract or swing to unobstructed open position in the direction of egress, under each of the following conditions:

5.1.	Upon loss of power to the turnstile or any part of the access control system that secures the physical barrier.

5.2.	Upon actuation of a readily accessible and clearly identified manual release device that results in direct interruption of power to each secured physical barrier, after which such barriers remain in the open position for not less than 30 seconds. The manual release device shall be positioned at one of the following locations:

5.2.1.	The manual release device is located on the egress side of each security access turnstile lane.

5.2.2.	The manual release device is located at an approved location where it can be actuated by an employee assigned to the area at all times that the building is occupied.

5.3.	Upon actuation of the building fire alarm system, if provided, the physical barrier remains in the open position until the fire alarm system is manually reset.

Exception: Actuation of manual fire alarm boxes.

5.4.	Upon actuation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection system, and for which the physical barrier remains in the open position until the fire alarm system is manually reset.

1010.5.3 High turnstile.

Turnstiles more than 39 inches (991 mm) high shall meet the requirements for revolving doors or the requirements of Section 1010.5.2 for security access turnstiles.

1010.5.4 Additional door.

Where serving an occupant load greater than 300, each turnstile that is not portable shall have a side-hinged swinging door that conforms to Section 1010.1 within 50 feet (15 240 mm).

Exception: A side-hinged swinging door is not required at security access turnstiles that comply with Section 1010.5.2.

SECTION 1011
STAIRWAYS
1011.1 General.

Stairways serving occupied portions of a building shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1011.2 through 1011.13. Alternating tread devices shall comply with Section 1011.14. Ship’s ladders shall comply with Section 1011.15. Ladders shall comply with Section 1011.16.

Exception: Within rooms or spaces used for assembly purposes, stepped aisles shall comply with Section 1029.

1011.2 Width and capacity.

The required capacity of stairways shall be determined as specified in Section 1005.1, but the minimum width shall be not less than 44 inches (1118 mm). See Section 1009 for accessible means of egress stairways.

Exceptions:

1.	Stairways serving an occupant load of less than 50 shall have a width of not less than 36 inches (914 mm).

2.	Spiral stairways as provided for in Section 1011.10.

3.	Where an incline platform lift or stairway chairlift is installed on stairways serving occupancies in Group R-3, or within dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2, a clear passage width not less than 20 inches (508 mm) shall be provided. Where the seat and platform can be folded when not in use, the distance shall be measured from the folded position.

1011.3 Headroom.

Stairways shall have a headroom clearance of not less than 80 inches (2032 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the edge of the nosings. Such headroom shall be continuous above the stairway to the point where the line intersects the landing below, one tread depth beyond the bottom riser. The minimum clearance shall be maintained the full width of the stairway and landing.

Exceptions:

1.	Spiral stairways complying with Section 1011.10 are permitted a 78-inch (1981 mm) headroom clearance.

2.	In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; where the nosings of treads at the side of a flight extend under the edge of a floor opening through which the stair passes, the floor opening shall be allowed to project horizontally into the required headroom not more than 43/4 inches (121 mm).

1011.4 Walkline.

The walkline across winder treads shall be concentric to the direction of travel through the turn and located 12 inches (305 mm) from the side where the winders are narrower. The 12-inch (305 mm) dimension shall be measured from the widest point of the clear stair width at the walking surface of the winder. Where winders are adjacent within the flight, the point of the widest clear stair width of the adjacent winders shall be used.

1011.5 Stair treads and risers.

Stair treads and risers shall comply with Sections 1011.5.1 through 1011.5.5.3.

1011.5.1 Dimension reference surfaces.

For the purpose of this section, all dimensions are exclusive of carpets, rugs or runners.

1011.5.2 Riser height and tread depth.

Stair riser heights shall be 7 inches (178 mm) maximum and 4 inches (102 mm) minimum. The riser height shall be measured vertically between the nosings of adjacent treads or between the stairway landing and the adjacent tread. Rectangular tread depths shall be 11 inches (279 mm) minimum measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right angle to the tread’s nosing. Winder treads shall have a minimum tread depth of 11 inches (279 mm) between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads at the intersections with the walkline and a minimum tread depth of 10 inches (254 mm) within the clear width of the stair.

Exceptions:

1.	Spiral stairways in accordance with Section 1011.10.

2.	Stairways connecting stepped aisles to cross aisles or concourses shall be permitted to use the riser/tread dimension in Section 1029.14.2.

3.	In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; the maximum riser height shall be 73/4 inches (197 mm); the minimum tread depth shall be 10 inches (254 mm); the minimum winder tread depth at the walkline shall be 10 inches (254 mm); and the minimum winder tread depth shall be 6 inches (152 mm). A nosing projection not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) but not more than 11/4 inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways with solid risers where the tread depth is less than 11 inches (279 mm).

4.	See Section 403.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building for the replacement of existing stairways.

5.	In Group I-3 facilities, stairways providing access to guard towers, observation stations and control rooms, not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area, shall be permitted to have a maximum riser height of 8 inches (203 mm) and a minimum tread depth of 9 inches (229 mm).

1011.5.3 Winder treads.

Winder treads are not permitted in means of egress stairways except within a dwelling unit.

Exceptions:

1.	Curved stairways in accordance with Section 1011.9.

2.	Spiral stairways in accordance with Section 1011.10.

1011.5.4 Dimensional uniformity.

Stair treads and risers shall be of uniform size and shape. The tolerance between the largest and smallest riser height or between the largest and smallest tread depth shall not exceed 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in any flight of stairs. The greatest winder tread depth at the walkline within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Stairways connecting stepped aisles to cross aisles or concourses shall be permitted to comply with the dimensional nonuniformity in Section 1029.14.2.

2.	Consistently shaped winders, complying with Section 1011.5, differing from rectangular treads in the same flight of stairs.

3.	Nonuniform riser dimension complying with Section 1011.5.4.1.

1011.5.4.1 Nonuniform height risers.

Where the bottom or top riser adjoins a sloping public way, walkway or driveway having an established grade and serving as a landing, the bottom or top riser is permitted to be reduced along the slope to less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height, with the variation in height of the bottom or top riser not to exceed one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope) of stair width. The nosings or leading edges of treads at such nonuniform height risers shall have a distinctive marking stripe, different from any other nosing marking provided on the stair flight. The distinctive marking stripe shall be visible in descent of the stair and shall have a slip-resistant surface. Marking stripes shall have a width of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) but not more than 2 inches (51 mm).

1011.5.5 Nosing and riser profile.

Nosings shall have a curvature or bevel of not less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) but not more than 9/16 inch (14.3 mm) from the foremost projection of the tread. Risers shall be solid and vertical or sloped under the tread above from the underside of the nosing above at an angle not more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from the vertical.

1011.5.5.1 Nosing projection size.

The leading edge (nosings) of treads shall project not more than 11/4 inches (32 mm) beyond the tread below.

1011.5.5.2 Nosing projection uniformity.

Nosing projections of the leading edges shall be of uniform size, including the projections of the nosing’s leading edge of the floor at the top of a flight.

1011.5.5.3 Solid risers.

Risers shall be solid.

Exceptions:

1.	Solid risers are not required for stairways that are not required to comply with Section 1009, provided that the opening between treads does not permit the passage of a sphere with a diameter of 4 inches (102 mm).

2.	Solid risers are not required for occupancies in Group I-3 or in Group F, H and S occupancies other than areas accessible to the public. There are no restrictions on the size of the opening in the riser.

3.	Solid risers are not required for spiral stairways constructed in accordance with Section 1011.10.

1011.6 Stairway landings.

There shall be a floor or landing at the top and bottom of each stairway. The width of landings shall be not less than the width of stairways served. Every landing shall have a minimum width measured perpendicular to the direction of travel equal to the width of the stairway. Where the stairway has a straight run the depth need not exceed 48 inches (1219 mm). Doors opening onto a landing shall not reduce the landing to less than one-half the required width. When fully open, the door shall not project more than 7 inches (178 mm) into a landing. Where wheelchair spaces are required on the stairway landing in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, the wheelchair space shall not be located in the required width of the landing and doors shall not swing over the wheelchair spaces.

Exception: Where stairways connect stepped aisles to cross aisles or concourses, stairway landings are not required at the transition between stairways and stepped aisles constructed in accordance with Section 1029.

1011.7 Stairway construction.

Stairways shall be built of materials consistent with the types permitted for the type of construction of the building, except that wood handrails shall be permitted for all types of construction.

1011.7.1 Stairway walking surface.

The walking surface of treads and landings of a stairway shall not be sloped steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in any direction. Stairway treads and landings shall have a solid surface. Finish floor surfaces shall be securely attached.

Exceptions:

1.	Openings in stair walking surfaces shall be a size that does not permit the passage of 1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) sphere. Elongated openings shall be placed so that the long dimension is perpendicular to the direction of travel.

2.	In Group F, H and S occupancies, other than areas of parking structures accessible to the public, openings in treads and landings shall not be prohibited provided a sphere with a diameter of 11/8 inches (29 mm) cannot pass through the opening.

3.	See also the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1011.7.2 Outdoor conditions.

Outdoor stairways and outdoor approaches to stairways shall be designed so that water will not accumulate on walking surfaces.

1011.7.3 Enclosures under interior stairways.

The walls and soffits within enclosed usable spaces under enclosed and unenclosed stairways shall be protected by 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or the fire-resistance rating of the stairway enclosure, whichever is greater. Access to the enclosed space shall not be directly from within the stairway enclosure.

Exception: Spaces under stairways serving and contained within a single residential dwelling unit in Group R-2 or R-3 shall be permitted to be protected on the enclosed side with 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.

1011.7.4 Enclosures under exterior stairways.

There shall not be enclosed usable space under exterior exit stairways unless the space is completely enclosed in 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. The open space under exterior stairways shall not be used for any purpose.

1011.8 Vertical rise.

A flight of stairs shall not have a vertical rise greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) between floor levels or landings.

Exception: Spiral stairways used as a means of egress from technical production areas.

1011.9 Curved stairways.

Curved stairways with winder treads shall have treads and risers in accordance with Section 1011.5 and the smallest radius shall be not less than twice the minimum width or required capacity of the stairway.

Exception: The radius restriction shall not apply to curved stairways in Group R-3 and within individual dwelling units in Group R-2.

1011.10 Spiral stairways.

Spiral stairways are permitted to be used as a component in the means of egress only within dwelling units or from a space not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area and serving not more than five occupants, or from technical production areas in accordance with Section 410.6.

A spiral stairway shall have a 63/4-inch (171 mm) minimum clear tread depth at a point 12 inches (305 mm) from the walkline. The risers shall be sufficient to provide a headroom of 78 inches (1981 mm) minimum, but riser height shall not be more than 91/2 inches (241 mm). The minimum stairway clear width at and below the handrail shall be 26 inches (660 mm).

1011.11 Handrails.

Flights of stairways shall have handrails on each side and shall comply with Section 1014. Where glass is used to provide the handrail, the handrail shall comply with Section 2407.

Exceptions:

1.	Flights of stairways within dwelling units and flights of spiral stairways are permitted to have a handrail on one side only.

2.	Decks, patios and walkways that have a single change in elevation where the landing depth on each side of the change of elevation is greater than what is required for a landing do not require handrails.

3.	In Group R-3 occupancies, a change in elevation consisting of a single riser at an entrance or egress door does not require handrails.

4.	Changes in room elevations of three or fewer risers within dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 and R-3 do not require handrails.

5.	Where a platform lift is in a stationary position and the floor of the platform lift serves as the upper landing of a stairway, handrails shall not be required on the stairway, provided that all of the following criteria are met:

5.1.	The stairway contains no more than two risers.

5.2.	A handhold, positioned horizontally or vertically, is located on one side of the stairway adjacent to the top landing.

5.3.	The handhold is located not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 42 inches (1066 mm) above the bottom landing of the stairway.

5.4.	The handhold gripping surface complies with Section 1014.3, and is not less than 4.5 inches (144 mm) in length.

1011.12 Stairway to roof.

In buildings four or more stories above grade plane, one stairway shall extend to the roof surface unless the roof has a slope steeper than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope).

Exception: Other than where required by Section 1011.12.1, in buildings without an occupied roof access to the roof from the top story shall be permitted to be by an alternating tread device, a ships ladder or a permanent ladder.

1011.12.1 Stairway to elevator equipment.

Roofs and penthouses containing elevator equipment that must be accessed for maintenance are required to be accessed by a stairway.

1011.12.2 Roof access.

Where a stairway is provided to a roof, access to the roof shall be provided through a penthouse complying with Section 1510.2.

Exception: In buildings without an occupied roof, access to the roof shall be permitted to be a roof hatch or trap door not less than 16 square feet (1.5 m2) in area and having a minimum dimension of 2 feet (610 mm).

1011.13 Guards.

Guards shall be provided along stairways and landings where required by Section 1015 and shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1015. Where the roof hatch opening providing the required access is located within 10 feet (3049 mm) of the roof edge, such roof access or roof edge shall be protected by guards installed in accordance with Section 1015.

1011.14 Alternating tread devices.

Alternating tread devices are limited to an element of a means of egress in buildings of Groups F, H and S from a mezzanine not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area and that serves not more than five occupants; in buildings of Group I-3 from a guard tower, observation station or control room not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area and for access to unoccupied roofs. Alternating tread devices used as a means of egress shall not have a rise greater than 20 feet (6096 mm) between floor levels or landings.

1011.14.1 Handrails of alternating tread devices.

Handrails shall be provided on both sides of alternating tread devices and shall comply with Section 1014.

1011.14.2 Treads of alternating tread devices.

Alternating tread devices shall have a minimum tread depth of 5 inches (127 mm), a minimum projected tread depth of 81/2 inches (216 mm), a minimum tread width of 7 inches (178 mm) and a maximum riser height of 91/2 inches (241 mm). The tread depth shall be measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the foremost projections of adjacent treads. The riser height shall be measured vertically between the leading edges of adjacent treads. The riser height and tread depth provided shall result in an angle of ascent from the horizontal of between 50 and 70 degrees (0.87 and 1.22 rad). The initial tread of the device shall begin at the same elevation as the platform, landing or floor surface.

Exception: Alternating tread devices used as an element of a means of egress in buildings from a mezzanine area not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) in area that serves not more than five occupants shall have a minimum tread depth of 3 inches (76 mm) with a minimum projected tread depth of 101/2 inches (267 mm). The rise to the next alternating tread surface shall not exceed 8 inches (203 mm).

1011.15 Ship’s ladders.

Ship’s ladders are permitted to be used in Group I-3 as a component of a means of egress to and from control rooms or elevated facility observation stations not more than 250 square feet (23 m2) with not more than three occupants and for access to unoccupied roofs. The minimum clear width at and below the handrails shall be 20 inches (508 mm). Ship’s ladders shall be designed for the live loads indicated in Section 1607.16.

1011.15.1 Handrails of ship’s ladders.

Handrails shall be provided on both sides of ship’s ladders.

1011.15.2 Treads of ship’s ladders.

Ship’s ladders shall have a minimum tread depth of 5 inches (127 mm). The tread shall be projected such that the total of the tread depth plus the nosing projection is not less than 81/2 inches (216 mm). The maximum riser height shall be 91/2 inches (241 mm).

1011.16 Ladders.

Permanent ladders shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from occupied spaces within a building. Permanent ladders shall be constructed in accordance with Section 306.5 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and designed for the live loads indicated in Section 1607.16. Permanent ladders shall be permitted to provide access to the following areas:

1.	Spaces frequented only by personnel for maintenance, repair or monitoring of equipment.

2.	Nonoccupiable spaces accessed only by catwalks, crawl spaces, freight elevators or very narrow passageways.

3.	Raised areas used primarily for purposes of security, life safety or fire safety including, but not limited to, observation galleries, prison guard towers, fire towers or lifeguard stands.

4.	Elevated levels in Group U not open to the general public.

5.	Nonoccupied roofs that are not required to have stairway access in accordance with Section 1011.12.1.

6.	Where permitted to access equipment and appliances in accordance with Section 306.5 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

1011.17 Accessible stairs.

Stairs required to be accessible shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

SECTION 1012
RAMPS
1012.1 Scope.

The provisions of this section shall apply to ramps used as a component of a means of egress.

Exceptions:

1.	Ramped aisles within assembly rooms or spaces shall comply with the provisions in Section 1029.

2.	Curb ramps not subject to Florida Building Code, Accessibility, shall comply with ICC A117.1.

3.	Vehicle ramps in parking garages for pedestrian exit access shall not be required to comply with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility when they are not an accessible route serving accessible parking spaces, other required accessible elements or part of an accessible means of egress.

1012.2 Slope.

Ramps used as part of a means of egress shall have a running slope not steeper than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope). The slope of other pedestrian ramps shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in eight units horizontal (12.5-percent slope).

1012.3 Cross slope.

The slope measured perpendicular to the direction of travel of a ramp shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

Exception: See also the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1012.4 Vertical rise.

The rise for any ramp run shall be 30 inches (762 mm) maximum.

1012.5 Minimum dimensions.

The minimum dimensions of means of egress ramps shall comply with Sections 1012.5.1 through 1012.5.3.

1012.5.1 Width and capacity.

The minimum width and required capacity of a means of egress ramp shall be not less than that required for corridors by Section 1020.3. The clear width of a ramp between handrails, if provided, or other permissible projections shall be 36 inches (914 mm) minimum.

1012.5.2 Headroom.

The minimum headroom in all parts of the means of egress ramp shall be not less than 80 inches (2032 mm).

1012.5.3 Restrictions.

Means of egress ramps shall not reduce in width in the direction of egress travel. Projections into the required ramp and landing width are prohibited. Doors opening onto a landing shall not reduce the clear width to less than 42 inches (1067 mm).

1012.6 Landings.

Ramps shall have landings at the bottom and top of each ramp, points of turning, entrance, exits at doors and in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility. Landings shall comply with Sections 1012.6.1 through 1012.6.5.

1012.6.1 Slope.

Landings shall have a slope not steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in any direction. Changes in level are not permitted.

Exception: See also the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1012.6.2 Width.

The landing width shall be not less than the width of the widest ramp run adjoining the landing.

1012.6.3 Length.

The landing length shall be 60 inches (1525 mm) minimum.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group R-2 and R-3 individual dwelling and sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible units, landings are permitted to be 36 inches (914 mm) minimum.

2.	Where the ramp is not a part of an accessible route, the length of the landing shall not be required to be more than 48 inches (1220 mm) in the direction of travel.

3.	Accessible landings shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1012.6.4 Change in direction.

Where changes in direction of travel occur at landings provided between ramp runs, the landing shall be 60 inches by 60 inches (1524 mm by 1524 mm) minimum.

Exception: In Group R-2 and R-3 individual dwelling or sleeping units that are not required to be Accessible units, in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, landings are permitted to be 36 inches by 36 inches (914 mm by 914 mm) minimum.

1012.6.5 Doorways.

Where doorways are located adjacent to a ramp landing, maneuvering clearances required by ICC A117.1 are permitted to overlap the required landing area.

1012.7 Ramp construction.

Ramps shall be built of materials consistent with the types permitted for the type of construction of the building, except that wood handrails shall be permitted for all types of construction.

1012.7.1 Ramp surface.

The surface of ramps shall be of slip-resistant materials that are securely attached.

1012.7.2 Outdoor conditions.

Outdoor ramps and outdoor approaches to ramps shall be designed so that water will not accumulate on walking surfaces.

1012.8 Handrails.

Ramps with a rise greater than 6 inches (152 mm) shall have handrails on both sides. Handrails shall comply with Section 1014.

1012.9 Guards.

Guards shall be provided where required by Section 1015 and shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1015.

1012.10 Edge protection.

Edge protection complying with Section 1012.10.1 or 1012.10.2 shall be provided on each side of ramp runs and at each side of ramp landings.

Exceptions:

1.	Edge protection is not required on ramps that are not required to have handrails, provided they have flared sides that comply with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

2.	Edge protection is not required on the sides of ramp landings serving an adjoining ramp run or stairway.

3.	Edge protection is not required on the sides of ramp landings having a vertical dropoff of not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 10 inches (254 mm) horizontally of the required landing area.

1012.10.1 Curb, rail, wall or barrier.

A curb, rail, wall or barrier shall be provided to serve as edge protection. A curb shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height. Barriers shall be constructed so that the barrier prevents the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere, where any portion of the sphere is within 4 inches (102 mm) of the floor or ground surface.

1012.10.2 Extended floor or ground surface.

The floor or ground surface of the ramp run or landing shall extend 12 inches (305 mm) minimum beyond the inside face of a handrail complying with Section 1014.

SECTION 1013
EXIT SIGNS
1013.1 Where required.

Exits and exit access doors shall be marked by an approved exit sign readily visible from any direction of egress travel. The path of egress travel to exits and within exits shall be marked by readily visible exit signs to clearly indicate the direction of egress travel in cases where the exit or the path of egress travel is not immediately visible to the occupants. Intervening means of egress doors within exits shall be marked by exit signs. Exit sign placement shall be such that no point in an exit access corridor or exit passageway is more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) or the listed viewing distance for the sign, whichever is less, from the nearest visible exit sign.

Exceptions:

1.	Exit signs are not required in rooms or areas that require only one exit or exit access.

2.	Main exterior exit doors or gates that are obviously and clearly identifiable as exits need not have exit signs where approved by the building official.

3.	Exit signs are not required in occupancies in Group U and individual sleeping units or dwelling units in Group R-1, R-2 or R-3.

4.	Exit signs are not required in dayrooms, sleeping rooms or dormitories in occupancies in Group I-3.

5.	In occupancies in Groups A-4 and A-5, exit signs are not required on the seating side of vomitories or openings into seating areas where exit signs are provided in the concourse that are readily apparent from the vomitories. Egress lighting is provided to identify each vomitory or opening within the seating area in an emergency.

1013.2 Floor-level exit signs in Group R-1.

Where exit signs are required in Group R-1 occupancies by Section 1013.1, additional low-level exit signs shall be provided in all areas serving guest rooms in Group R-1 occupancies and shall comply with Section 1013.5.

The bottom of the sign shall be not less than 10 inches (254 mm) nor more than 18 inches (455 mm) above the floor level. The sign shall be flush mounted to the door or wall. Where mounted on the wall, the edge of the sign shall be within 4 inches (102 mm) of the door frame on the latch side.

1013.3 Illumination.

Exit signs shall be internally or externally illuminated.

Exception: Tactile signs required by Section 1013.4 need not be provided with illumination.

1013.4 Raised character and braille exit signs.

A sign stating EXIT in visual characters, raised characters and braille and complying with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility shall be provided adjacent to each door to an area of refuge providing direct access to a stairway, an exterior area for assisted rescue, an exit stairway or ramp, an exit passageway, a horizontal exit and the exit discharge.

1013.5 Internally illuminated exit signs.

Electrically powered, self-luminous and photoluminescent exit signs shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 924 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and Chapter 27. Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times.

1013.6 Externally illuminated exit signs.

Externally illuminated exit signs shall comply with Sections 1013.6.1 through 1013.6.3.

1013.6.1 Graphics.

Every exit sign and directional exit sign shall have plainly legible letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high with the principal strokes of the letters not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) wide. The word “EXIT” shall have letters having a width not less than 2 inches (51 mm) wide, except the letter “I,” and the minimum spacing between letters shall be not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Signs larger than the minimum established in this section shall have letter widths, strokes and spacing in proportion to their height.

The word “EXIT” shall be in high contrast with the background and shall be clearly discernible when the means of exit sign illumination is or is not energized. If a chevron directional indicator is provided as part of the exit sign, the construction shall be such that the direction of the chevron directional indicator cannot be readily changed.

1013.6.2 Exit sign illumination.

The face of an exit sign illuminated from an external source shall have an intensity of not less than 5 footcandles (54 lux).

1013.6.3 Power source.

Exit signs shall be illuminated at all times. To ensure continued illumination for a duration of not less than 90 minutes in case of primary power loss, the sign illumination means shall be connected to an emergency power system provided from storage batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in accordance with Chapter 27. Group I-2, Condition 2 exit sign illumination shall not be provided by unit equipment batteries only.

Exception: Approved exit sign illumination means that provide continuous illumination independent of external power sources for a duration of not less than 90 minutes, in case of primary power loss, are not required to be connected to an emergency electrical system.

SECTION 1014
HANDRAILS
1014.1 Where required.

Handrails serving flights of stairways, ramps, stepped aisles and ramped aisles shall be adequate in strength and attachment in accordance with Section 1607.9. Handrails required for flights of stairways by Section 1011.11 shall comply with Sections 1014.2 through 1014.9. Handrails required for ramps by Section 1012.8 shall comply with Sections 1014.2 through 1014.8. Handrails for stepped aisles and ramped aisles required by Section 1029.16 shall comply with Sections 1014.2 through 1014.8.

1014.2 Height.

Handrail height, measured above stair tread nosings, or finish surface of ramp slope, shall be uniform, not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm). Handrail height of alternating tread devices and ship’s ladders, measured above tread nosings, shall be uniform, not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Where handrail fittings or bendings are used to provide continuous transition between flights, the fittings or bendings shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height.

2.	In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupancies that are associated with a Group R-3 occupancy or associated with individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; where handrail fittings or bendings are used to provide continuous transition between flights, transition at winder treads, transition from handrail to guard, or where used at the start of a flight, the handrail height at the fittings or bendings shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height.

3.	Handrails on top of a guard where permitted along stepped aisles and ramped aisles in accordance with Section 1029.16.

1014.3 Handrail graspability.

Required handrails shall comply with Section 1014.3.1 or shall provide equivalent graspability.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group R-3 occupancies; within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; and in Group U occupancies that are accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy or accessory to individual dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies; handrails shall be Type I in accordance with Section 1014.3.1, Type II in accordance with Section 1014.3.2 or shall provide equivalent graspability.

2.	Accessible handrails shall meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1014.3.1 Type I.

Handrails with a circular cross section shall have an outside diameter of not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) and not greater than 2 inches (51 mm). Where the handrail is not circular, it shall have a perimeter dimension of not less than 4 inches (102 mm) and not greater than 61/4 inches (160 mm) with a maximum cross-sectional dimension of 21/4 inches (57 mm) and minimum cross-sectional dimension of 1 inch (25 mm). Edges shall have a minimum radius of 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).

1014.3.2 Type II.

Handrails with a perimeter greater than 61/4 inches (160 mm) shall provide a graspable finger recess area on both sides of the profile. The finger recess shall begin within a distance of 3/4 inch (19 mm) measured vertically from the tallest portion of the profile and achieve a depth of not less than 5/16 inch (8 mm) within 7/8 inch (22 mm) below the widest portion of the profile. This required depth shall continue for not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) to a level that is not less than 13/4 inches (45 mm) below the tallest portion of the profile. The width of the handrail above the recess shall be not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) to not greater than 23/4 inches (70 mm). Edges shall have a minimum radius of 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).

1014.4 Continuity.

Handrail gripping surfaces shall be continuous, without interruption by newel posts or other obstructions.

Exceptions:

1.	Handrails within dwelling units are permitted to be interrupted by a newel post at a turn or landing.

2.	Within a dwelling unit, the use of a volute, turnout, starting easing or starting newel is allowed over the lowest tread.

3.	Handrail brackets or balusters attached to the bottom surface of the handrail that do not project horizontally beyond the sides of the handrail within 11/2 inches (38 mm) of the bottom of the handrail shall not be considered obstructions. For each 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of additional handrail perimeter dimension above 4 inches (102 mm), the vertical clearance dimension of 11/2 inches (38 mm) shall be permitted to be reduced by 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

4.	Where handrails are provided along walking surfaces with slopes not steeper than 1:20, the bottoms of the handrail gripping surfaces shall be permitted to be obstructed along their entire length where they are integral to crash rails or bumper guards.

5.	Handrails serving stepped aisles or ramped aisles are permitted to be discontinuous in accordance with Section 1029.16.1.

1014.5 Fittings.

Handrails shall not rotate within their fittings.

1014.6 Handrail extensions.

Handrails shall return to a wall, guard or the walking surface or shall be continuous to the handrail of an adjacent flight of stairs or ramp run. Where handrails are not continuous between flights, the handrails shall extend horizontally not less than 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the top riser and continue to slope for the depth of one tread beyond the bottom riser. At ramps where handrails are not continuous between runs, the handrails shall extend horizontally above the landing 12 inches (305 mm) minimum beyond the top and bottom of ramp runs. The extensions of handrails shall be in the same direction of the flights of stairs at stairways and the ramp runs at ramps.

Exceptions:

1.	Handrails within a dwelling unit that is not required to be accessible need extend only from the top riser to the bottom riser.

2.	Handrails serving aisles in rooms or spaces used for assembly purposes are permitted to comply with the handrail extensions in accordance with Section 1029.16.

3.	Handrails for alternating tread devices and ship’s ladders are permitted to terminate at a location vertically above the top and bottom risers. Handrails for alternating tread devices are not required to be continuous between flights or to extend beyond the top or bottom risers.

4.	Accessible handrail extensions shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1014.7 Clearance.

Clear space between a handrail and a wall or other surface shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm). A handrail and a wall or other surface adjacent to the handrail shall be free of any sharp or abrasive elements.

1014.8 Projections.

On ramps and on ramped aisles that are part of an accessible route, the clear width between handrails shall be 36 inches (914 mm) minimum. Projections into the required width of aisles, stairways and ramps at each side shall not exceed 41/2 inches (114 mm) at or below the handrail height. Projections into the required width shall not be limited above the minimum headroom height required in Section 1011.3. Projections due to intermediate handrails shall not constitute a reduction in the egress width. Where a pair of intermediate handrails are provided within the stairway width without a walking surface between the pair of intermediate handrails and the distance between the pair of intermediate handrails is greater than 6 inches (152 mm), the available egress width shall be reduced by the distance between the closest edges of each such intermediate pair of handrails that is greater than 6 inches (152 mm).

1014.9 Intermediate handrails.

Stairways shall have intermediate handrails located in such a manner that all portions of the stairway minimum width or required capacity are within 30 inches (762 mm) of a handrail. On monumental stairs, handrails shall be located along the most direct path of egress travel.

SECTION 1015
GUARDS
1015.1 General.

Guards shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1015.2 through 1015.7. Operable windows with sills located more than 72 inches (1829 mm) above finished grade or other surface below shall comply with Section 1015.8.

1015.2 Where required.

Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces, including mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps and landings that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within 36 inches (914 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side. Guards shall be adequate in strength and attachment in accordance with Section 1607.9.

Exception: Guards are not required for the following locations:

1.	On the loading side of loading docks or piers.

2.	On the audience side of stages and raised platforms, including stairs leading up to the stage and raised platforms.

3.	On raised stage and platform floor areas, such as runways, ramps and side stages used for entertainment or presentations.

4.	At vertical openings in the performance area of stages and platforms.

5.	At elevated walking surfaces appurtenant to stages and platforms for access to and utilization of special lighting or equipment.

6.	Along vehicle service pits not accessible to the public.

7.	In assembly seating areas at cross aisles in accordance with Section 1029.17.2.

8.	On the loading side of station platforms on fixed guideway transit or passenger rail systems.

1015.2.1 Glazing.

Where glass is used to provide a guard or as a portion of the guard system, the guard shall comply with Section 2407. Where the glazing provided does not meet the strength and attachment requirements of Section 1607.9, complying guards shall be located along glazed sides of open-sided walking surfaces.

1015.3 Height.

Required guards shall be not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) high, measured vertically as follows:

1.	From the adjacent walking surfaces.

2.	On stairways and stepped aisles, from the line connecting the leading edges of the tread nosings.

3.	On ramps and ramped aisles, from the ramp surface at the guard.

Exceptions:

1.	For occupancies in Group R-3 not more than three stories above grade in height and within individual dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2 not more than three stories above grade in height with separate means of egress, required guards shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height measured vertically above the adjacent walking surfaces.

2.	For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2, guards on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not less than 34 inches (864 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

3.	For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2, where the top of the guard also serves as a handrail on the open sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

4.	The guard height in assembly seating areas shall comply with Section 1029.17 as applicable.

5.	Along alternating tread devices and ship’s ladders, guards where the top rail also serves as a handrail shall have height not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864 mm), measured vertically from the leading edge of the device tread nosing.

6.	In Group F occupancies, where exit access stairways serve three stories or fewer and such stairs are not open to the public, where the top of the guard also serves as a handrail, the top of the guard shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

1015.4 Opening limitations.

Required guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter from the walking surface to the required guard height.

Exceptions:

1.	From a height of 36 inches (914 mm) to 42 inches (1067 mm), guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 43/8 inches (111 mm) in diameter.

2.	The triangular openings at the open sides of a stair, formed by the riser, tread and bottom rail shall not allow passage of a sphere 6 inches (152 mm) in diameter.

3.	At elevated walking surfaces for access to and use of electrical, mechanical or plumbing systems or equipment, guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.

4.	In areas that are not open to the public within occupancies in Group I-3, F, H or S, and for alternating tread devices and ship’s ladders, guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.

5.	In assembly seating areas, guards required at the end of aisles in accordance with Section 1029.17.4 shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter up to a height of 26 inches (660 mm). From a height of 26 inches (660 mm) to 42 inches (1067 mm) above the adjacent walking surfaces, guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 8 inches (203 mm) in diameter.

6.	Within individual dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, guards on the open sides of stairs shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 43/8 (111 mm) inches in diameter.

1015.5 Screen porches.

Porches and decks that are enclosed with insect screening shall be provided with guards where the walking surface is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below.

1015.6 Mechanical equipment, systems and devices.

Guards shall be provided where various components that require service are located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open side is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor, roof or grade below. The guard shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) beyond each end of such components. The guard shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.

Exception: Guards are not required where permanent fall arrest/restraint anchorage connector devices that comply with ANSI/ASSE Z359.1 are affixed for use during the entire roof covering lifetime. The devices shall be reevaluated for possible replacement when the entire roof covering is replaced. The devices shall be placed not more than 10 feet (3048 mm) on center along hip and ridge lines and placed not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from the roof edge or open side of the walking surface.

1015.7 Roof access.

Guards shall be provided where the roof hatch opening is located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a roof edge or open side of a walking surface and such edge or open side is located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor, roof or grade below. The guard shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a sphere 21 inches (533 mm) in diameter.

Exception: Guards are not required where permanent fall arrest/restraint anchorage connector devices that comply with ANSI/ASSE Z359.1 are affixed for use during the entire roof covering lifetime. The devices shall be reevaluated for possible replacement when the entire roof covering is replaced. The devices shall be placed not more than 10 feet (3048 mm) on center along hip and ridge lines and placed not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from the roof edge or open side of the walking surface.

1015.8 Window openings.

Windows in Group R-2 and R-3 buildings including dwelling units, where the top of the sill of an operable window opening is located less than 36 inches (914 mm) above the finished floor and more than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below on the exterior of the building, shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2006.

2.	Operable windows where the openings will not allow a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere to pass through the opening when the window is in its largest opened position.

3.	Operable windows where the openings are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2090.

4.	Operable windows that are provided with window opening control devices that comply with Section 1015.8.1.

1015.8.1 Window opening control devices.

Window opening control devices shall comply with ASTM F2090. The window opening control device, after operation to release the control device allowing the window to fully open, shall not reduce the minimum net clear opening area of the window unit to less than the area required by Section 1030.2.

SECTION 1016
EXIT ACCESS
1016.1 General.

The exit access shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 1003 through 1015. Exit access arrangement shall comply with Sections 1016 through 1021.

1016.2 Egress through intervening spaces.

Egress through intervening spaces shall comply with this section.

1.	Exit access through an enclosed elevator lobby is permitted. Where access to two or more exits or exit access doorways is required in Section 1006.2.1, access to not less than one of the required exits shall be provided without travel through the enclosed elevator lobbies required by Section 3006, not to apply if the lobby is only provided to meet the requirements of Section 3007.6, Exception 1. Where the path of exit access travel passes through an enclosed elevator lobby, the level of protection required for the enclosed elevator lobby is not required to be extended to the exit unless direct access to an exit is required by other sections of this code.

2.	Egress from a room or space shall not pass through adjoining or intervening rooms or areas, except where such adjoining rooms or areas and the area served are accessory to one or the other, are not a Group H occupancy and provide a discernible path of egress travel to an exit.

Exception: Means of egress are not prohibited through adjoining or intervening rooms or spaces in a Group H, S or F occupancy where the adjoining or intervening rooms or spaces are the same or a lesser hazard occupancy group.

3.	An exit access shall not pass through a room that can be locked to prevent egress.

Exception: An electrically locked exit access door providing egress from an elevator lobby shall be permitted in accordance with Section 1010.2.16.

4.	Means of egress from dwelling units or sleeping areas shall not lead through other sleeping areas, toilet rooms or bathrooms.

5.	Egress shall not pass through kitchens, storage rooms, closets or spaces used for similar purposes.

Exceptions:

1.	Means of egress are not prohibited through a kitchen area serving adjoining rooms constituting part of the same dwelling unit or sleeping unit.

2.	Means of egress are not prohibited through stockrooms in Group M occupancies where all of the following are met:

2.1.	The stock is of the same hazard classification as that found in the main retail area.

2.2.	Not more than 50 percent of the exit access is through the stockroom.

2.3.	The stockroom is not subject to locking from the egress side.

2.4.	There is a demarcated, minimum 44-inch-wide (1118 mm) aisle defined by full- or partial-height fixed walls or similar construction that will maintain the required width and lead directly from the retail area to the exit without obstructions.

1016.2.1 Multiple tenants.

Where more than one tenant occupies any one floor of a building or structure, each tenant space, dwelling unit and sleeping unit shall be provided with access to the required exits without passing through adjacent tenant spaces, dwelling units and sleeping units.

Exception: The means of egress from a smaller tenant space shall not be prohibited from passing through a larger adjoining tenant space where such rooms or spaces of the smaller tenant occupy less than 10 percent of the area of the larger tenant space through which they pass; are the same or similar occupancy group; a discernible path of egress travel to an exit is provided; and the means of egress into the adjoining space is not subject to locking from the egress side. A required means of egress serving the larger tenant space shall not pass through the smaller tenant space or spaces.

SECTION 1017
EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE
1017.1 General.

Travel distance within the exit access portion of the means of egress system shall be in accordance with this section.

1017.2 Limitations.

Exit access travel distance shall not exceed the values given in Table 1017.2.

TABLE 1017.2

EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCEa

OCCUPANCY	WITHOUT SPRINKLER
SYSTEM
(feet)	WITH SPRINKLER
SYSTEM
(feet)
A, E, F-1, M, R, S-1	200	250b
I-1	Not Permitted	250b
B	200	300c
F-2, S-2, U	300	400c
H-1	Not Permitted	75d
H-2	Not Permitted	100d
H-3	Not Permitted	150d
H-4	Not Permitted	175d
H-5	Not Permitted	200c
I-2, I-3, I-4	Not Permittede	200c

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	See the following sections for modifications to exit access travel distance requirements:

Section 402.8: For the distance limitation in malls.

Section 404.9: For the distance limitation through an atrium space.

Section 407.4: For the distance limitation in Group I-2.

Sections 408.6.1 and 408.8.1: For the distance limitations in Group I-3.

Section 411.4: For the distance limitation in special amusement buildings.

Section 412.7: For the distance limitations in aircraft manufacturing facilities.

Section 1006.2.2.2: For the distance limitation in refrigeration machinery rooms.

Section 1006.2.2.3: For the distance limitation in refrigerated rooms and spaces.

Section 1006.3.3: For buildings with one exit.

Section 1017.2.2: For increased distance limitation in Groups F-1 and S-1.

Section 1029.7: For increased limitation in assembly seating.

Section 3103.4: For temporary structures.

Section 3104.9: For pedestrian walkways.

b.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. See Section 903 for occupancies where automatic sprinkler systems are permitted in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

c.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

d.	Group H occupancies equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.1.

e.	Group I-4 day care facilities for which an automatic sprinkler system is not required in accordance with Section 903.2.6, Exception 2.

1017.2.1 Exterior egress balcony increase.

Exit access travel distances specified in Table 1017.2 shall be increased up to an additional 100 feet (30 480 mm) provided the last portion of the exit access leading to the exit occurs on an exterior egress balcony constructed in accordance with Section 1021. The length of such balcony shall be not less than the amount of the increase taken.

1017.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase.

The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height.

2.	The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7315 mm).

3.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

1017.3 Measurement.

Exit access travel distance shall be measured from the most remote point of each room, area or space along the natural and unobstructed path of horizontal and vertical egress travel to the entrance to an exit. Where more than one exit is required, exit access travel distance shall be measured to the nearest exit.

Exceptions:

1.	In open parking garages, exit access travel distance is permitted to be measured to the closest riser of an exit access stairway or the closest slope of an exit access ramp.

2.	In smoke protected seating and open air assembly seating, exit access travel distance shall be measured in accordance with Section 1029.7.

1017.3.1 Exit access stairways and ramps.

Travel distance on exit access stairways or ramps shall be included in the exit access travel distance measurement. The measurement along stairways shall be made on a plane parallel and tangent to the stair tread nosings in the center of the stair and landings. The measurement along ramps shall be made on the walking surface in the center of the ramp and landings.

SECTION 1018
AISLES
1018.1 General.

Aisles and aisle accessways serving as a portion of the exit access in the means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. Aisles or aisle accessways shall be provided from all occupied portions of the exit access that contain seats, tables, furnishings, displays and similar fixtures or equipment. The minimum width or required capacity of aisles shall be unobstructed.

Exception: Encroachments complying with Section 1005.7.

1018.2 Aisles in assembly spaces.

Aisles and aisle accessways serving a room or space used for assembly purposes shall comply with Section 1029.

1018.3 Aisles in Groups B and M.

In Group B and M occupancies, the minimum clear aisle width shall be determined by Section 1005.1 for the occupant load served, but shall be not less than that required for corridors by Section 1020.3.

Exception: Nonpublic aisles serving less than 50 people and not required to be accessible by Chapter 11 need not exceed 28 inches (711 mm) in width.

1018.4 Aisle accessways in Group M.

An aisle accessway shall be provided on not less than one side of each element within the merchandise pad. The minimum clear width for an aisle accessway not required to be accessible shall be 30 inches (762 mm). The required clear width of the aisle accessway shall be measured perpendicular to the elements and merchandise within the merchandise pad. The 30-inch (762 mm) minimum clear width shall be maintained to provide a path to an adjacent aisle or aisle accessway. The common path of egress travel shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) from any point in the merchandise pad.

Exception: For areas serving not more than 50 occupants, the common path of egress travel shall not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm).

1018.5 Aisles in other than assembly spaces and Groups B and M.

In other than rooms or spaces used for assembly purposes and Group B and M occupancies, the minimum clear aisle capacity shall be determined by Section 1005.1 for the occupant load served, but the width shall be not less than that required for corridors by Section 1020.3.

Exception: Nonpublic aisles serving less than 50 people and not required to be accessible by Chapter 11 need not exceed 28 inches (711 mm) in width.

SECTION 1019
EXIT ACCESS STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS
1019.1 General.

Exit access stairways and ramps serving as an exit access component in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. The number of stories connected by exit access stairways and ramps shall include basements, but not mezzanines.

1019.2 All occupancies.

Exit access stairways and ramps that serve floor levels within a single story are not required to be enclosed.

1019.3 Occupancies other than Groups I-2 and I-3.

In other than Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies, floor openings containing exit access stairways or ramps shall be enclosed with a shaft enclosure constructed in accordance with Section 713.

Exceptions:

1.	Exit access stairways and ramps that serve or atmospherically communicate between only two stories. Such interconnected stories shall not be open to other stories.

2.	In Group R-1, R-2 or R-3 occupancies, exit access stairways and ramps connecting four stories or less serving and contained within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit or live/work unit.

3.	Exit access stairways serving and contained within a Group R-3 congregate residence or a Group R-4 facility are not required to be enclosed.

4.	Exit access stairways and ramps in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where the area of the vertical opening between stories does not exceed twice the horizontal projected area of the stairway or ramp and the opening is protected by a draft curtain and closely spaced sprinklers in accordance with NFPA 13. In other than Group B and M occupancies, this provision is limited to openings that do not connect more than four stories.

5.	Exit access stairways and ramps within an atrium complying with the provisions of Section 404.

6.	Exit access stairways and ramps in open parking garages that serve only the parking garage.

7.	Exit access stairways and ramps serving smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating complying with the exit access travel distance requirements of Section 1029.7.

8.	Exit access stairways and ramps between the balcony, gallery or press box and the main assembly floor in occupancies such as theaters, places of religious worship, auditoriums and sports facilities.

1019.4 Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies.

In Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies, floor openings between stories containing exit access stairways or ramps are required to be enclosed with a shaft enclosure constructed in accordance with Section 713.

Exception: In Group I-3 occupancies, exit access stairways or ramps constructed in accordance with Section 408 are not required to be enclosed.

SECTION 1020
CORRIDORS
1020.1 General.

Corridors serving as an exit access component in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section.

1020.2 Construction.

Corridors shall be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 1020.2. The corridor walls required to be fire-resistance rated shall comply with Section 708 for fire partitions.

Exceptions:

1.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in an occupancy in Group E where each room that is used for instruction has not less than one door opening directly to the exterior and rooms for assembly purposes have not less than one-half of the required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior. Exterior doors specified in this exception are required to be at ground level.

2.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors contained within a dwelling unit or sleeping unit in an occupancy in Groups I-1 and R.

3.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in open parking garages.

4.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in an occupancy in Group B that is a space requiring only a single means of egress complying with Section 1006.2.

5.	Corridors adjacent to the exterior walls of buildings shall be permitted to have unprotected openings on unrated exterior walls where unrated walls are permitted by Table 705.5 and unprotected openings are permitted by Table 705.8.

TABLE 1020.2

CORRIDOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING

OCCUPANCY	OCCUPANT
LOAD SERVED
BY CORRIDOR	REQUIRED FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING (hours)

Without
sprinkler system
	With sprinkler
systemc

H-1, H-2, H-3	All	Not Permitted	1
H-4, H-5	Greater than 30	Not Permitted	1
A, B, E, F, M, S, U	Greater than 30	1	0
R	Greater than 10	Not Permitted	0.5
I-2a, I-4	All	Not Permitted	0
I-1, I-3	All	Not Permitted	1b

a.	For requirements for occupancies in Group I-2, see Sections 407.2 and 407.3.

b.	For a reduction in the fire-resistance rating for occupancies in Group I-3, see Section 408.8.

c.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 where allowed.

1020.3 Width and capacity.

The required capacity of corridors shall be determined as specified in Section 1005.1, but the minimum width shall be not less than that specified in Table 1020.3.

Exception: In Group I-2 occupancies, corridors are not required to have a clear width of 96 inches (2438 mm) in areas where there will not be stretcher or bed movement for access to care or as part of the defend-in-place strategy.

TABLE 1020.3

MINIMUM CORRIDOR WIDTH

OCCUPANCY	MINIMUM WIDTH
(inches)

Any facilities not listed below	44
Access to and utilization of mechanical,
plumbing or electrical systems or equipment
	24
With an occupant load of less than 50	36
Within a dwelling unit	36
In Group E with a corridor having an occupant
load of 100 or more
	72
In corridors and areas serving stretcher
traffic in occupancies where patients
receive outpatient medical care that causes
the patient to be incapable of self-preservation
	72
Group I-2 in areas where required for bed
movement
	96

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1020.4 Obstruction.

The minimum width or required capacity of corridors shall be unobstructed.

Exception: Encroachments complying with Section 1005.7.

1020.5 Dead ends.

Where more than one exit or exit access doorway is required, the exit access shall be arranged such that there are no dead ends in corridors more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length.

Exceptions:

1.	In occupancies in Group I-3 of Condition 2, 3 or 4, the dead end in a corridor shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).

2.	In occupancies in Groups B, E, F, I-1, M, R-1, R-2, S and U, where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the length of the dead-end corridors shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).

3.	A dead-end corridor shall not be limited in length where the length of the dead-end corridor is less than 2.5 times the least width of the dead-end corridor.

4.	In Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies, the length of dead end corridors that do not serve patient rooms or patient treatment spaces shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm).

1020.6 Air movement in corridors.

Corridors shall not serve as supply, return, exhaust, relief or ventilation air ducts.

Exceptions:

1.	Use of a corridor as a source of makeup air for exhaust systems in rooms that open directly onto such corridors, including toilet rooms, bathrooms, dressing rooms, smoking lounges and janitor closets, shall be permitted, provided that each such corridor is directly supplied with outdoor air at a rate greater than the rate of makeup air taken from the corridor.

2.	Where located within a dwelling unit, the use of corridors for conveying return air shall not be prohibited.

3.	Where located within tenant spaces of 1,000 square feet (93 m2) or less in area, utilization of corridors for conveying return air is permitted.

4.	Transfer air movement required to maintain pressurization difference within health care facilities in accordance with ASHRAE 170.

1020.6.1 Corridor ceiling.

Use of the space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above as a return air plenum is permitted for one or more of the following conditions:

1.	The corridor is not required to be of fire-resistance-rated construction.

2.	The corridor is separated from the plenum by fire-resistance-rated construction.

3.	The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut down upon activation of the air-handling unit smoke detectors required by the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

4.	The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut down upon detection of sprinkler water flow where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

5.	The space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above the corridor is used as a component of an approved engineered smoke control system.

1020.7 Corridor continuity.

Fire-resistance-rated corridors shall be continuous from the point of entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms. Where the path of egress travel within a fire-resistance-rated corridor to the exit includes travel along unenclosed exit access stairways or ramps, the fire-resistance rating shall be continuous for the length of the stairway or ramp and for the length of the connecting corridor on the adjacent floor leading to the exit.

Exceptions:

1.	Foyers, lobbies or reception rooms constructed as required for corridors shall not be construed as intervening rooms.

2.	Enclosed elevator lobbies as permitted by Item 1 of Section 1016.2 shall not be construed as intervening rooms.

SECTION 1021
EGRESS BALCONIES
1021.1 General.

Balconies used for egress purposes shall conform to the same requirements as corridors for minimum width, required capacity, headroom, dead ends and projections.

1021.2 Wall separation.

Exterior egress balconies shall be separated from the interior of the building by walls and opening protectives as required for corridors.

Exception: Separation is not required where the exterior egress balcony is served by not less than two stairways and a dead-end travel condition does not require travel past an unprotected opening to reach a stairway.

1021.3 Openness.

The long side of an egress balcony shall be at least 50 percent open, and the open area above the guards shall be so distributed as to minimize the accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.

1021.4 Location.

Exterior egress balconies shall have a minimum fire separation distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) measured at right angles from the exterior edge of the egress balcony to the following:

1.	Adjacent lot lines.

2.	Other portions of the building.

3.	Other buildings on the same lot unless the adjacent building exterior walls and openings are protected in accordance with Section 705 based on fire separation distance.

For the purposes of this section, other portions of the building shall be treated as separate buildings.

SECTION 1022
EXITS
1022.1 General.

Exits shall comply with Sections 1022 through 1027 and the applicable requirements of Sections 1003 through 1015. An exit shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with its function as a means of egress. Once a given level of exit protection is achieved, such level of protection shall not be reduced until arrival at the exit discharge. Exits shall be continuous from the point of entry into the exit to the exit discharge.

1022.2 Exterior exit doors.

Buildings or structures used for human occupancy shall have not less than one exterior door that meets the requirements of Section 1010.1.1.

1022.2.1 Detailed requirements.

Exterior exit doors shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 1010.1.

1022.2.2 Arrangement.

Exterior exit doors shall lead directly to the exit discharge or the public way.

SECTION 1023
INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS
1023.1 General.

Interior exit stairways and ramps serving as an exit component in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. Interior exit stairways and ramps shall be enclosed and lead directly to the exterior of the building or shall be extended to the exterior of the building with an exit passageway conforming to the requirements of Section 1024, except as permitted in Section 1028.2. An interior exit stairway or ramp shall not be used for any purpose other than as a means of egress and a circulation path.

1023.2 Construction.

Enclosures for interior exit stairways and ramps shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Interior exit stairway and ramp enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours where connecting four stories or more and not less than 1 hour where connecting less than four stories. The number of stories connected by the interior exit stairways or ramps shall include any basements, but not any mezzanines. Enclosures for interior exit stairways and ramps shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than the floor assembly penetrated, but need not exceed 2 hours.

Exceptions:

1.	Interior exit stairways and ramps in Group I-3 occupancies in accordance with the provisions of Section 408.3.8.

2.	Interior exit stairways within an atrium enclosed in accordance with Section 404.6.

1023.3 Termination.

Interior exit stairways and ramps shall terminate at an exit discharge or a public way.

Exception: A combination of interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passageways, constructed in accordance with Sections 1023.2, 1023.3.1 and 1024, respectively, and forming a continuous protected enclosure, shall be permitted to extend an interior exit stairway or ramp to the exit discharge or a public way.

1023.3.1 Extension.

Where interior exit stairways and ramps are extended to an exit discharge or a public way by an exit passageway, the interior exit stairway and ramp shall be separated from the exit passageway by a fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than that required for the interior exit stairway and ramp. A fire door assembly complying with Section 716.5 shall be installed in the fire barrier to provide a means of egress from the interior exit stairway and ramp to the exit passageway. Openings in the fire barrier other than the fire door assembly are prohibited. Penetrations of the fire barrier are prohibited.

Exceptions:

1.	Penetrations of the fire barrier in accordance with Section 1023.5 shall be permitted.

2.	Separation between an interior exit stairway or ramp and the exit passageway extension shall not be required where there are no openings into the exit passageway extension.

3.	Separation between an interior exit stairway or ramp and the exit passageway extension shall not be required when the interior exit stair and the exit passageway extension are pressurized in accordance with Section 909.20.5.

1023.4 Openings.

Interior exit stairway and ramp opening protectives shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 716.

Openings in interior exit stairways and ramps other than unprotected exterior openings shall be limited to those required for exit access to the enclosure from normally occupied spaces and for egress from the enclosure.

Elevators shall not open into interior exit stairways and ramps.

1023.5 Penetrations.

Penetrations into or through interior exit stairways and ramps are prohibited except for equipment and ductwork necessary for independent ventilation or pressurization, sprinkler piping, standpipes, electrical raceway for fire department communication and security systems and electrical raceway serving the interior exit stairway and ramp and terminating at a steel box not exceeding 16 square inches (0.010 m2). Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714. There shall not be penetrations or communication openings, whether protected or not, between adjacent interior exit stairways and ramps.

Exception: Membrane penetrations shall be permitted on the outside of the interior exit stairway and ramp. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.2.

1023.6 Ventilation.

Equipment and ductwork for interior exit stairway and ramp ventilation as permitted by Section 1023.5 shall comply with one of the following items:

1.	Such equipment and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and shall be directly connected to the interior exit stairway and ramp by ductwork enclosed in construction as required for shafts.

2.	Where such equipment and ductwork is located within the interior exit stairway and ramp, the intake air shall be taken directly from the outdoors and the exhaust air shall be discharged directly to the outdoors, or such air shall be conveyed through ducts enclosed in construction as required for shafts.

3.	Where located within the building, such equipment and ductwork shall be separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, with construction as required for shafts.

In each case, openings into the fire-resistance-rated construction shall be limited to those needed for maintenance and operation and shall be protected by opening protectives in accordance with Section 716 for shaft enclosures.

The interior exit stairway and ramp ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems.

1023.7 Interior exit stairway and ramp exterior walls.

Exterior walls of the interior exit stairway or ramp shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls. Where nonrated walls or unprotected openings enclose the exterior of the stairway or ramps and the walls or openings are exposed by other parts of the building at an angle of less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad), the building exterior walls within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally of a nonrated wall or unprotected opening shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. This construction shall extend vertically from the ground to a point 10 feet (3048 mm) above the topmost landing of the stairway or ramp, or to the roof line, whichever is lower.

1023.8 Discharge identification.

An interior exit stairway and ramp shall not continue below its level of exit discharge unless an approved barrier is provided at the level of exit discharge to prevent persons from unintentionally continuing into levels below. Directional exit signs shall be provided as specified in Section 1013.

1023.9 Stairway identification signs.

A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in an interior exit stairway and ramp connecting more than three stories designating the floor level, the terminus of the top and bottom of the interior exit stairway and ramp and the identification of the stairway or ramp. The signage shall also state the story of, and the direction to, the exit discharge and the availability of roof access from the interior exit stairway and ramp for the fire department. The sign shall be located 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor landing in a position that is readily visible when the doors are in the open and closed positions. In addition to the stairway identification sign, a floor-level sign in visual characters, raised characters and braille complying with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility shall be located at each floor-level landing adjacent to the door leading from the interior exit stairway and ramp into the corridor to identify the floor level.

1023.9.1 Signage requirements.

Stairway identification signs shall comply with all of the following requirements:

1.	The signs shall be a minimum size of 18 inches (457 mm) by 12 inches (305 mm).

2.	The letters designating the identification of the interior exit stairway and ramp shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in height.

3.	The number designating the floor level shall be not less than 5 inches (127 mm) in height and located in the center of the sign.

4.	Other lettering and numbers shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in height.

5.	Characters and their background shall have a non-glare finish. Characters shall contrast with their background, with either light characters on a dark background or dark characters on a light background.

6.	Where signs required by Section 1023.9 are installed in the interior exit stairways and ramps of buildings subject to Section 1025, the signs shall be made of the same materials as required by Section 1025.4.

1023.10 Elevator lobby identification signs.

At landings in interior exit stairways where two or more doors lead to the floor level, any door with direct access to an enclosed elevator lobby shall be identified by signage located on the door or directly adjacent to the door stating “Elevator Lobby.” Signage shall be in accordance with Section 1023.9.1, Items 4, 5 and 6.

1023.11 Smokeproof enclosures.

Where required by Section 403.5.4, 405.7.2 or 412.3.2.1, interior exit stairways and ramps shall be smokeproof enclosures in accordance with Section 909.20.

1023.11.1 Termination and extension.

A smokeproof enclosure shall terminate at an exit discharge or a public way. The smokeproof enclosure shall be permitted to be extended by an exit passageway in accordance with Section 1023.3. The exit passageway shall be without openings other than the fire door assembly required by Section 1023.3.1 and those necessary for egress from the exit passageway. The exit passageway shall be separated from the remainder of the building by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exceptions:

1.	Openings in the exit passageway serving a smokeproof enclosure are permitted where the exit passageway is protected and pressurized in the same manner as the smokeproof enclosure, and openings are protected as required for access from other floors.

2.	The fire barrier separating the smokeproof enclosure from the exit passageway is not required, provided the exit passageway is protected and pressurized in the same manner as the smokeproof enclosure.

3.	A smokeproof enclosure shall be permitted to egress through areas on the level of exit discharge or vestibules as permitted by Section 1028.

1023.11.2 Enclosure access.

Access to the stairway or ramp within a smokeproof enclosure shall be by way of a vestibule or an open exterior balcony.

Exception: Access is not required by way of a vestibule or exterior balcony for stairways and ramps using the pressurization alternative complying with Section 909.20.5.

1023.12 Standpipes.

Standpipes and standpipe hose connections shall be provided in accordance with Sections 905.3 and 905.4.

SECTION 1024
EXIT PASSAGEWAYS
1024.1 General.

Exit passageways serving as an exit component in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. An exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose other than as a means of egress and a circulation path.

1024.2 Width.

The required capacity of exit passageways shall be determined as specified in Section 1005.1 but the minimum width shall be not less than 44 inches (1118 mm), except that exit passageways serving an occupant load of less than 50 shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width. The minimum width or required capacity of exit passageways shall be unobstructed.

Exception: Encroachments complying with Section 1005.7.

1024.3 Construction.

Exit passageway enclosures shall have walls, floors and ceilings of not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, and not less than that required for any connecting interior exit stairway or ramp. Exit passageways shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

1024.4 Termination.

Exit passageways on the level of exit discharge shall terminate at an exit discharge. Exit passageways on other levels shall terminate at an exit.

1024.5 Openings.

Exit passageway opening protectives shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 716.

Except as permitted in Section 402.8.7, openings in exit passageways other than unprotected exterior openings shall be limited to those necessary for exit access to the exit passageway from normally occupied spaces and for egress from the exit passageway.

Where an interior exit stairway or ramp is extended to an exit discharge or a public way by an exit passageway, the exit passageway shall comply with Section 1023.3.1.

Elevators shall not open into an exit passageway.

1024.6 Penetrations.

Penetrations into or through an exit passageway are prohibited except for equipment and ductwork necessary for independent pressurization, fire protection systems, two-way communication systems, electrical raceway for fire department communication and electrical raceway serving the exit passageway and terminating at a steel box not exceeding 16 square inches (0.010 m2). Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714. There shall not be penetrations or communicating openings, whether protected or not, between adjacent exit passageways.

Exception: Membrane penetrations shall be permitted on the outside of the exit passageway. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.

1024.7 Ventilation.

Equipment and ductwork for exit passageway ventilation as permitted by Section 1024.6 shall comply with one of the following:

1.	The equipment and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and shall be directly connected to the exit passageway by ductwork enclosed in construction as required for shafts.

2.	Where the equipment and ductwork is located within the exit passageway, the intake air shall be taken directly from the outdoors and the exhaust air shall be discharged directly to the outdoors, or the air shall be conveyed through ducts enclosed in construction as required for shafts.

3.	Where located within the building, the equipment and ductwork shall be separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, with construction as required for shafts.

In each case, openings into the fire-resistance-rated construction shall be limited to those needed for maintenance and operation and shall be protected by opening protectives in accordance with Section 716 for shaft enclosures.

Exit passageway ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems.

1024.8 Standpipes.

Standpipes and standpipe hose connections shall be provided in accordance with Sections 905.3 and 905.4.

1024.9 Exit passageway exterior walls.

Exterior walls of the exit passageway shall comply with Section 705. Where nonrated walls or unprotected openings enclose the exterior of the exit passageway and the walls or openings are exposed by other parts of the building at an angle of less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad), the building exterior walls within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally of a nonrated wall or unprotected opening shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. This construction shall extend vertically from the ground to a point 10 feet (3048 mm) above the floor of the exit passageway, or to the roof line, whichever is lower.

SECTION 1025
LUMINOUS EGRESS PATH MARKINGS
1025.1 General.

Approved luminous egress path markings delineating the exit path shall be provided in high-rise buildings of Group A, B, E, I, M, and R-1 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1025.1 through 1025.5.

Exception: Luminous egress path markings shall not be required on the level of exit discharge in lobbies that serve as part of the exit path in accordance with Section 1028.2, Exception 1.

1025.2 Markings within exit components.

Egress path markings shall be provided in interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passageways, in accordance with Sections 1025.2.1 through 1025.2.6.

1025.2.1 Steps.

A solid and continuous stripe shall be applied to the horizontal leading edge of each step and shall extend for the full length of the step. Outlining stripes shall have a minimum horizontal width of 1 inch (25 mm) and a maximum width of 2 inches (51 mm). The leading edge of the stripe shall be placed not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) from the leading edge of the step and the stripe shall not overlap the leading edge of the step by not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) down the vertical face of the step.

Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with UL 1994.

1025.2.2 Landings.

The leading edge of landings shall be marked with a stripe consistent with the dimensional requirements for steps.

1025.2.3 Handrails.

Handrails and handrail extensions shall be marked with a solid and continuous stripe having a minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm). The stripe shall be placed on the top surface of the handrail for the entire length of the handrail, including extensions and newel post caps. Where handrails or handrail extensions bend or turn corners, the stripe shall not have a gap of more than 4 inches (102 mm).

Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with UL 1994.

1025.2.4 Perimeter demarcation lines.

Stair landings and other floor areas within interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passageways, with the exception of the sides of steps, shall be provided with solid and continuous demarcation lines on the floor or on the walls or a combination of both. The stripes shall be 1 to 2 inches (25 mm to 51 mm) wide with interruptions not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm).

Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall not apply to outlining stripes listed in accordance with UL 1994.

1025.2.4.1 Floor-mounted demarcation lines.

Perimeter demarcation lines shall be placed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the wall and shall extend to within 2 inches (51 mm) of the markings on the leading edge of landings. The demarcation lines shall continue across the floor in front of all doors.

Exception: Demarcation lines shall not extend in front of exit discharge doors that lead out of an exit and through which occupants must travel to complete the exit path.

1025.2.4.2 Wall-mounted demarcation lines.

Perimeter demarcation lines shall be placed on the wall with the bottom edge of the stripe not more than 4 inches (102 mm) above the finished floor. At the top or bottom of the stairs, demarcation lines shall drop vertically to the floor within 2 inches (51 mm) of the step or landing edge. Demarcation lines on walls shall transition vertically to the floor and then extend across the floor where a line on the floor is the only practical method of outlining the path. Where the wall line is broken by a door, demarcation lines on walls shall continue across the face of the door or transition to the floor and extend across the floor in front of such door.

Exception: Demarcation lines shall not extend in front of exit discharge doors that lead out of an exit and through which occupants must travel to complete the exit path.

1025.2.4.3 Transition.

Where a wall-mounted demarcation line transitions to a floor-mounted demarcation line, or vice versa, the wall-mounted demarcation line shall drop vertically to the floor to meet a complimentary extension of the floor-mounted demarcation line, thus forming a continuous marking.

1025.2.5 Obstacles.

Obstacles at or below 6 feet 6 inches (1981 mm) in height and projecting more than 4 inches (102 mm) into the egress path shall be outlined with markings not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in width comprised of a pattern of alternating equal bands, of luminous material and black, with the alternating bands not more than 2 inches (51 mm) thick and angled at 45 degrees (0.79 rad). Obstacles shall include, but are not limited to, standpipes, hose cabinets, wall projections and restricted height areas. However, such markings shall not conceal any required information or indicators including but not limited to instructions to occupants for the use of standpipes.

Exception: The minimum width of 1 inch (25 mm) shall not apply to markings listed in accordance with UL 1994.

1025.2.6 Doors within the exit path.

Doors through which occupants must pass in order to complete the exit path shall be provided with markings complying with Sections 1025.2.6.1 through 1025.2.6.3.

1025.2.6.1 Emergency exit symbol.

The doors shall be identified by a low-location luminous emergency exit symbol complying with NFPA 170. The exit symbol shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height and shall be mounted on the door, centered horizontally, with the top of the symbol not higher than 18 inches (457 mm) above the finished floor.

1025.2.6.2 Door hardware markings.

Door hardware shall be marked with not less than 16 square inches (10 323 mm2) of luminous material. This marking shall be located behind, immediately adjacent to, or on the door handle or escutcheon. Where a panic bar is installed, such material shall not be less than 1 inch (25 mm) wide for the entire length of the actuating bar or touchpad.

1025.2.6.3 Door frame markings.

The top and sides of the door frame shall be marked with a solid and continuous 1-inch- to 2-inch-wide (25 mm to 51 mm) stripe. Where the door molding does not provide sufficient flat surface on which to locate the stripe, the stripe shall be permitted to be located on the wall surrounding the frame.

1025.3 Uniformity.

Placement and dimensions of markings shall be consistent and uniform throughout the same enclosure.

1025.4 Self-luminous and photoluminescent.

Luminous egress path markings shall be permitted to be made of any material, including paint, provided that an electrical charge is not required to maintain the required luminance. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, self-luminous materials and photoluminescent materials. Materials shall comply with either of the following standards:

1.	UL 1994.

2.	ASTM E2072, except that the charging source shall be 1 footcandle (11 lux) of fluorescent illumination for 60 minutes, and the minimum luminance shall be 30 milicandelas per square meter at 10 minutes and 5 milicandelas per square meter after 90 minutes.

1025.5 Illumination.

Where photoluminescent exit path markings are installed, they shall be provided with not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) of illumination for not less than 60 minutes prior to periods when the building is occupied and continuously during occupancy.

SECTION 1026
HORIZONTAL EXITS
1026.1 General.

Horizontal exits serving as an exit in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section. A horizontal exit shall not serve as the only exit from a portion of a building, and where two or more exits are required, not more than one-half of the total number of exits or total exit minimum width or required capacity shall be horizontal exits.

Exceptions:

1.	Horizontal exits are permitted to comprise two-thirds of the required exits from any building or floor area for occupancies in Group I-2.

2.	Horizontal exits are permitted to comprise 100 percent of the exits required for occupancies in Group I-3. Not less than 6 square feet (0.6 m2) of accessible space per occupant shall be provided on each side of the horizontal exit for the total number of people in adjoining compartments.

1026.2 Separation.

The separation between buildings or refuge areas connected by a horizontal exit shall be provided by a fire wall complying with Section 706; or by a fire barrier complying with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly complying with Section 711, or both. The minimum fire-resistance rating of the separation shall be 2 hours. Opening protectives in horizontal exits shall also comply with Section 716. Duct and air transfer openings in a fire wall or fire barrier that serves as a horizontal exit shall also comply with Section 717. The horizontal exit separation shall extend vertically through all levels of the building unless floor assemblies have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours with no unprotected openings.

Exception: A fire-resistance rating is not required at horizontal exits between a building area and an above-grade pedestrian walkway constructed in accordance with Section 3104, provided that the distance between connected buildings is more than 20 feet (6096 mm).

Horizontal exits constructed as fire barriers shall be continuous from exterior wall to exterior wall so as to divide completely the floor served by the horizontal exit.

1026.3 Opening protectives.

Fire doors in horizontal exits shall be self-closing or automatic-closing when activated by a smoke detector in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4. Doors, where located in a cross-corridor condition, shall be automatic-closing by activation of a smoke detector installed in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

1026.4 Refuge area.

The refuge area of a horizontal exit shall be a space occupied by the same tenant or a public area and each such refuge area shall be adequate to accommodate the original occupant load of the refuge area plus the occupant load anticipated from the adjoining compartment. The anticipated occupant load from the adjoining compartment shall be based on the capacity of the horizontal exit doors entering the refuge area or the total occupant load of the adjoining compartment, whichever is less.

1026.4.1 Capacity.

The capacity of the refuge area shall be computed based on a net floor area allowance of 3 square feet (0.2787 m2) for each occupant to be accommodated therein. Where the horizontal exit also forms a smoke compartment, the capacity of the refuge area for Group I-1, I-2 and I-3 occupancies and Group B ambulatory care facilities shall comply with Section 407.5.1, 408.6.2, 420.4.1 and 422.3.2 as applicable.

1026.4.2 Number of exits.

The refuge area into which a horizontal exit leads shall be provided with exits adequate to meet the occupant requirements of this chapter, but not including the added occupant load imposed by persons entering the refuge area through horizontal exits from other areas. Not less than one refuge area exit shall lead directly to the exterior or to an interior exit stairway or ramp.

Exception: The adjoining compartment shall not be required to have a stairway or door leading directly outside, provided the refuge area into which a horizontal exit leads has stairways or doors leading directly outside and are so arranged that egress shall not require the occupants to return through the compartment from which egress originates.

1026.5 Standpipes.

Standpipes and standpipe hose connections shall be provided in accordance with Sections 905.3 and 905.4.

SECTION 1027
EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS
1027.1 General.

Exterior exit stairways and ramps serving as an exit component in a means of egress system shall comply with the requirements of this section.

1027.2 Use in a means of egress.

Exterior exit stairways shall not be used as an element of a required means of egress for Group I-2 occupancies. For occupancies in other than Group I-2, exterior exit stairways and ramps shall be permitted as an element of a required means of egress for buildings not exceeding six stories above grade plane or that are not high-rise buildings.

1027.3 Open side.

Exterior exit stairways and ramps serving as an element of a required means of egress shall be open on not less than one side, except for required structural columns, beams, handrails and guards. An open side shall have not less than 35 square feet (3.3 m2) of aggregate open area adjacent to each floor level and the level of each intermediate landing. The required open area shall be located not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the adjacent floor or landing level.

1027.4 Side yards.

The open areas adjoining exterior exit stairways or ramps shall be either yards, courts or public ways; the remaining sides are permitted to be enclosed by the exterior walls of the building.

1027.5 Location.

Exterior exit stairways and ramps shall have a minimum fire separation distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) measured at right angles from the exterior edge of the stairway or ramps, including landings, to:

1.	Adjacent lot lines.

2.	Other portions of the building.

3.	Other buildings on the same lot unless the adjacent building exterior walls and openings are protected in accordance with Section 705 based on fire separation distance.

For the purposes of this section, other portions of the building shall be treated as separate buildings.

Exception: Exterior exit stairways and ramps serving individual dwelling units of Group R-3 shall have a minimum fire separation distance of 5 feet (1524 mm).

1027.6 Exterior exit stairway and ramp protection.

Exterior exit stairways and ramps shall be separated from the interior of the building as required in Section 1023.2. Openings shall be limited to those necessary for egress from normally occupied spaces. Where a vertical plane projecting from the edge of an exterior exit stairway or ramp and landings is exposed by other parts of the building at an angle of less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad), the exterior wall shall be rated in accordance with Section 1023.7.

Exceptions:

1.	Separation from the interior of the building is not required for occupancies, other than those in Group R-1 or R-2, in buildings that are not more than two stories above grade plane where a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies is the first story above grade plane.

2.	Separation from the interior of the building is not required where the exterior exit stairway or ramp is served by an exterior exit ramp or balcony that connects two remote exterior exit stairways or other approved exits with a perimeter that is not less than 50 percent open. To be considered open, the opening shall be not less than 50 percent of the height of the enclosing wall, with the top of the openings not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the top of the balcony.

3.	Separation from the open-ended corridor of the building is not required for exterior exit stairways or ramps, provided that Items 3.1 through 3.5 are met:

3.1.	The building, including open-ended corridors, and stairways and ramps, shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

3.2.	The open-ended corridors comply with Section 1020.

3.3.	The open-ended corridors are connected on each end to an exterior exit stairway or ramp complying with Section 1027.

3.4.	The exterior walls and openings adjacent to the exterior exit stairway or ramp comply with Section 1023.7.

3.5.	At any location in an open-ended corridor where a change of direction exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad) occurs, a clear opening of not less than 35 square feet (3.3 m2) or an exterior stairway or ramp shall be provided. Where clear openings are provided, they shall be located so as to minimize the accumulation of smoke or toxic gases.

4.	In Group R-3 occupancies not more than four stories in height, exterior exit stairways and ramps serving individual dwelling units are not required to be separated from the interior of the building where the exterior exit stairway or ramp discharges directly to grade.

SECTION 1028
EXIT DISCHARGE
1028.1 General.

The exit discharge shall comply with Sections 1028 and 1029 and the applicable requirements of Sections 1003 through 1015.

1028.2 Exit discharge.

Exits shall discharge directly to the exterior of the building. The exit discharge shall be at grade or shall provide a direct path of egress travel to grade. The exit discharge shall not reenter a building. The combined use of Exceptions 1 and 2 shall not exceed 50 percent of the number and minimum width or required capacity of the required exits.

Exceptions:

1.	Not more than 50 percent of the number and minimum width or required capacity of interior exit stairways and ramps is permitted to egress through areas on the level of discharge provided all of the following conditions are met:

1.1.	Discharge of interior exit stairways and ramps shall be provided with a free and unobstructed path of travel to an exterior exit door and such exit is readily visible and identifiable from the point of termination of the enclosure.

1.2.	The entire area of the level of exit discharge is separated from areas below by construction conforming to the fire-resistance rating for the enclosure.

1.3.	The egress path from the interior exit stairway and ramp on the level of exit discharge is protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system. Portions of the level of exit discharge with access to the egress path shall be either equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, or separated from the egress path in accordance with the requirements for the enclosure of interior exit stairways or ramps.

1.4.	Where a required interior exit stairway or ramp and an exit access stairway or ramp serve the same floor level and terminate at the same level of exit discharge, the termination of the exit access stairway or ramp and the exit discharge door of the interior exit stairway or ramp shall be separated by a distance of not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) or not less than one-fourth the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building, whichever is less. The distance shall be measured in a straight line between the exit discharge door from the interior exit stairway or ramp and the last tread of the exit access stairway or termination of slope of the exit access ramp.

2.	Not more than 50 percent of the number and minimum width or required capacity of the interior exit stairways and ramps is permitted to egress through a vestibule provided all of the following conditions are met:

2.1.	The entire area of the vestibule is separated from areas below by construction conforming to the fire-resistance rating of the interior exit stairway or ramp enclosure.

2.2.	The depth from the exterior of the building is not greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) and the length is not greater than 30 feet (9144 mm).

2.3.	The area is separated from the remainder of the level of exit discharge by a fire partition constructed in accordance with Section 708.

Exception: The maximum transmitted temperature rise is not required.

2.4.	The area is used only for means of egress and exits directly to the outside.

3.	Horizontal exits complying with Section 1026 shall not be required to discharge directly to the exterior of the building.

1028.3 Exit discharge width or capacity.

The minimum width or required capacity of the exit discharge shall be not less than the minimum width or required capacity of the exits being served.

1028.4 Exit discharge components.

Exit discharge components shall be sufficiently open to the exterior so as to minimize the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases.

1028.5 Access to a public way.

The exit discharge shall provide a direct and unobstructed access to a public way.

Exception: Where access to a public way cannot be provided, a safe dispersal area shall be provided where all of the following are met:

1.	The area shall be of a size to accommodate not less than 5 square feet (0.46 m2) for each person.

2.	The area shall be located on the same lot not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) away from the building requiring egress.

3.	The area shall be permanently maintained and identified as a safe dispersal area.

4.	The area shall be provided with a safe and unobstructed path of travel from the building.

SECTION 1029
ASSEMBLY
1029.1 General.

A room or space used for assembly purposes that contains seats, tables, displays, equipment or other material shall comply with this section.

1029.1.1 Bleachers.

Bleachers, grandstands and folding and telescopic seating, that are not building elements, shall comply with ICC 300.

1029.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers.

Where spaces under grandstands or bleachers are used for purposes other than ticket booths less than 100 square feet (9.29 m2) and toilet rooms, such spaces shall be separated by fire barriers complying with Section 707 and horizontal assemblies complying with Section 711 with not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

1029.2 Assembly main exit.

A building, room or space used for assembly purposes that has an occupant load of greater than 300 and is provided with a main exit, that main exit shall be of sufficient capacity to accommodate not less than one-half of the occupant load, but such capacity shall be not less than the total required capacity of all means of egress leading to the exit. Where the building is classified as a Group A occupancy, the main exit shall front on not less than one street or an unoccupied space of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in width that adjoins a street or public way. In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes where there is not a well-defined main exit or where multiple main exits are provided, exits shall be permitted to be distributed around the perimeter of the building provided that the total capacity of egress is not less than 100 percent of the required capacity.

1029.3 Assembly other exits.

In addition to having access to a main exit, each level in a building used for assembly purposes having an occupant load greater than 300 and provided with a main exit, shall be provided with additional means of egress that shall provide an egress capacity for not less than one-half of the total occupant load served by that level and shall comply with Section 1007.1. In a building used for assembly purposes where there is not a well-defined main exit or where multiple main exits are provided, exits for each level shall be permitted to be distributed around the perimeter of the building, provided that the total width of egress is not less than 100 percent of the required width.

1029.4 Foyers and lobbies.

In Group A-1 occupancies, where persons are admitted to the building at times when seats are not available, such persons shall be allowed to wait in a lobby or similar space, provided such lobby or similar space shall not encroach upon the minimum width or required capacity of the means of egress. Such foyer, if not directly connected to a public street by all the main entrances or exits, shall have a straight and unobstructed corridor or path of travel to every such main entrance or exit.

1029.5 Interior balcony and gallery means of egress.

For balconies, galleries or press boxes having a seating capacity of 50 or more located in a building, room or space used for assembly purposes, not less than two means of egress shall be provided, with one from each side of every balcony, gallery or press box.

1029.6 Capacity of aisle for assembly.

The required capacity of aisles shall be not less than that determined in accordance with Section 1029.6.1 where smoke-protected assembly seating is not provided, Section 1029.6.2 where smoke-protected assembly seating is provided and Section 1029.6.3 where open-air assembly seating is provided.

1029.6.1 Without smoke protection.

The required capacity in inches (mm) of the aisles for assembly seating without smoke protection shall be not less than the occupant load served by the egress element in accordance with all of the following, as applicable:

1.	Not less than 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) of aisle capacity for each occupant served shall be provided on stepped aisles having riser heights 7 inches (178 mm) or less and tread depths 11 inches (279 mm) or greater, measured horizontally between tread nosings.

2.	Not less than 0.005 inch (0.127 mm) of additional aisle capacity for each occupant shall be provided for each 0.10 inch (2.5 mm) of riser height above 7 inches (178 mm).

3.	Where egress requires stepped aisle descent, not less than 0.075 inch (1.9 mm) of additional aisle capacity for each occupant shall be provided on those portions of aisle capacity having no handrail within a horizontal distance of 30 inches (762 mm).

4.	Ramped aisles, where slopes are steeper than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope), shall have not less than 0.22 inch (5.6 mm) of clear aisle capacity for each occupant served. Level or ramped aisles, where slopes are not steeper than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope), shall have not less than 0.20 inch (5.1 mm) of clear aisle capacity for each occupant served.

1029.6.2 Smoke-protected assembly seating.

The required capacity in inches (mm) of the aisle for smoke-protected assembly seating shall be not less than the occupant load served by the egress element multiplied by the appropriate factor in Table 1029.6.2. The total number of seats specified shall be those within the space exposed to the same smoke-protected environment. Interpolation is permitted between the specific values shown. A life safety evaluation, complying with NFPA 101, shall be done for a facility utilizing the reduced width requirements of Table 1029.6.2 for smoke-protected assembly seating.

TABLE 1029.6.2

CAPACITY FOR AISLES FOR SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY

TOTAL NUMBER OF SEATS IN
THE SMOKE-PROTECTED
ASSEMBLY SEATING	INCHES OF CAPACITY PER SEAT SERVED
Stepped aisles with
handrails within 30 inches
	Stepped aisles without
handrails within 30 inches
	Level aisles or ramped aisles
not steeper than 1 in 10 in slope
	Ramped aisles steeper
than 1 in 10 in slope

Equal to or less than 5,000	0.2	0.25	0.15	0.165
10,000	0.13	0.163	0.1	0.11
15,000	0.096	0.12	0.07	0.077
20,000	0.076	0.095	0.056	0.062
Equal to or greater than 25,000	0.06	0.075	0.044	0.048

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1029.6.2.1 Smoke control.

Aisles and aisle accessways serving a smoke-protected assembly seating area shall be provided with a smoke control system complying with Section 909 or natural ventilation designed to maintain the smoke level not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor of the means of egress.

1029.6.2.2 Roof height.

A smoke-protected assembly seating area with a roof shall have the lowest portion of the roof deck not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) above the highest aisle or aisle accessway.

Exception: A roof canopy in an outdoor stadium shall be permitted to be less than 15 feet (4572 mm) above the highest aisle or aisle accessway provided that there are no objects less than 80 inches (2032 mm) above the highest aisle or aisle accessway.

1029.6.2.3 Automatic sprinklers.

Enclosed areas with walls and ceilings in buildings or structures containing smoke-protected assembly seating shall be protected with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Exceptions:

1.	The floor area used for contests, performances or entertainment provided the roof construction is more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above the floor level and the use is restricted to low fire hazard uses.

2.	Press boxes and storage facilities less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in area.

1029.6.3 Open-air assembly seating.

In open-air assembly seating, the required capacity in inches (mm) of aisles shall be not less than the total occupant load served by the egress element multiplied by 0.08 (2.0 mm) where egress is by stepped aisle and multiplied by 0.06 (1.52 mm) where egress is by level aisles and ramped aisles.

Exception: The required capacity in inches (mm) of aisles shall be permitted to comply with Section 1029.6.2 for the number of seats in the open-air smoke-protected assembly seating where Section 1029.6.2 permits less capacity.

1029.6.3.1 Automatic sprinklers.

Enclosed areas with walls and ceilings in buildings or structures containing open-air assembly seating shall be protected with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Exceptions:

1.	The floor area used for contests, performances or entertainment, provided that the roof construction is more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above the floor level and the use is restricted to low fire hazard uses.

2.	Press boxes and storage facilities less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in area.

3.	Open-air assembly seating facilities where seating and the means of egress in the seating area are essentially open to the outside.

1029.7 Travel distance.

The exit access travel distance shall comply with Section 1017. Where aisles are provided for seating, the distance shall be measured along the aisles and aisle accessways without travel over or on the seats.

Exceptions:

1.	In facilities with smoke-protected assembly seating, the total exit access travel distance shall be not greater than 400 feet (122 m). That portion of the total permitted exit access travel distance from each seat to the nearest entrance to a vomitory or concourse shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). The portion of the total permitted exit access travel distance from the entrance to the vomitory or concourse to one of the following shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm):

1.1.	The closest riser of an exit access stairway.

1.2.	The closest slope of an exit access ramp.

1.3.	An exit.

2.	In facilities with open-air assembly seating of Type III, IV or V construction, the exit access travel distance to one of the following shall not exceed 400 feet (122 m):

2.1.	The closest riser of an exit access stairway.

2.2.	The closest slope of an exit access ramp.

2.3.	An exit.

3.	In facilities with open-air assembly seating of Type I or II construction, the exit access travel distance shall not be limited.

1029.8 Common path of egress travel.

The common path of egress travel shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) from any seat to a point where an occupant has a choice of two paths of egress travel to two exits.

Exceptions:

1.	For areas serving less than 50 occupants, the common path of egress travel shall not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm).

2.	For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating, the common path of egress travel shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).

1029.8.1 Path through adjacent row.

Where one of the two paths of travel is across the aisle through a row of seats to another aisle, there shall be not more than 24 seats between the two aisles, and the minimum clear width between rows for the row between the two aisles shall be 12 inches (305 mm) plus 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for each additional seat above seven in the row between aisles.

Exception: For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating there shall be not more than 40 seats between the two aisles and the minimum clear width shall be 12 inches (305 mm) plus 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) for each additional seat.

1029.9 Assembly aisles are required.

Every occupied portion of any building, room or space used for assembly purposes that contains seats, tables, displays, similar fixtures or equipment shall be provided with aisles leading to exits or exit access doorways in accordance with this section.

1029.9.1 Minimum aisle width.

The minimum clear width for aisles shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Forty-eight inches (1219 mm) for stepped aisles having seating on both sides.

Exception: Thirty-six inches (914 mm) where the stepped aisles serve less than 50 seats.

2.	Thirty-six inches (914 mm) for stepped aisles having seating on only one side.

Exception: Twenty-three inches (584 mm) between a stepped aisle handrail and seating where a stepped aisle does not serve more than five rows on one side.

3.	Twenty-three inches (584 mm) between a stepped aisle handrail or guard and seating where the stepped aisle is subdivided by a mid-aisle handrail.

4.	Forty-two inches (1067 mm) for level or ramped aisles having seating on both sides.

Exceptions:

1.	Thirty-six inches (914 mm) where the aisle serves fewer than 50 seats.

2.	Thirty inches (762 mm) where the aisle serves fewer than 15 seats and does not serve as part of an accessible route.

5.	Thirty-six inches (914 mm) for level or ramped aisles having seating on only one side.

Exception: Thirty inches (762 mm) where the aisle serves fewer than 15 seats and does not serve as part of an accessible route.

1029.9.2 Aisle catchment area.

The aisle shall provide sufficient capacity for the number of persons accommodated by the catchment area served by the aisle. The catchment area served by an aisle is that portion of the total space served by that section of the aisle. In establishing catchment areas, the assumption shall be made that there is a balanced use of all means of egress, with the number of persons in proportion to egress capacity.

1029.9.3 Converging aisles.

Where aisles converge to form a single path of egress travel, the required capacity of that path shall be not less than the combined required capacity of the converging aisles.

1029.9.4 Uniform width and capacity.

Those portions of aisles, where egress is possible in either of two directions, shall be uniform in minimum width or required capacity.

1029.9.5 Dead end aisles.

Each end of an aisle shall be continuous to a cross aisle, foyer, doorway, vomitory, concourse or stairway in accordance with Section 1029.9.7 having access to an exit.

Exceptions:

1.	Dead-end aisles shall be not greater than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length.

2.	Dead-end aisles longer than 16 rows are permitted where seats beyond the 16th row dead-end aisle are not more than 24 seats from another aisle, measured along a row of seats having a minimum clear width of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for each additional seat above seven in the row where seats have backrests or beyond 10 where seats are without backrests in the row.

3.	For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating, the dead end aisle length of vertical aisles shall not exceed a distance of 21 rows.

4.	For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating, a longer dead-end aisle is permitted where seats beyond the 21-row dead-end aisle are not more than 40 seats from another aisle, measured along a row of seats having an aisle accessway with a minimum clear width of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) for each additional seat above seven in the row where seats have backrests or beyond 10 where seats are without backrests in the row.

1029.9.6 Aisle measurement.

The clear width for aisles shall be measured to walls, edges of seating and tread edges except for permitted projections.

Exception: The clear width of aisles adjacent to seating at tables shall be permitted to be measured in accordance with Section 1029.13.1.

1029.9.6.1 Assembly aisle obstructions.

There shall not be obstructions in the minimum width or required capacity of aisles.

Exception: Handrails are permitted to project into the required width of stepped aisles and ramped aisles in accordance with Section 1014.8.

1029.9.7 Stairways connecting to stepped aisles.

A stairway that connects a stepped aisle to a cross aisle or concourse shall be permitted to comply with the assembly aisle walking surface requirements of Section 1029.14. Transitions between stairways and stepped aisles shall comply with Section 1029.10.

1029.9.8 Stairways connecting to vomitories.

A stairway that connects a vomitory to a cross aisle or concourse shall be permitted to comply with the assembly aisle walking surface requirements of Section 1029.14. Transitions between stairways and stepped aisles shall comply with Section 1029.10.

1029.10 Transitions.

Transitions between stairways and stepped aisles shall comply with either Section 1029.10.1 or 1029.10.2.

1029.10.1 Transitions to stairways that maintain stepped aisle riser and tread dimensions.

Stepped aisles, transitions and stairways that maintain the stepped aisle riser and tread dimensions shall comply with Section 1029.14 as one exit access component.

1029.10.2 Transitions to stairways that do not maintain stepped aisle riser and tread dimensions.

Transitions between stairways and stepped aisles having different riser and tread dimensions shall comply with Sections 1029.10.2.1 through 1029.10.3.

1029.10.2.1 Stairways and stepped aisles in a straight run.

Where stairways and stepped aisles are in a straight run, the transition shall have one of the following:

1.	A minimum depth of 22 inches (559 mm) where the treads on the descending side of the transition have greater depth.

2.	A minimum depth of 30 inches (762 mm) where the treads on the descending side of the transition have lesser depth.

1029.10.2.2 Stairways that change direction from stepped aisles.

Transitions where the stairway changes direction from the stepped aisle shall have a minimum depth of 11 inches (280 mm) or the stepped aisle tread depth, whichever is greater, between the stepped aisle and stairway.

1029.10.3 Transition marking.

A distinctive marking stripe shall be provided at each nosing or leading edge adjacent to the transition. Such stripe shall be a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm), and a maximum of 2 inches (51 mm), wide. The edge marking stripe shall be distinctively different from the stepped aisle contrasting marking stripe.

1029.11 Stepped aisles at vomitories.

Stepped aisles that change direction at vomitories shall comply with Section 1029.11.1. Transitions between a stepped aisle above a vomitory and stepped aisle to the side of vomitory shall comply with Section 1029.11.2.

1029.11.1 Stepped aisles that change direction at vomitories.

Stepped aisle treads where the stepped aisle changes direction at a vomitory shall have a minimum depth of 11 inches (280 mm) or the stepped aisle tread depth, whichever is greater. The height of a stepped aisle tread above a transition at a vomitory shall comply with Section 1029.14.2.2.

1029.11.2 Stepped aisle transitions at the top of vomitories.

Transitions between the stepped aisle above a vomitory and stepped aisles to the side of a vomitory shall have a minimum depth of 11 inches (280 mm) or the stepped aisle depth, whichever is greater.

1029.12 Construction.

Aisles, stepped aisles and ramped aisles shall be built of materials consistent with the types permitted for the type of construction of the building.

Exception: Wood handrails shall be permitted for all types of construction.

1029.12.1 Walking surface.

The surface of aisles, stepped aisles and ramped aisles shall be of slip-resistant materials that are securely attached. The surface for stepped aisles shall comply with Section 1011.7.1.

1029.12.2 Outdoor conditions.

Outdoor aisles, stepped aisles and ramped aisles and outdoor approaches to aisles, stepped aisles and ramped aisles shall be designed so that water will not accumulate on the walking surface.

1029.13 Aisle accessways.

Aisle accessways for seating at tables shall comply with Section 1029.13.1. Aisle accessways for seating in rows shall comply with Section 1029.13.2.

1029.13.1 Seating at tables.

Where seating is located at a table or counter and is adjacent to an aisle or aisle accessway, the measurement of required clear width of the aisle or aisle accessway shall be made to a line 19 inches (483 mm) away from and parallel to the edge of the table or counter. The 19-inch (483 mm) distance shall be measured perpendicular to the side of the table or counter. In the case of other side boundaries for aisles or aisle accessways, the clear width shall be measured to walls, edges of seating and tread edges.

Exception: Where tables or counters are served by fixed seats, the width of the aisle or aisle accessway shall be measured from the back of the seat.

1029.13.1.1 Aisle accessway capacity and width for seating at tables.

Aisle accessways serving arrangements of seating at tables or counters shall comply with the capacity requirements of Section 1005.1 but shall not have less than 12 inches (305 mm) of width plus 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of width for each additional 1 foot (305 mm), or fraction thereof, beyond 12 feet (3658 mm) of aisle accessway length measured from the center of the seat farthest from an aisle.

Exception: Portions of an aisle accessway having a length not exceeding 6 feet (1829 mm) and used by a total of not more than four persons.

1029.13.1.2 Seating at table aisle accessway length.

The length of travel along the aisle accessway shall not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) from any seat to the point where a person has a choice of two or more paths of egress travel to separate exits.

1029.13.2 Clear width of aisle accessways serving seating in rows.

Where seating rows have 14 or fewer seats, the minimum clear aisle accessway width shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) measured as the clear horizontal distance from the back of the row ahead and the nearest projection of the row behind. Where chairs have automatic or self-rising seats, the measurement shall be made with seats in the raised position. Where any chair in the row does not have an automatic or self-rising seat, the measurements shall be made with the seat in the down position. For seats with folding tablet arms, row spacing shall be determined with the tablet arm in the used position.

Exception: For seats with folding tablet arms, row spacing is permitted to be determined with the tablet arm in the stored position where the tablet arm when raised manually to vertical position in one motion automatically returns to the stored position by force of gravity.

1029.13.2.1 Dual access.

For rows of seating served by aisles or doorways at both ends, there shall be not more than 100 seats per row. The minimum clear width of 12 inches (305 mm) between rows shall be increased by 0.3 inch (7.6 mm) for every additional seat beyond 14 seats where seats have backrests or beyond 21 where seats are without backrests. The minimum clear width is not required to exceed 22 inches (559 mm).

Exception: For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating, the row length limits for a 12-inch-wide (305 mm) aisle accessway, beyond which the aisle accessway minimum clear width shall be increased, are in Table 1029.13.2.1.

TABLE 1029.13.2.1

SMOKE-PROTECTED OR OPEN-AIR ASSEMBLY AISLE ACCESSWAYS

TOTAL NUMBER OF SEATS IN THE SMOKE-
PROTECTED OR OPEN-AIR ASSEMBLY
SEATING	MAXIMUM NUMBER OF SEATS PER ROW PERMITTED TO
HAVE A MINIMUM 12-INCH CLEAR WIDTH AISLE ACCESSWAY

Aisle or doorway at both ends of row	Aisle or doorway at one end of row only
Seats with backrests	Seats without backrests	Seats with backrests	Seats without backrests
Fewer than 4,000	14	21	7	10
4,000 to 6,999	15	22	7	10
7,000 to 9,999	16	23	8	11
10,000 to 12,999	17	24	8	11
13,000 to 15,999	18	25	9	12
16,000 to 18,999	19	26	9	12
19,000 to 21,999	20	27	10	13
22,000 and greater	21	28	11	14

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1029.13.2.2 Single access.

For rows of seating served by an aisle or doorway at only one end of the row, the minimum clear width of 12 inches (305 mm) between rows shall be increased by 0.6 inch (15.2 mm) for every additional seat beyond seven seats where seats have backrests or beyond 10 where seats are without backrests. The minimum clear width is not required to exceed 22 inches (559 mm).

Exception: For smoke-protected or open-air assembly seating, the row length limits for a 12-inch-wide (305 mm) aisle accessway, beyond which the aisle accessway minimum clear width shall be increased, are in Table 1029.13.2.1.

1029.14 Assembly aisle walking surfaces.

Ramped aisles shall comply with Sections 1029.14.1 through 1029.14.1.3. Stepped aisles shall comply with Sections 1029.14.2 through 1029.14.2.4.

1029.14.1 Ramped aisles.

Aisles that are sloped more than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) shall be considered a ramped aisle. Ramped aisles that serve as part of an accessible route in accordance with Sections 1009 and 1108.2 shall have a maximum slope of one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope). The slope of other ramped aisles shall not exceed one unit vertical in 8 units horizontal (12.5-percent slope).

1029.14.1.1 Cross slope.

The slope measured perpendicular to the direction of travel of a ramped aisle shall not be steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

1029.14.1.2 Landings.

Ramped aisles shall have landings in accordance with Sections 1012.6 through 1012.6.5. Landings for ramped aisles shall be permitted to overlap required aisles or cross aisles.

1029.14.1.3 Edge protection.

Ramped aisles shall have edge protection in accordance with Sections 1012.10 and 1012.10.1.

Exception: In assembly spaces with fixed seating, edge protection is not required on the sides of ramped aisles where the ramped aisles provide access to the adjacent seating and aisle accessways.

1029.14.2 Stepped aisles.

Aisles with a slope exceeding one unit vertical in eight units horizontal (12.5-percent slope) shall consist of a series of risers and treads that extends across the full width of aisles and complies with Sections 1029.14.2.1 through 1029.14.2.4.

1029.14.2.1 Treads.

Tread depths shall be not less than 11 inches (279 mm) and shall have dimensional uniformity.

Exception: The tolerance between adjacent treads shall not exceed 3/16 inch (4.8 mm).

1029.14.2.2 Risers.

Where the gradient of stepped aisles is to be the same as the gradient of adjoining seating areas, the riser height shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nor more than 8 inches (203 mm) and shall be uniform within each flight.

Exceptions:

1.	Riser height nonuniformity shall be limited to the extent necessitated by changes in the gradient of the adjoining seating area to maintain adequate sightlines. Where nonuniformities exceed 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) between adjacent risers, the exact location of such nonuniformities shall be indicated with a distinctive marking stripe on each tread at the nosing or leading edge adjacent to the nonuniform risers. Such stripe shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm), and not more than 2 inches (51 mm), wide. The edge marking stripe shall be distinctively different from the contrasting marking stripe.

2.	Riser heights not exceeding 9 inches (229 mm) shall be permitted where they are necessitated by the slope of the adjacent seating areas to maintain sightlines.

1029.14.2.2.1 Construction tolerances.

The tolerance between adjacent risers on a stepped aisle that were designed to be equal height shall not exceed 3/16 inch (4.8 mm). Where the stepped aisle is designed in accordance with Exception 1 of Section 1029.14.2.2, the stepped aisle shall be constructed so that each riser of unequal height, determined in the direction of descent, is not more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in height different from adjacent risers where stepped aisle treads are less than 22 inches (560 mm) in depth and 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) in height different from adjacent risers where stepped aisle treads are 22 inches (560 mm) or greater in depth.

1029.14.2.3 Tread contrasting marking stripe.

A contrasting marking stripe shall be provided on each tread at the nosing or leading edge such that the location of each tread is readily apparent when viewed in descent. Such stripe shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm), and not more than 2 inches (51 mm), wide.

Exception: The contrasting marking stripe is permitted to be omitted where tread surfaces are such that the location of each tread is readily apparent when viewed in descent.

1029.14.2.4 Nosing and profile.

Nosing and riser profile shall comply with Sections 1011.5.5 through 1011.5.5.3.

1029.15 Seat stability.

In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes, the seats shall be securely fastened to the floor.

Exceptions:

1.	In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes or portions thereof without ramped or tiered floors for seating and with 200 or fewer seats, the seats shall not be required to be fastened to the floor.

2.	In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes or portions thereof with seating at tables and without ramped or tiered floors for seating, the seats shall not be required to be fastened to the floor.

3.	In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes or portions thereof without ramped or tiered floors for seating and with greater than 200 seats, the seats shall be fastened together in groups of not less than three or the seats shall be securely fastened to the floor.

4.	In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes where flexibility of the seating arrangement is an integral part of the design and function of the space and seating is on tiered levels, not more than 200 seats shall not be required to be fastened to the floor. Plans showing seating, tiers and aisles shall be submitted for approval.

5.	Groups of seats within a building, room or space used for assembly purposes separated from other seating by railings, guards, partial height walls or similar barriers with level floors and having not more than 14 seats per group shall not be required to be fastened to the floor.

6.	Seats intended for musicians or other performers and separated by railings, guards, partial height walls or similar barriers shall not be required to be fastened to the floor.

1029.16 Handrails.

Ramped aisles having a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 15 units horizontal (6.7-percent slope) and stepped aisles shall be provided with handrails in compliance with Section 1014 located either at one or both sides of the aisle or within the aisle width. Where the stepped aisles have seating on one side and the aisle width is 74 inches (1880 mm) or greater, two handrails are required. Where two handrails are required, one of the handrails shall be within 30 inches (762 mm) horizontally of side of the tiered floor adjacent to the stepped the aisle.

Exceptions:

1.	Handrails are not required for ramped aisles with seating on both sides.

2.	Handrails are not required where, at the side of the aisle, there is a guard with a top surface that complies with the graspability requirements of handrails in accordance with Section 1014.3.

3.	Handrail extensions are not required at the top and bottom of stepped aisles and ramped aisles to permit crossovers within the aisles.

1029.16.1 Discontinuous mid-aisle handrails.

Where there is seating on both sides of the aisle, the mid-aisle handrails shall be discontinuous. Where a stepped aisle is required to have two handrails, the mid-aisle handrails shall be discontinuous. The gaps or breaks at intervals shall not exceed five rows to facilitate access to seating and to permit crossing from one side of the aisle to the other. These gaps or breaks shall have a clear width of not less than 22 inches (559 mm) and not greater than 36 inches (914 mm), measured horizontally, and the mid-aisle handrail shall have rounded terminations or bends.

1029.16.2 Handrail termination.

Handrails located on the side of stepped aisles shall return to a wall, guard or the walking surface or shall be continuous to the handrail of an adjacent stepped aisle flight.

1029.16.3 Mid-aisle termination.

Mid-aisle handrails shall not extend beyond the lowest riser and shall terminate within 18 inches (381 mm), measured horizontally, from the lowest riser. Handrail extensions are not required.

Exception: Mid-aisle handrails shall be permitted to extend beyond the lowest riser where the handrail extensions do not obstruct the width of the cross aisle.

1029.16.4 Rails.

Where mid-aisle handrails are provided in stepped aisles, there shall be an additional rail located approximately 12 inches (305 mm) below the handrail. The rail shall be adequate in strength and attachment in accordance with Section 1607.9.1.2.

1029.17 Assembly guards.

Guards adjacent to seating in a building, room or space used for assembly purposes shall be provided where required by Section 1015 and shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1015 except where provided in accordance with Sections 1029.17.1 through 1029.17.4. At bleachers, grandstands and folding and telescopic seating, guards must be provided where required by ICC 300 and Section 1029.17.1.

1029.17.1 Perimeter guards.

Perimeter guards shall be provided where the footboards or walking surface of seating facilities are more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below. Where the seatboards are adjacent to the perimeter, guard height shall be 42 inches (1067 mm) high minimum, measured from the seatboard. Where the seats are self-rising, guard height shall be 42 inches (1067 mm) high minimum, measured from the floor surface. Where there is an aisle between the seating and the perimeter, the guard height shall be measured in accordance with Section 1015.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Guards that impact sightlines shall be permitted to comply with Section 1029.17.3.

2.	Bleachers, grandstands and folding and telescopic seating shall not be required to have perimeter guards where the seating is located adjacent to a wall and the space between the wall and the seating is less than 4 inches (102 mm).

1029.17.2 Cross aisles.

Cross aisles located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards in accordance with Section 1015.

Where an elevation change of 30 inches (762 mm) or less occurs between a cross aisle and the adjacent floor or grade below, guards not less than 26 inches (660 mm) above the aisle floor shall be provided.

Exception: Where the backs of seats on the front of the cross aisle project 24 inches (610 mm) or more above the adjacent floor of the aisle, a guard need not be provided.

1029.17.3 Sightline-constrained guard heights.

Unless subject to the requirements of Section 1029.17.4, a fascia or railing system in accordance with the guard requirements of Section 1015 and having a minimum height of 26 inches (660 mm) shall be provided where the floor or foot-board elevation is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below and the fascia or railing would otherwise interfere with the sightlines of immediately adjacent seating.

1029.17.4 Guards at the end of aisles.

A fascia or railing system complying with the guard requirements of Section 1015 shall be provided for the full width of the aisle where the foot of the aisle is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below. The fascia or railing shall be a minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) high and shall provide a minimum 42 inches (1067 mm) measured diagonally between the top of the rail and the nosing of the nearest tread.

SECTION 1030
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE
1030.1 General.

In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R-2 occupancies in accordance with Tables 1006.3.3(1) and 1006.3.3(2) and Group R-3 occupancies. Basements and sleeping rooms below the fourth story above grade plane shall have at least one exterior emergency escape and rescue opening in accordance with this section. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, emergency escape and rescue openings shall be required in each sleeping room, but shall not be required in adjoining areas of the basement. Such openings shall open directly into a public way or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.

Exceptions:

1.	Basements with a ceiling height of less than 80 inches (2032 mm) shall not be required to have emergency escape and rescue openings.

2.	Emergency escape and rescue openings are not required from basements or sleeping rooms that have an exit door or exit access door that opens directly into a public way or to a yard, court or exterior exit balcony that opens to a public way.

3.	Basements without habitable spaces and having not more than 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in floor area shall not be required to have emergency escape and rescue openings.

1030.2 Minimum size.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5.7 square feet (0.53 m2).

Exception: The minimum net clear opening for grade-floor emergency escape and rescue openings shall be 5 square feet (0.46 m2).

1030.2.1 Minimum dimensions.

The minimum net clear opening height dimension shall be 24 inches (610 mm). The minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be 20 inches (508 mm). The net clear opening dimensions shall be the result of normal operation of the opening.

1030.3 Maximum height from floor.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) measured from the floor.

1030.3.1 Emergency escape and rescue doors.

Where a door is provided as the required emergency escape and rescue opening, it shall be a swinging door or a sliding door.

1030.4 Operational constraints.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Window-opening control devices and fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be permitted for use on windows serving as a required emergency escape and rescue opening. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with Section 1030.2 and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the emergency escape and rescue opening. Where such bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are installed in existing buildings, smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11 regardless of the valuation of the alteration.

1030.5 Window wells.

An emergency escape and rescue opening with a finished sill height below the adjacent ground level shall be provided with a window well in accordance with Sections 1030.5.1 and 1030.5.2.

1030.5.1 Minimum size.

The minimum horizontal area of the window well shall be 9 square feet (0.84 m2), with a minimum dimension of 36 inches (914 mm). The area of the window well shall allow the emergency escape and rescue opening to be fully opened.

1030.5.2 Ladders or steps.

Window wells with a vertical depth of more than 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be equipped with an approved permanently affixed ladder or steps. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of at least 12 inches (305 mm), shall project at least 3 inches (76 mm) from the wall and shall be spaced not more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center (o.c.) vertically for the full height of the window well. The ladder or steps shall not encroach into the required dimensions of the window well by more than 6 inches (152 mm). The ladder or steps shall not be obstructed by the emergency escape and rescue opening. Ladders or steps required by this section are exempt from the stairway requirements of Section 1011.

1030.5.2.1 Steps.

Steps shall have an inside width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), shall have treads greater than 5 inches (127 mm) in depth and a riser height not greater than 18 inches (457 mm) for the full height of the area well.

SECTION 1031
EGRESS COURTS
1031.1 General.

Egress courts serving as an exit discharge component in the means of egress system shall comply with the requirements in this section.

1031.2 Width or capacity.

The required capacity of egress courts shall be determined as specified in Section 1005.1, but the minimum width shall be not less than 44 inches (1118 mm), except as specified herein. Egress courts serving Group R-3 and U occupancies shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width. The required capacity and width of egress courts shall be unobstructed to a height of 7 feet (2134 mm). The width of the egress court shall not be less than the required capacity.

Exception: Encroachments complying with Section 1005.7.

1031.3 Construction and openings.

Where an egress court serving a building or portion thereof is less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in width, the egress court walls shall have not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) above the floor of the egress court. Openings within such walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

Exceptions:

1.	Egress courts serving an occupant load of less than 10.

2.	Egress courts serving Group R-3.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-11]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 11
ACCESSIBILITY
SECTION 1101
GENERAL
1101.1 Scope.

This chapter governs the design and construction of buildings for accessibility.

1101.1.1 Criteria.

Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

1101.2 Design.

Reserved.

SECTION 1102
DEFINITIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1103
SCOPING REQUIREMENTS

RESERVED

SECTION 1104
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

RESERVED

SECTION 1105
ACCESSIBLE ENTRANCES

RESERVED

SECTION 1106
PARKING AND PASSENGER LOADING FACILITIES

RESERVED

SECTION 1107
DWELLING UNITS AND SLEEPING UNITS

RESERVED

SECTION 1108
SPECIAL OCCUPANCIES

RESERVED

SECTION 1109
OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES

RESERVED

SECTION 1110
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES

RESERVED

SECTION 1111
SIGNAGE

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-12]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 12
INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT
SECTION 1201
GENERAL
1201.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern ventilation, temperature control, lighting, yards and courts, sound transmission, room dimensions, surrounding materials and rodentproofing associated with the interior spaces of buildings.

SECTION 1202
DEFINITIONS
1202.1 General.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

SUNROOM.

THERMAL ISOLATION.

SECTION 1203
VENTILATION
1203.1 General.

Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

Where the air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is less than 3 air changes per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section R402.4.1.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation—Residential Provisions, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Ambulatory care facilities and Group I-2 occupancies shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 407 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

1203.2 Ventilation required.

Enclosed attics and enclosed rafter spaces formed where ceilings are applied directly to the underside of roof framing members shall have cross ventilation for each separate space by ventilation openings protected against the entrance of rain and snow. Blocking, bridging, and insulation shall be arranged so as not to interfere with the movement of air. An airspace of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) shall be provided between the insulation and the roof sheathing. The net free ventilating area shall be not less than 1/150 of the area of the space ventilated. Ventilators shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Exception: The net free cross-ventilation area shall be permitted to be reduced to 1/300 provided at least 40 percent and not more than 50 percent of the required venting area is provided by ventilators located in the upper portion of the attic or rafter space. Upper ventilators shall be located not more than 3 feet (914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space, measured vertically, with the balance of the ventilation provided by eave or cornice vents. Where the location of wall or roof framing members conflicts with the installation of upper ventilators, installation more than 3 feet (914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space shall be permitted.

1203.2.1 Openings into attic.

Exterior openings into the attic space of any building intended for human occupancy shall be protected to prevent the entry of birds, squirrels, rodents, snakes and other similar creatures. Openings for ventilation having a least dimension of not less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) and not more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) shall be permitted. Openings for ventilation having a least dimension larger than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) shall be provided with corrosion-resistant wire cloth screening, hardware cloth, perforated vinyl or similar material with openings having a least dimension of not less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) and not more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Where combustion air is obtained from an attic area, it shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

1203.3 Unvented attic and unvented enclosed rafter assemblies.

Unvented attics and unvented enclosed roof framing assemblies created by ceilings applied directly to the underside of the roof framing members/rafters and the structural roof sheathing at the top of the roof framing members shall be permitted where all the following conditions are met:

1.	The unvented attic space is completely within the building thermal envelope.

2.	No interior Class I vapor retarders are installed on the ceiling side (attic floor) of the unvented attic assembly or on the ceiling side of the unvented enclosed roof framing assembly.

3.	Where wood shingles or shakes are used, a minimum 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) vented airspace separates the shingles or shakes and the roofing underlayment above the structural sheathing.

4.	In Climate Zones 5, 6, 7 and 8, any air-impermeable insulation shall be a Class II vapor retarder or shall have a Class II vapor retarder coating or covering in direct contact with the underside of the insulation.

5.	Insulation shall comply with either Item 5.1 or 5.2, and additionally Item 5.3.

5.1.	Item 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3 or 5.1.4 shall be met, depending on the air permeability of the insulation directly under the structural roof sheathing.

5.1.1.	Where only air-impermeable insulation is provided, it shall be applied in direct contact with the underside of the structural roof sheathing.

5.1.2.	Where air-permeable insulation is provided inside the building thermal envelope, it shall be installed in accordance with Item 5.1. In addition to the air-permeable insulation installed directly below the structural sheathing, rigid board or sheet insulation shall be installed directly above the structural roof sheathing in accordance with the R values in Table 1203.3 for condensation control.

5.1.3.	Where both air-impermeable and air-permeable insulation are provided, the air-impermeable insulation shall be applied in direct contact with the underside of the structural roof sheathing in accordance with Item 5.1.1 and shall be in accordance with the R values in Table 1203.3 for condensation control. The air-permeable insulation shall be installed directly under the air-impermeable insulation.

5.1.4.	Alternatively, sufficient rigid board or sheet insulation shall be installed directly above the structural roof sheathing to maintain the monthly average temperature of the underside of the structural roof sheathing above 45°F (7°C). For calculation purposes, an interior air temperature of 68°F (20°C) is assumed and the exterior air temperature is assumed to be the monthly average outside air temperature of the three coldest months.

5.2.	In Climate Zones 1, 2 and 3 air-permeable insulation installed in unvented attics shall meet the following requirements:

5.2.1.	A vapor diffusion port shall be installed not more than 12 inches (305 mm) from the highest point of the roof, measured vertically from the highest point of the roof to the lower edge of the port.

5.2.2.	The port area shall be greater than or equal to 1/600 of the ceiling area. Where there are multiple ports in the attic, the sum of the port areas shall be greater than or equal to the area requirement.

5.2.3.	The vapor permeable membrane in the vapor diffusion port shall have a vapor permeance rating of greater than or equal to 20 perms when tested in accordance with Procedure A of ASTM E96.

5.2.4.	The vapor diffusion port shall serve as an air barrier between the attic and the exterior of the building.

5.2.5.	The vapor diffusion port shall protect the attic against the entrance of rain and snow.

5.2.6.	Framing members and blocking shall not block the free flow of water vapor to the port. Not less than a 2-inch (50 mm) space shall be provided between any blocking and the roof sheathing. Air-permeable insulation shall be permitted within that space.

5.2.7.	The roof slope shall be greater than or equal to 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (3:12).

5.2.8.	Where only air-permeable insulation is used, it shall be installed directly below the structural roof sheathing, on top the attic floor, or on top of the ceiling.

5.2.9.	Where only air-permeable insulation is used and is installed directly below the structural roof sheathing, air shall be supplied at a flow rate greater than or equal to 50 cubic feet per minute (23.6 L/s) per 1,000 square feet (93 m2) of ceiling.

5.3.	The air shall be supplied from ductwork providing supply air to the occupiable space when the conditioning system is operating. Alternatively, the air shall be supplied by a supply fan when the conditioning system is operating. Where preformed insulation board is used as the airimpermeable insulation layer, it shall be sealed at the perimeter of each individual sheet interior surface to form a continuous layer.

Exceptions:

1.	Section 1203.3 does not apply to special use structures or enclosures such as swimming pool enclosures, data processing centers, hospitals or art galleries.

2.	Section 1203.3 does not apply to enclosures in Climate Zones 5 through 8 that are humidified beyond 35 percent during the three coldest months.

TABLE 1203.3

INSULATION FOR CONDENSATION CONTROL

CLIMATE ZONE	MINIMUM R-VALUE OF AIR-IMPERMEABLE INSULATIONa
2B and 3B tile roof only	0 (none required)
1, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, 3C	R-5
4C	R-10
4A, 4B	R-15
5	R-20
6	R-25
7	R-30
8	R-35

a.	Contributes to, but does not supersede, thermal resistance requirements for attic and roof assemblies in Section C402.2.1 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

1203.4 Under-floor ventilation.

The space between the bottom of the floor joists and the earth under any building except spaces occupied by basements or cellars shall be provided with ventilation openings through foundation walls or exterior walls. Such openings shall be placed so as to provide cross ventilation of the under-floor space.

1203.4.1 Openings for under-floor ventilation.

The net area of ventilation openings shall be not less than 1 square foot for each 150 square feet (0.67 m2 for each 100 m2) of crawl-space area. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials, provided that the least dimension of the covering shall be not greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm):

1.	Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch (1.8 mm) thick.

2.	Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch (1.2 mm) thick.

3.	Cast-iron grilles or gratings.

4.	Extruded load-bearing vents.

5.	Hardware cloth of 0.035-inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier.

6.	Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension not greater than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

1203.4.2 Exceptions.

The following are exceptions to Sections 1203.4 and 1203.4.1:

1.	Where warranted by climatic conditions, ventilation openings to the outdoors are not required if ventilation openings to the interior are provided.

2.	The total area of ventilation openings is permitted to be reduced to 1/1,500 of the under-floor area where the ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor retarder material and the required openings are placed so as to provide cross ventilation of the space. The installation of operable louvers shall not be prohibited.

3.	Ventilation openings are not required where continuously operated mechanical ventilation is provided at a rate of 1.0 cubic foot per minute (cfm) for each 50 square feet (1.02 L/s for each 10 m2) of crawlspace floor area and the ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor retarder.

4.	Ventilation openings are not required where the ground surface is covered with a Class I vapor retarder, the perimeter walls are insulated and the space is conditioned in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

5.	For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, the openings for under-floor ventilation shall be deemed as meeting the flood opening requirements of ASCE 24 provided that the ventilation openings are designed and installed in accordance with ASCE 24.

1203.5 Natural ventilation.

Natural ventilation of an occupied space shall be through windows, doors, louvers or other openings to the outdoors. The operating mechanism for such openings shall be provided with ready access so that the openings are readily controllable by the building occupants.

1203.5.1 Ventilation area required.

The openable area of the openings to the outdoors shall be not less than 4 percent of the floor area being ventilated.

1203.5.1.1 Adjoining spaces.

Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the opening to the adjoining room shall be unobstructed and shall have an area of not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.3 m2). The openable area of the openings to the outdoors shall be based on the total floor area being ventilated.

Exception: Exterior openings required for ventilation shall be permitted to open into a sunroom with thermal isolation or a patio cover provided that the openable area between the sunroom addition or patio cover and the interior room shall have an area of not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 20 square feet (1.86 m2). The openable area of the openings to the outdoors shall be based on the total floor area being ventilated.

1203.5.1.2 Openings below grade.

Where openings below grade provide required natural ventilation, the outside horizontal clear space measured perpendicular to the opening shall be one and one-half times the depth of the opening. The depth of the opening shall be measured from the average adjoining ground level to the bottom of the opening.

1203.5.2 Contaminants exhausted.

Contaminant sources in naturally ventilated spaces shall be removed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

1203.5.2.1 Bathrooms.

Rooms containing bathtubs, showers, spas and similar bathing fixtures shall be mechanically ventilated in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

1203.5.3 Openings on yards or courts.

Where natural ventilation is to be provided by openings onto yards or courts, such yards or courts shall comply with Section 1206.

1203.6 Other ventilation and exhaust systems.

Ventilation and exhaust systems for occupancies and operations involving flammable or combustible hazards or other contaminant sources as covered in the Florida Building Code, Mechanical or the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be provided as required by both codes.

SECTION 1204
TEMPERATURE CONTROL
1204.1 Equipment and systems.

Interior spaces intended for human occupancy shall be provided with active or passive space heating systems capable of maintaining an indoor temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor on the design heating day.

Exceptions: Space heating systems are not required for:

1.	Interior spaces where the primary purpose of the space is not associated with human comfort.

2.	Group F, H, S or U occupancies.

SECTION 1205
LIGHTING
1205.1 General.

Every space intended for human occupancy shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings in accordance with Section 1205.2 or shall be provided with artificial light in accordance with Section 1205.3. Exterior glazed openings shall open directly onto a public way or onto a yard or court in accordance with Section 1206.

1205.2 Natural light.

The minimum net glazed area shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the room served.

1205.2.1 Adjoining spaces.

For the purpose of natural lighting, any room is permitted to be considered as a portion of an adjoining room where one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet (2.32 m2), whichever is greater.

Exception: Openings required for natural light shall be permitted to open into a sunroom with thermal isolation or a patio cover where the common wall provides a glazed area of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 20 square feet (1.86 m2), whichever is greater.

1205.2.2 Exterior openings.

Exterior openings required by Section 1205.2 for natural light shall open directly onto a public way, yard or court, as set forth in Section 1206.

Exceptions:

1.	Required exterior openings are permitted to open into a roofed porch where the porch meets all of the following criteria:

1.1.	Abuts a public way, yard or court.

1.2.	Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

1.3.	Has a longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed.

2.	Skylights are not required to open directly onto a public way, yard or court.

1205.3 Artificial light.

Artificial light shall be provided that is adequate to provide an average illumination of 10 footcandles (107 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor level.

1205.4 Stairway illumination.

Stairways within dwelling units and exterior stairways serving a dwelling unit shall have an illumination level on tread runs of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux). Stairways in other occupancies shall be governed by Chapter 10.

1205.4.1 Controls.

The control for activation of the required stairway lighting shall be in accordance with NFPA 70.

1205.5 Emergency egress lighting.

The means of egress shall be illuminated in accordance with Section 1008.1.

SECTION 1206
YARDS OR COURTS
1206.1 General.

This section shall apply to yards and courts adjacent to exterior openings that provide natural light or ventilation. Such yards and courts shall be on the same lot as the building.

1206.2 Yards.

Yards shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width for buildings two stories or less above grade plane. For buildings more than two stories above grade plane, the minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of 1 foot (305 mm) for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories above grade plane, the required width of the yard shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories above grade plane.

1206.3 Courts.

Courts shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall be not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) in width. Courts shall be not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in length unless bounded on one end by a public way or yard. For buildings more than two stories above grade plane, the court shall be increased 1 foot (305 mm) in width and 2 feet (610 mm) in length for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories above grade plane, the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories above grade plane.

1206.3.1 Court access.

Access shall be provided to the bottom of courts for cleaning purposes.

1206.3.2 Air intake.

Courts more than two stories in height shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than 10 square feet (0.93 m2) in area and leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public way.

1206.3.3 Court drainage.

The bottom of every court shall be properly graded and drained to a public sewer or other approved disposal system complying with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

SECTION 1207
SOUND TRANSMISSION
1207.1 Scope.

This section shall apply to common interior walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies between adjacent dwelling units and sleeping units or between dwelling units and sleeping units and adjacent public areas such as halls, corridors, stairways or service areas.

1207.2 Airborne sound.

Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units and sleeping units from each other or from public or service areas shall have a sound transmission class of not less than 50 where tested in accordance with ASTM E90, or have a Normalized Noise Isolation Class (NNIC) rating of not less than 45 if field tested in accordance with ASTM E336 for airborne noise. Alternatively, the sound transmission class of walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies shall be established by engineering analysis based on a comparison of walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies having sound transmission class ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E90. Penetrations or openings in construction assemblies for piping; electrical devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating, ventilating or exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required ratings. This requirement shall not apply to entrance doors; however, such doors shall be tight fitting to the frame and sill.

1207.2.1 Masonry.

The sound transmission class of concrete masonry and clay masonry assemblies shall be calculated in accordance with TMS 0302 or determined through testing in accordance with ASTM E90.

1207.3 Structure-borne sound.

Floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units and sleeping units or between a dwelling unit or sleeping unit and a public or service area within the structure shall have an impact insulation class rating of not less than 50 where tested in accordance with ASTM E492, or have an Apparent Impact Insulation Class (AIIC) of not less than 45 if field tested in accordance with ASTM E1007. Alternatively, the impact insulation class of floor/ceiling assemblies shall be established by engineering analysis based on a comparison of floor/ceiling assemblies having impact insulation class ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E492.

SECTION 1208
INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS
1208.1 Minimum room widths.

Habitable spaces, other than a kitchen, shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.

1208.2 Minimum ceiling heights.

Occupiable spaces, habitable spaces and corridors shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm) above the finished floor. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens, storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the finished floor.

Exceptions:

1.	In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center shall be permitted to project not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.

2.	If any room in a building has a sloped ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in one-half the area thereof. Any portion of the room measuring less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the finished floor to the ceiling shall not be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof.

3.	The height of mezzanines and spaces below mezzanines shall be in accordance with Section 505.1.

4.	Corridors contained within a dwelling unit or sleeping unit in a Group R occupancy shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the finished floor.

1208.2.1 Furred ceiling.

Any room with a furred ceiling shall be required to have the minimum ceiling height in two-thirds of the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

1208.3 Room area.

Every dwelling unit shall have no fewer than one room that shall have not less than 120 square feet (11.2 m2) of net floor area. Other habitable rooms shall have a net floor area of not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2).

Exception: Kitchens are not required to be of a minimum floor area.

1208.4 Efficiency dwelling units.

Efficiency dwelling units shall conform to the requirements of the code except as modified herein:

1.	The unit shall have a living room of not less than 190 square feet (17.7 m2) of floor area.

2.	The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.

3.	The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.

4.	The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

SECTION 1209
ACCESS TO UNOCCUPIED SPACES
1209.1 Crawl spaces.

Crawl spaces shall be provided with not fewer than one access opening that shall be not less than 18 inches by 24 inches (457 mm by 610 mm).

1209.2 Attic spaces.

An opening not less than 20 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm) shall be provided to any attic area having a clear height of over 30 inches (762 mm). Clear headroom of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) shall be provided in the attic space at or above the access opening.

1209.3 Mechanical appliances.

Access to mechanical appliances installed in under-floor areas, in attic spaces and on roofs or elevated structures shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

SECTION 1210
TOILET AND BATHROOM REQUIREMENTS
[P] 1210.1 Required fixtures.

The number and type of plumbing fixtures provided in any occupancy shall comply with Chapter 29.

1210.2 Finish materials.

Walls, floors and partitions in toilet and bathrooms shall comply with Sections 1210.2.1 through 1210.2.4.

1210.2.1 Floors and wall bases.

In other than dwelling units, toilet, bathing and shower room floor finish materials shall have a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface. The intersections of such floors with walls shall have a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent vertical base that extends upward onto the walls not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

1210.2.2 Walls and partitions.

Walls and partitions within 2 feet (610 mm) of service sinks, urinals and water closets shall have a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface, to a height of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor, and except for structural elements, the materials used in such walls shall be of a type that is not adversely affected by moisture.

Exception: This section does not apply to the following buildings and spaces:

1.	Dwelling units and sleeping units.

2.	Toilet rooms that are not accessible to the public and that have not more than one water closet.

Accessories such as grab bars, towel bars, paper dispensers and soap dishes, provided on or within walls, shall be installed and sealed to protect structural elements from moisture.

1210.2.3 Showers.

Shower compartments and walls above bathtubs with installed shower heads shall be finished with a smooth, nonabsorbent surface to a height not less than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the drain inlet.

1210.2.4 Waterproof joints.

Built-in tubs with showers shall have waterproof joints between the tub and adjacent wall.

[P] 1210.3 Privacy.

Public restrooms shall be visually screened from outside entry or exit doorways to ensure user privacy within the restroom. This provision shall also apply where mirrors would compromise personal privacy. Privacy at water closets and urinals shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1210.3.1 and 1210.3.2.

Exception: Visual screening shall not be required for single-occupant toilet rooms with a lockable door.

[P] 1210.3.1 Water closet compartment.

Each water closet utilized by the public or employees shall occupy a separate compartment with walls or partitions and a door enclosing the fixtures to ensure privacy.

Exceptions:

1.	Water closet compartments shall not be required in a single-occupant toilet room with a lockable door.

2.	Toilet rooms located in child day care facilities and containing two or more water closets shall be permitted to have one water closet without an enclosing compartment.

3.	This provision is not applicable to toilet areas located within Group I-3 occupancy housing areas.

[P] 1210.3.2 Urinal partitions.

Each urinal utilized by the public or employees shall occupy a separate area with walls or partitions to provide privacy. The walls or partitions shall begin at a height not more than 12 inches (305 mm) from and extend not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the finished floor surface. The walls or partitions shall extend from the wall surface at each side of the urinal not less than 18 inches (457 mm) or to a point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the outermost front lip of the urinal measured from the finished backwall surface, whichever is greater.

Exceptions:

1.	Urinal partitions shall not be required in a single-occupant or family or assisted-use toilet room with a lockable door.

2.	Toilet rooms located in child day care facilities and containing two or more urinals shall be permitted to have one urinal without partitions.

SECTION 1211
ENHANCED CLASSROOM ACOUSTICS
1211.1 General.

Enhanced classroom acoustics, where required in this section, shall comply with Section 808 of ICC A117.1.

1211.2 Where required.

In Group E occupancies, enhanced classroom acoustics shall be provided in all classrooms with a volume of 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3) or less.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-13]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 13
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
SECTION 1301
GENERAL
[E] 1301.1 Scope.

This chapter governs the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

[E] 1301.1.1 Criteria.

Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-14]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 14
EXTERIOR WALLS
SECTION 1401
GENERAL
1401.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall establish the minimum requirements for exterior walls; exterior wall coverings; exterior wall openings; exterior windows and doors; exterior soffits and fascias; architectural trim; balconies and similar projections; and bay and oriel windows.

SECTION 1402
DEFINITIONS
1402.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ADHERED MASONRY VENEER.

ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER.

BACKING.

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS).

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE.

EXTERIOR WALL.

EXTERIOR WALL COVERING.

EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE.

FENESTRATION.

FIBER-CEMENT SIDING.

HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE EXTERIORGRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL).

HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE EXTERIORGRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL) SYSTEM.

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM).

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM) SYSTEM.

POLYPROPYLENE SIDING.

PORCELAIN TILE.

VENEER.

VINYL SIDING.

WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER.

SECTION 1403
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1403.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall apply to exterior walls, wall coverings and components thereof.

1403.2 Weather protection.

Exterior walls shall provide the building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior wall envelope shall include flashing, as described in Section 1405.4. The exterior wall envelope shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to prevent the accumulation of water within the wall assembly by providing a water-resistive barrier behind the exterior veneer, as described in Section 1404.2, and a means for draining water that enters the assembly to the exterior. Protection against condensation in the exterior wall assembly shall be provided in accordance with Section 1405.3.

Exceptions:

1.	A weather-resistant exterior wall envelope shall not be required over concrete or masonry walls designed in accordance with Chapters 19 and 21, respectively.

2.	Compliance with the requirements for a means of drainage, and the requirements of Sections 1404.2 and 1405.4, shall not be required for an exterior wall envelope that has been demonstrated through testing to resist wind-driven rain, including joints, penetrations and intersections with dissimilar materials, in accordance with ASTM E331 under the following conditions:

2.1.	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall include at least one opening, one control joint, one wall/eave interface and one wall sill. Tested openings and penetrations shall be representative of the intended end-use configuration.

2.2.	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall be at least 4 feet by 8 feet (1219 mm by 2438 mm) in size.

2.3.	Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be tested at a minimum differential pressure of 6.24 pounds per square foot (psf) (0.297 kN/m2).

2.4.	Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be subjected to a minimum test exposure duration of 2 hours.

The exterior wall envelope design shall be considered to resist wind-driven rain where the results of testing indicate that water did not penetrate control joints in the exterior wall envelope, joints at the perimeter of openings or intersections of terminations with dissimilar materials.

3.	Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) complying with Section 1408.4.1.

[BS] 1403.3 Wind resistance.

Exterior walls, exterior wall coverings, exterior soffits and fascias, components and claddings and the associated openings, shall be designed and constructed to resist safely the superimposed loads required byChapter 16.

1403.4 Fire resistance.

Exterior walls shall be fire-resistance rated as required by other sections of this code with opening protection as required by Chapter 7.

1403.5 Water-resistive barriers.

Exterior walls on buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction that are greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in height above grade plane and contain a combustible water-resistive barrier shall be tested in accordance with and comply with the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285. Combustibility shall be determined in accordance with Section 703.2.2. For the purposes of this section, fenestration products, flashing of fenestration products and water-resistive-barrier flashing and accessories at other locations, including through wall flashings, shall not be considered part of the water-resistive barrier.

Exceptions:

1.	Walls in which the water-resistive barrier is the only combustible component and the exterior wall has a wall covering of brick, concrete, stone, terra cotta, stucco or steel with minimum thicknesses in accordance with Table 1405.2.

2.	Walls in which the water-resistive barrier is the only combustible component and the water-resistive barrier complies with the following:

2.1.	A peak heat release rate of less than 150 kW/m2, a total heat release of less than 20 MJ/m2 and an effective heat of combustion of less than 18 MJ/kg when tested on specimens at the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM E1354, in the horizontal orientation and at an incident radiant heat flux of 50 kW/m2.

2.2.	A flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, with test specimen preparation and mounting in accordance with ASTM E2404.

[BS] 1403.6 Flood resistance.

For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, exterior walls extending below the elevation required by Section 1612 shall be constructed with flood-damage-resistant materials.

[BS] 1403.7 Flood resistance for coastal high-hazard areas and coastal A zones.

For buildings in coastal high-hazard areas and coastal A zones as established in Section 1612.3, electrical, mechanical and plumbing system components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through exterior walls that are designed to break away under flood loads.

1403.8

In order to provide for inspection for termite infestation, clearance between exterior wall coverings and final earth grade on the exterior of a building shall not be less than 6 inches (152 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Paint or decorative cementitious finish less than 5/8 inch (17.1 mm) thick adhered directly to the masonry foundation sidewall.

2.	Access or vehicle ramps which rise to the interior finish floor elevation for the width of such ramps only.

3.	A 4-inch (102 mm) inspection space above patio and garage slabs and entry areas.

4.	If the patio has been soil treated for termites, the finish elevation may match the building interior finish floor elevations on masonry construction only.

5.	Masonry veneers constructed in accordance with Section 2114.2.

SECTION 1404
MATERIALS
1404.1 General.

Materials used for the construction of exterior walls shall comply with the provisions of this section. Materials not prescribed herein shall be permitted, provided that any such alternative has been approved.

1404.2 Water-resistive barrier.

Not fewer than one layer of water-resistive barrier material shall be attached to the studs or sheathing, with flashing as described in Section 1405.4, in such a manner as to provide a continuous water-resistive barrier behind the exterior wall veneer. Water-resistive barriers shall comply with one of the following:

1.	No. 15 felt complying with ASTM D226, Type I.

2.	ASTM E2556, Type I or II.

3.	ASTM E331 in accordance with Section 1402.2.

4.	Other approved materials installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.

[BS] 1404.3 Wood.

Exterior walls of wood construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 23.

[BS] 1404.3.1 Basic hardboard.

Basic hardboard shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A135.4.

[BS] 1404.3.2 Hardboard siding.

Hardboard siding shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A135.6 and, where used structurally, shall be so identified by the label of an approved agency.

[BS] 1404.4 Masonry.

Exterior walls of masonry construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section and Chapter 21. Masonry units, mortar and metal accessories used in anchored and adhered veneer shall meet the physical requirements of Chapter 21. The backing of anchored and adhered veneer shall be of concrete, masonry, steel framing or wood framing. Continuous insulation meeting the applicable requirements of this code shall be permitted between the backing and the masonry veneer.

[BS] 1404.5 Metal.

Exterior walls constructed of cold-formed steel, structural steel or aluminum shall be designed in accordance with Chapters 22 and 20, respectively.

[BS] 1404.5.1 Aluminum siding.

Aluminum siding shall conform to the requirements of AAMA 1402. AAMA 1402 shall be modified to read as follows:

3.0 SIDING SPECIFICATIONS.

3.2.1.1 Static Pressure Test.

3.2.1.1.1 All siding products shall be capable ofresisting the design pressures specified for walls for components and cladding loads in accordance with Section 1609.1.1. To verify that the soffit will perform under these conditions, it shall be tested in the maximum unsupported length for which the manufacturer seeks conformance when tested in accordance with Test Method #1, “Standard for Testing of Aluminum Siding/Fastener and Windload Resistance.”

  The static test pressure shall be as required to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of Section 1609.1.

3.2.1.1.2 For applications where the effective design pressure as specified in Section 1609.1.1 is greater than 1040 Pa (21.7 psf) [e.g., wind zone areas greater than 36 m/s (80 mph) or elevations above 33 feet (10 m) the product shall be tested in accordance with Test Method #1 under a static test pressure determined by the formula:

Where:

PT = Static Test Pressure [Pa (psf)]

DPp = Design Pressure [Pa (psf)]

1.5 = Safety Factor

Appendix A1.0 Windload Criteria is deleted in its entirety.

[BS] 1404.5.2 Cold-rolled copper.

Copper shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B370.

[BS] 1404.5.3 Lead-coated copper.

Lead-coated copper shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B101.

[BS] 1404.6 Concrete.

Exterior walls of concrete construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 19.

[BS] 1404.7 Glass-unit masonry.

Exterior walls of glass-unit masonry shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 21.

1404.8 Plastics.

Plastic panel, apron or spandrel walls as defined in this code shall not be limited in thickness, provided that such plastics and their assemblies conform to the requirements of Chapter 26 and are constructed of approved weather-resistant materials of adequate strength to resist the wind loads for cladding specified in Chapter 16.

1404.9 Vinyl siding.

Vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D3679 by an approved quality control agency.

1404.10 Fiber-cement siding.

Fiber-cement siding shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A (or ISO 8336, Category A), and shall be so identified on labeling listing an approved quality control agency.

1404.11 Exterior insulation and finish systems.

Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) and exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) with drainage shall comply with Section 1408.

1404.12 Polypropylene siding.

Polypropylene siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D7254 by an approved quality control agency. In addition, polypropylene siding shall conform to the fire separation distance requirements of Section 1404.12.1 or 1404.12.2. Polypropylene siding shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 1405.18 and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Polypropylene siding shall be secured to the building so as to provide weather protection for the exterior walls of the building.

1404.12.1 Flame spread index.

The certification of the flame spread index shall be accompanied by a test report stating that all portions of the test specimen ahead of the flame front remained in position during the test in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

1404.12.2 Fire separation distance.

The fire separation distance between a building with polypropylene siding and the adjacent building shall be not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).

1404.13 Foam plastic insulation.

Foam plastic insulation used in exterior wall covering assemblies shall comply with Chapter 26.

1404.14

Manufactured soffit materials and systems shall be labeled in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709.10 of this code.

1404.15 Attachments through insulation.

Exterior wall coverings attached to the building structure through foam plastic insulating sheathing shall comply with the attachment requirements of Section 2603.11, 2603.12 or 2603.13.

SECTION 1405
INSTALLATION OF WALL COVERINGS
1405.1 General.

Exterior wall coverings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and TAS 202 and 203 in the HVHZ.

1405.1.1 Soffits and fascias.

Soffits and fascias installed at roof overhangs shall comply with Section 1410.

1405.2 Weather protection.

Exterior walls shall provide weather protection for the building. The materials of the minimum nominal thickness specified in Table 1405.2 shall be acceptable as approved weather coverings. Where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is greater than 115 mph, claddings listed in Table 1405.2 must be of adequate strength to resist the wind loads for cladding specified in Chapter 16.

TABLE 1405.2

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF WEATHER COVERINGS

COVERING TYPE	MINIMUM THICKNESS
(inches)

Adhered masonry veneer	0.25
Aluminum siding	0.019
Anchored masonry veneer	2.625
Asbestos-cement boards	0.125
Asbestos shingles	0.156
Cold-rolled copperd	0.0216 nominal
Copper shinglesd	0.0162 nominal
Exterior plywood (with sheathing)	0.313
Exterior plywood
(without sheathing)
	See Section 2304.6 (HVHZ,
see Section 2322)

Fiber cement lap siding	0.25c
Fiber cement panel siding	0.25c
Fiberboard siding	0.5
Glass-fiber reinforced concrete panels	0.375
Hardboard sidingc	0.25
High-yield copperd	0.0162 nominal
Lead-coated copperd	0.0216 nominal
Lead-coated high-yield copper	0.0162 nominal
Marble slabs	1
Particleboard (with sheathing)	See Section 2304.6 (HVHZ,
see Section 2315.1.11)

Particleboard (without sheathing)	See Section 2304.6 (HVHZ,
see Section 2315.1.11)

Porcelain tile	0.125 nominal
Steel (approved corrosion resistant)	0.0149
Stone (cast artificial, anchored)	1.5
Stone (natural)	2
Structural glass	0.344
Stucco or exterior cement plaster	
 Three-coat work over:	
  Metal plaster base	0.875b
  Unit masonry	0.625b
 Cast-in-place or precast concrete	0.625b
Two-coat work over:	
Unit masonry	0.5b
Cast-in-place or precast concrete	0.375b
Terra cotta (anchored)	1
Terra cotta (adhered)	0.25
Vinyl siding	0.035
Wood shingles	0.375
Wood siding (without sheathing)a	0.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 ounce = 28.35 g, 1 square foot = 0.093 m2.

a.	Wood siding of thicknesses less than 0.5 inch shall be placed over sheathing that conforms to Section 2304.6. (HVHZ, see Section 2322)

b.	Exclusive of texture.

c.	As measured at the bottom of decorative grooves.

d.	16 ounces per square foot for cold-rolled copper and lead-coated copper, 12 ounces per square foot for copper shingles, high-yield copper and lead-coated high-yield copper.

1405.3 Vapor retarders.

Vapor retarder materials shall be classified in accordance with Table 1405.3(1). A vapor retarder shall be provided on the interior side of frame walls in accordance with Tables 1405.3(2) and 1405.3(3), or an approved design using accepted engineering practice for hygrothermal analysis. The appropriate climate zone shall be selected in accordance with Chapter 3 [CE] of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation—Commercial Provisions.

TABLE 1405.3(1)

VAPOR RETARDER MATERIALS AND CLASSES

VAPOR
RETARDER
CLASS	ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS
I	Sheet polyethylene, nonperforated aluminum foil, orother approved materials with a perm rating of lessthan or equal to 0.1
II	Kraft-faced fiberglass batts, vapor retarder paint, orother approved materials applied in accordance withthe manufacturer’s instructions for a perm ratinggreater than 0.1 and less than or equal to 1.0
III	Latex paint, enamel paint, or other approved materials applied in accordance with the manufacturer’sinstructions for a perm rating of greater than 1.0 andless than or equal to 10

TABLE 1405.3(2)

VAPOR RETARDER OPTIONS

CLIMATE
ZONE
	VAPOR RETARDER CLASS
I	II	IIIa
1, 2	Not permitted	Not Permitted	Permitted
3, 4 (except Marine 4)	Not permitted	Permitted	Permitted
Marine 4, 5, 6, 7, 8	Permitted	Permitted	See Table 1405.3(3)

a.	Only Class III vapor retarders shall be used on the interior side of frame walls where foam plastic insulating sheathing with a perm rating of less than 1 is applied in accordance with Table 1405.3(3) on the exterior side of the frame wall.

TABLE 1405.3(3)

CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS

ZONE	CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS PERMITTED FOR:a
Marine
4
	Vented cladding over wood structural panels
Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R2.5 over 2 × 4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R3.75 over 2 × 6 wall

5	
Vented cladding over wood structural panels
Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R5 over 2 × 4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R7.5 over 2 × 6 wall

6	
Vented cladding over fiberboard
Vented cladding over gypsum
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R7.5 over 2 × 4 wall
Insulated sheathing with R-value ≥ R11.25 over 2 × 6 wall

7	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ R10 over 2 × 4 wall
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ R15 over 2 × 6 wall

8	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ R12.5 over 2 × 4 wall
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ R20 over 2 × 6 wall

a.	The requirements in this table apply only to insulation used to control moisture in order to permit the use of Class III vapor retarders. The insulation materials used to satisfy this option also contribute to but do not supersede the thermal envelope requirements of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

b.	Vented cladding shall include vinyl lap siding, polypropylene, or horizontal aluminum siding, brick veneer with clear airspace as specified in this code, and other approved vented claddings.

1405.3.1 Class I and II vapor retarders.

Where a Class II vapor retarder is used in combination with foam plastic insulating sheathing installed as continuous insulation on the exterior side of frame walls, the continuous insulation shall comply with Table 1405.3.1 and the Class II vapor retarder shall have a vapor permeance greater than 1 perm when measured by ASTM E96 water method (Procedure B). Use of a Class I interior vapor retarder in frame walls with a Class I vapor retarder on the exterior side shall require an approved design.

Exceptions:

1.	Basement walls.

2.	Below-grade portion of any wall.

3.	Construction where accumulation, condensation or freezing of moisture will not damage the materials.

4.	Class I and II vapor retarders with vapor permeance greater than 1 perm when measured by ASTM E96 water method (Procedure B) shall be allowed on the interior side of any frame wall in all climate zones.

TABLE 1405.3.1

CONTINUOUS INSULATION WITH CLASS II VAPOR RETARDER

CLIMATE
ZONE
	PERMITTED CONDITIONSa
3	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 2
4, 5, and 6	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 3 over 2 × 4 wall
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 5 over 2 × 6 wall

7	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 5 over 2 × 4 wall
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 6 wall

8	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 4 wall
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 10 over 2 × 6 wall

a.	In addition to the vapor retarder, spray foam with a maximum permeance of 1.5 perms at the installed thickness applied to the interior cavity side of wood structural panels, fiberboard, insulating sheathing or gypsum is deemed to comply with the continuous insulation requirement only for the moisture control purposes of this table where the spray foam R-value plus any continuous insulation R-value provided equals or exceeds the specified continuous insulation R-value.

1405.3.2 Class III vapor retarders.

Only Class III vapor retarders shall be used on the interior side of frame walls where foam plastic insulating sheathing with a perm rating of less than 1 is applied in accordance with Table 1404.3(3) on the exterior side of the frame wall.

1405.3.2.1 Spray foam plastic insulation for moisture control with Class III vapor retarders.

For purposes of compliance with Table 1405.3(3), spray foam with a maximum permeance of 1.5 perms at the installed thickness applied to the interior cavity side of wood structural panels, fiberboard, insulating sheathing or gypsum shall be deemed to meet the continuous insulation R-value requirement where the spray foam R-value meets or exceeds the specified continuous insulation R-value.

1405.3.2.1.1 Hybrid insulation for moisture control with Class III vapor retarders.

For the purposes of compliance with Table 1405.3(3), the combined R-values of spray foam plastic insulation and continuous insulation shall be permitted to be counted toward the continuous R-value requirement.

1405.3.3 Minimum airspaces and vented openings for vented cladding.

For the purposes of this section, vented cladding shall include the following minimum airspaces:

1.	Vinyl lap or horizontal aluminum siding applied over a weather-resistive barrier as specified in this chapter.

2.	Brick veneer with an airspace as specified in this code.

3.	Other approved vented claddings.

1405.4 Flashing.

Flashing shall be installed in such a manner so as to prevent moisture from entering the wall or to redirect that moisture to the exterior. Flashing shall be installed at the perimeters of exterior door and window assemblies, penetrations and terminations of exterior wall assemblies, exterior wall intersections with roofs, chimneys, porches, decks, balconies and similar projections and at built-in gutters and similar locations where moisture could enter the wall. Flashing with projecting flanges shall be installed on both sides and the ends of copings, under sills and continuously above projecting trim. When self-adhered membranes are used as flashing in wall assemblies, those self-adhered flashings shall comply with AAMA-711. When fluid applied membranes are used as flashing for exterior wall openings, those fluid applied membrane flashings shall comply with AAMA 714. Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be applied at the following locations:

1.	Exterior window and door openings. Flashing at exterior window and door openings shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall finish or to the water-resistive barrier for subsequent drainage. Flashing at exterior window and door openings shall be installed in accordance with one or more of the following:

1.1.	The fenestration manufacturer’s installation and flashing instructions, or for applications not addressed in the fenestration manufacturer’s instructions, in accordance with the flashing or water-resistive barrier manufacturer’s instructions. Where flashing instructions or details are not provided, pan flashing shall be installed at the sill of exterior window and door openings. Pan flashing shall be sealed or sloped in such a manner as to direct water to the surface of the exterior wall finish or to the water-resistive barrier for subsequent drainage. Openings using pan flashing shall also incorporate flashing or protection at the head and sides.

1.2.	In accordance with the flashing design or method of a registered design professional.

1.3.	In accordance with other approved methods.

1.4.	In accordance with FMA/AAMA 100, FMA/AAMA 200, FMA/WDMA 250, FMA/AAMA/WDMA 300, FMA/AAMA/WDMA 400, or FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710.

2.	At the intersection of chimneys or other masonry construction with frame or stucco walls, with projecting lips on both sides under stucco copings.

3.	Under and at the ends of masonry, wood or metal copings and sills.

4.	Continuously above all projecting wood trim.

5.	Where exterior porches, decks or stairs attach to a wall or floor assembly of wood-frame construction.

6.	At wall and roof intersections.

7.	At built-in gutters.

1405.4.1 Exterior wall pockets.

In exterior walls of buildings or structures, wall pockets or crevices in which moisture can accumulate shall be avoided or protected with caps or drips, or other approved means shall be provided to prevent water damage.

1405.4.2 Masonry.

Flashing and weep holes in anchored veneer shall be located in the first course of masonry above finished ground level above the foundation wall or slab, and other points of support, including structural floors, shelf angles and lintels where anchored veneers are designed in accordance with Section 1405.6.

1405.5 Wood veneers.

Wood veneers on exterior walls of buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, 0.438-inch (11.1 mm) exterior hardboard siding or 0.375-inch (9.5 mm) exterior-type wood structural panels or particleboard and shall conform to the following:

1.	The veneer shall not exceed 40 feet (12 190 mm) in height above grade. Where fire-retardant-treated wood is used, the height shall not exceed 60 feet (18 290 mm) in height above grade.

2.	The veneer is attached to or furred from a noncombustible backing that is fire-resistance rated as required by other provisions of this code.

3.	Where open or spaced wood veneers (without concealed spaces) are used, they shall not project more than 24 inches (610 mm) from the building wall.

[BS] 1405.6 Anchored masonry veneer.

Anchored masonry veneer shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1405.6, 1405.7, 1405.8 and 1405.9 and Sections 12.1 and 12.2 of TMS 402.

[BS] 1405.6.1 Tolerances.

Anchored masonry veneers in accordance with Chapter 14 are not required to meet the tolerances in Article 3.3 F1 of TMS 602.

[BS] 1405.7 Stone veneer.

Anchored stone veneer units not exceeding 10 inches (254 mm) in thickness shall be anchored directly to masonry, concrete or to stud construction by one of the following methods:

1.	With concrete or masonry backing, anchor ties shall be not less than 0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant wire, or approved equal, formed beyond the base of the backing. The legs of the loops shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in length bent at right angles and laid in the mortar joint, and spaced so that the eyes or loops are 12 inches (305 mm) maximum on center in both directions. There shall be provided not less than a 0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant wire tie, or approved equal, threaded through the exposed loops for every 2 square feet (0.2 m2) of stone veneer. This tie shall be a loop having legs not less than 15 inches (381 mm) in length bent so that the tie will lie in the stone veneer mortar joint. The last 2 inches (51 mm) of each wire leg shall have a right-angle bend. One-inch (25 mm) minimum thickness of cement grout shall be placed between the backing and the stone veneer.

2.	With wood stud backing, a 2-inch by 2-inch (51 by 51 mm) 0.0625-inch (1.59 mm) zinc-coated or nonmetallic coated wire mesh with two layers of water-resistive barrier in accordance with Section 1404.2 shall be applied directly to wood studs spaced not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center. On studs, the mesh shall be attached with 2-inch-long (51 mm) corrosion-resistant steel wire furring nails at 4 inches (102 mm) on center providing a minimum 1.125-inch (29 mm) penetration into each stud and with 8d annular threaded nails at 8 inches (203 mm) on center. into top and bottom plates or with equivalent wire ties. There shall be not less than a 0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) zinc-coated or nonmetallic coated wire, or approved equal, attached to the stud with not smaller than an 8d (0.120 in. diameter) annular threaded nail for every 2 square feet (0.2 m2) of stone veneer. This tie shall be a loop having legs not less than 15 inches (381 mm) in length, so bent that the tie will lie in the stone veneer mortar joint. The last 2 inches (51 mm) of each wire leg shall have a right-angle bend. One-inch (25 mm) minimum thickness of cement grout shall be placed between the backing and the stone veneer.

3.	With cold-formed steel stud backing, a 2-inch by 2-inch (51 by 51 mm) 0.0625-inch (1.59 mm) zinc-coated or nonmetallic coated wire mesh with two layers of water-resistive barrier in accordance with Section 1404.2 shall be applied directly to steel studs spaced a not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center. The mesh shall be attached with corrosion-resistant #8 self-drilling, tapping screws at 4 inches (102 mm) on center, and at 8 inches (203 mm) on center into top and bottom tracks or with equivalent wire ties. Screws shall extend through the steel connection not fewer than three exposed threads. There shall be not less than a 0.1055-inch (2.68 mm) corrosion-resistant wire, or approved equal, attached to the stud with not smaller than a #8 self-drilling, tapping screw extending through the steel framing not fewer than three exposed threads for every 2 square feet (0.2 m2) of stone veneer. This tie shall be a loop having legs not less than 15 inches (381 mm) in length, so bent that the tie will lie in the stone veneer mortar joint. The last 2 inches (51 mm) of each wire leg shall have a right-angle bend. One-inch (25 mm) minimum thickness of cement grout shall be placed between the backing and the stone veneer. The cold-formed steel framing members shall have a minimum bare steel thickness of 0.0428 inches (1.087 mm).

[BS] 1405.8 Slab-type veneer.

Anchored slab-type veneer units not exceeding 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness shall be anchored directly to masonry, concrete or light-frame construction. For veneer units of marble, travertine, granite or other stone units of slab form, ties of corrosion-resistant dowels in drilled holes shall be located in the middle third of the edge of the units, spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) apart around the periphery of each unit with not less than four ties per veneer unit. Units shall not exceed 20 square feet (1.9 m2) in area. If the dowels are not tight fitting, the holes shall be drilled not more than 0.063 inch (1.6 mm) larger in diameter than the dowel, with the hole countersunk to a diameter and depth equal to twice the diameter of the dowel in order to provide a tight-fitting key of cement mortar at the dowel locations where the mortar in the joint has set. Veneer ties shall be corrosion-resistant metal capable of resisting, in tension or compression, a force equal to two times the weight of the attached veneer. If made of sheet metal, veneer ties shall be not smaller in area than 0.0336 by 1 inch (0.853 by 25 mm) or, if made of wire, not smaller in diameter than 0.1483-inch (3.76 mm) wire.

[BS] 1405.9 Terra cotta.

Anchored terra cotta or ceramic units not less than 15/8 inches (41 mm) thick shall be anchored directly to masonry, concrete or stud construction. Tied terra cotta or ceramic veneer units shall be not less than 15/8 inches (41 mm) thick with projecting dovetail webs on the back surface spaced approximately 8 inches (203 mm) on center. The facing shall be tied to the backing wall with corrosion-resistant metal anchors of not less than No. 8 gage wire installed at the top of each piece in horizontal bed joints not less than 12 inches (305 mm) nor more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center; these anchors shall be secured to 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) corrosion-resistant pencil rods that pass through the vertical aligned loop anchors in the backing wall. The veneer ties shall have sufficient strength to support the full weight of the veneer in tension. The facing shall be set with not less than a 2-inch (51 mm) space from the backing wall and the space shall be filled solidly with Portland cement grout and pea gravel. Immediately prior to setting, the backing wall and the facing shall be drenched with clean water and shall be distinctly damp when the grout is poured.

[BS] 1405.10 Adhered masonry veneer.

Adhered masonry veneer shall comply with the applicable requirements in this section and Sections 12.1 and 12.3 of TMS 402.

[BS] 1405.10.1 Exterior adhered masonry veneer.

Exterior adhered masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with Section 1405.10 and the manufacturer’s instructions.

[BS] 1405.10.1.1 Water-resistive barriers.

Water-resistive barriers shall be installed as required in Section 2510.6.

[BS] 1405.10.1.2 Flashing.

Flashing shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 1405.4 and the following.

[BS] 1405.10.1.2.1 Flashing at foundation.

A corrosion-resistant screed or flashing of a minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm) or 26 gage galvanized or plastic with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2 inches (89 mm) shall be installed to extend not less than 1 inch (25 mm) below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with Section 1405.4. The water-resistive barrier shall lap over the exterior of the attachment flange of the screed or flashing.

[BS] 1405.10.1.3 Clearances.

On exterior stud walls, adhered masonry veneer shall be installed not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth, or not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above paved areas, or not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) above exterior walking surfaces that are supported by the same foundation that supports the exterior wall.

[BS] 1405.10.1.4 Adhered masonry veneer installed with lath and mortar.

Exterior adhered masonry veneer installed with lath and mortar shall comply with the following.

[BS] 1405.10.1.4.1 Lathing.

Lathing shall comply with the requirements of Section 2510.

[BS] 1405.10.1.4.2 Scratch coat.

A nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) layer of mortar complying with the material requirements of Sections 2103 and 2512.2 shall be applied, encapsulating the lathing. The surface of this mortar shall be scored horizontally, resulting in a scratch coat.

[BS] 1405.10.1.4.3 Adhering veneer.

The masonry veneer units shall be adhered to the mortar scratch coat with a nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) setting bed of mortar complying with Sections 2103 and 2512.2 applied to create a full setting bed for the back of the masonry veneer units. The masonry veneer units shall be worked into the setting bed resulting in a nominal 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) setting bed after the masonry veneer units are applied.

[BS] 1405.10.1.5 Adhered masonry veneer applied directly to masonry and concrete.

Adhered masonry veneer applied directly to masonry or concrete shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 1405.10 and with the requirements of Section 1405.10.1.4 or 2510.7.

[BS] 1405.10.1.6 Cold weather construction.

Cold weather construction of adhered masonry veneer shall comply with the requirements of Sections 2104 and 2512.4.

[BS] 1405.10.1.7 Hot weather construction.

Hot weather construction of adhered masonry veneer shall comply with the requirements of Section 2104.

[BS] 1405.10.2 Exterior adhered masonry veneers—porcelain tile.

Adhered units weighing more than 3.5 pounds per square foot (0.17 kN/m2) shall not exceed 48 inches (1219 mm) in any face dimension nor more than 9 square feet (0.8 m2) in total face area and shall not weigh more than 6 pounds per square foot (0.29 kN/m2). Adhered units weighing less than or equal to 3.5 pounds per square foot (0.17 kN/m2) shall not exceed 72 inches (1829 mm) in any face dimension nor more than 17.5 square feet (1.6 m2) in total face area. Porcelain tile shall be adhered to an approved backing system.

[BS] 1405.10.3 Interior adhered masonry veneers.

Interior adhered masonry veneers shall have a maximum weight of 20 psf (0.958 kg/m2) and shall be installed in accordance with Section 1405.10. Where the interior adhered masonry veneer is supported by wood construction, the supporting members shall be designed to limit deflection to 1/600 of the span of the supporting members.

[BS] 1405.11 Metal veneers.

Veneers of metal shall be fabricated from approved corrosion-resistant materials or shall be protected front and back with porcelain enamel, or otherwise be treated to render the metal resistant to corrosion. Such veneers shall be not less than 0.0149-inch (0.378 mm) nominal thickness sheet steel mounted on wood or metal furring strips or approved sheathing on light-frame construction.

[BS] 1405.11.1 Attachment.

Exterior metal veneer shall be securely attached to the supporting masonry or framing members with corrosion-resistant fastenings, metal ties or by other approved devices or methods. The spacing of the fastenings or ties shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) either vertically or horizontally, but where units exceed 4 square feet (0.4 m2) in area there shall be not less than four attachments per unit. The metal attachments shall have a cross-sectional area not less than provided by W 1.7 wire. Such attachments and their supports shall be designed and constructed to resist the wind loads as specified in Section 1609 for components and cladding.

1405.11.2 Weather protection.

Metal supports for exterior metal veneer shall be protected by painting, galvanizing or by other equivalent coating or treatment. Wood studs, furring strips or other wood supports for exterior metal veneer shall be approved pressure-treated wood or protected as required in Section 1403.2. Joints and edges exposed to the weather shall be caulked with approved durable waterproofing material or by other approved means to prevent penetration of moisture.

1405.11.3 Backup.

Masonry backup shall not be required for metal veneer unless required by the fire-resistance requirements of this code.

1405.11.4 Grounding.

Grounding of metal veneers on buildings shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 27 of this code.

[BS] 1405.12 Glass veneer.

The area of a single section of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall not exceed 10 square feet (0.93 m2) where that section is not more than 15 feet (4572 mm) above the level of the sidewalk or grade level directly below, and shall not exceed 6 square feet (0.56 m2) where it is more than 15 feet (4572 mm) above that level.

[BS] 1405.12.1 Length and height.

The length or height of any section of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall not exceed 48 inches (1219 mm).

[BS] 1405.12.2 Thickness.

The thickness of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall be not less than 0.344 inch (8.7 mm).

[BS] 1405.12.3 Application.

Thin exterior structural glass veneer shall be set only after backing is thoroughly dry and after application of an approved bond coat uniformly over the entire surface of the backing so as to effectively seal the surface. Glass shall be set in place with an approved mastic cement in sufficient quantity so that at least 50 percent of the area of each glass unit is directly bonded to the backing by mastic not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick and not more than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) thick. The bond coat and mastic shall be evaluated for compatibility and shall bond firmly together.

[BS] 1405.12.4 Installation at sidewalk level.

Where glass extends to a sidewalk surface, each section shall rest in an approved metal molding, and be set at least 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) above the highest point of the sidewalk. The space between the molding and the sidewalk shall be thoroughly caulked and made water tight.

[BS] 1405.12.4.1 Installation above sidewalk level.

Where thin exterior structural glass veneer is installed above the level of the top of a bulkhead facing, or at a level more than 36 inches (914 mm) above the sidewalk level, the mastic cement binding shall be supplemented with approved nonferrous metal shelf angles located in the horizontal joints in every course. Such shelf angles shall be not less than 0.0478-inch (1.2 mm) thick and not less than 2 inches (51 mm) long and shall be spaced at approved intervals, with not less than two angles for each glass unit. Shelf angles shall be secured to the wall or backing with expansion bolts, toggle bolts or by other approved methods.

[BS] 1405.12.5 Joints.

Unless otherwise specifically approved by the building official, abutting edges of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall be ground square. Mitered joints shall not be used except where specifically approved for wide angles. Joints shall be uniformly buttered with an approved jointing compound and horizontal joints shall be held to not less than 0.063 inch (1.6 mm) by an approved nonrigid substance or device. Where thin exterior structural glass veneer abuts nonresilient material at sides or top, expansion joints not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) wide shall be provided.

[BS] 1405.12.6 Mechanical fastenings.

Thin exterior structural glass veneer installed above the level of the heads of show windows and veneer installed more than 12 feet (3658 mm) above sidewalk level shall, in addition to the mastic cement and shelf angles, be held in place by the use of fastenings at each vertical or horizontal edge, or at the four corners of each glass unit. Fastenings shall be secured to the wall or backing with expansion bolts, toggle bolts or by other methods. Fastenings shall be so designed as to hold the glass veneer in a vertical plane independent of the mastic cement. Shelf angles providing both support and fastenings shall be permitted.

[BS] 1405.12.7 Flashing.

Exposed edges of thin exterior structural glass veneer shall be flashed with overlapping corrosion-resistant metal flashing and caulked with a waterproof compound in a manner to effectively prevent the entrance of moisture between the glass veneer and the backing.

1405.13 Exterior windows and doors.

Windows and doors installed in exterior walls shall conform to the testing and performance requirements of Section 1709.5.

1405.13.1 Installation.

Windows and doors shall be installed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s instructions. Fastener size and spacing shall be provided in such instructions and shall be calculated based on maximum loads and spacing used in the tests.

[BS] 1405.14 Vinyl siding.

Vinyl siding conforming to the requirements of this section and complying with ASTM D3679 shall be permitted on exterior walls where the design wind pressure determined in accordance with Section 1609 does not exceed 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kN/m2). Where the design wind pressure exceeds 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kN/m2), tests or calculations indicating compliance with Chapter 16 shall be submitted. Vinyl siding shall be secured to the building so as to provide weather protection for the exterior walls of the building.

[BS] 1405.14.1 Application.

The siding shall be applied over sheathing or materials listed in Section 2304.6. Siding shall be applied over a water-resistive barrier in accordance with requirements in Section 1404. Siding and accessories shall be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer's instructions.

1405.14.1.1 Fasteners and fastener penetration for wood construction.

Unless otherwise specified in the approved manufacturer's instructions, nails used to fasten the siding and accessories shall be corrosion resistant and have a minimum 0.313-inch (7.9 mm) head diameter and 1/8-inch (3.18 mm) shank diameter. The penetration into nailable substrate shall be not less than at least 11/4 inches (32 mm).

1405.14.1.2 Fasteners and fastener penetration for cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

For coldformed steel light-frame construction, corrosion resistant fasteners shall be used. Screw fasteners shall penetrate through the steel with a minimum of three exposed threads. Other fasteners shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents and manufacturer's instructions.

1405.14.1.3 Fastener spacing.

Unless specified otherwise by the approved manufacturer's instructions, fasteners shall be installed in the middle third of the slots of the nail hem and maximum spacing between fasteners shall be 16 inches (406 mm) for horizontal siding and 12 inches (305 mm) for vertical siding.

1405.14.2 Accessories.

Accessories must be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s instructions.

1405.14.2.1 Starter strip.

Horizontal siding shall be installed with a starter strip at the initial course at any location.

1405.14.2.2 Utility trim.

Under windows, and at top of walls, utility trim shall be used with snap locks.

[BS] 1405.15 Cement plaster.

Cement plaster applied to exterior walls shall conform to the requirements specified in Chapter 25.

[BS] 1405.16 Fiber-cement siding.

Fiber-cement siding complying with Section 1404.10 shall be permitted on exterior walls of Type I, II, III, IV and V construction for wind pressure resistance or wind speed exposures as indicated by the manufacturer’s listing and label and approved installation instructions. Where specified, the siding shall be installed over sheathing or materials listed in Section 2304.6 and shall be installed to conform to the water-resistive barrier requirements in Section 1403. Siding and accessories shall be installed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s instructions. Unless otherwise specified in the approved manufacturer’s instructions, nails used to fasten the siding to wood studs shall be corrosion-resistant round head smooth shank and shall be long enough to penetrate the studs at least 1 inch (25 mm). For cold-formed steel light-frame construction, corrosion-resistant fasteners shall be used. Screw fasteners shall penetrate the cold-formed steel framing at least three exposed full threads. Other fasteners shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents and manufacturer’s instructions.

[BS] 1405.16.1 Panel siding.

Fiber-cement panels shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II (or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2). Panels shall be installed with the long dimension either parallel or perpendicular to framing. Vertical and horizontal joints shall occur over framing members and shall be protected with caulking, with battens or flashing, or be vertical or horizontal shiplap or otherwise designed to comply with Section 1403.2. Panel siding shall be installed with fasteners in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s instructions.

[BS] 1405.16.2 Lap siding.

Fiber-cement lap siding having a maximum width of 12 inches (305 mm) shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II (or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2). Lap siding shall be lapped a minimum of 11/4 inches (32 mm) and lap siding not having tongue-and-groove end joints shall have the ends protected with caulking, covered with an H-section joint cover, located over a strip of flashing or shall be otherwise designed to comply with Section 1403.2. Lap siding courses shall be installed with the fastener heads exposed or concealed in accordance with the approved manufacturer's instructions.

[BS] 1405.17 Fastening.

Weather boarding and wall coverings shall be securely fastened with aluminum, copper, zinc, zinc-coated or other approved corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with the nailing schedule in Table 2304.10.1, the HVHZ shall comply with Table 2324.1 or the approved manufacturer’s instructions. Shingles and other weather coverings shall be attached with appropriate standard-shingle nails to furring strips securely nailed to studs, or with approved mechanically bonding nails, except where sheathing is of wood not less than 1-inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or of wood structural panels as specified in Section 2301.2 (the HVHZ shall comply with Section 2322).

[BS] 1405.18 Polypropylene siding.

Polypropylene siding conforming to the requirements of this section and complying with Section 1404.12 shall be limited to exterior walls of Type VB construction located in areas where the wind speed specified in Chapter 16 does not exceed 100 miles per hour (45 m/s) and the building height is less than or equal to 40 feet (12 192 mm) in Exposure C. Where construction is located in areas where the basic wind speed exceeds 100 miles per hour (45 m/s), or building heights are in excess of 40 feet (12 192 mm), tests or calculations indicating compliance with Chapter 16 shall be submitted. Polypropylene siding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Polypropylene siding shall be secured to the building so as to provide weather protection for the exterior walls of the building.

[BS] 1405.18.1 Installation.

Unless otherwise specified in the approved manufacturer’s instructions, polypropylene siding and accessories shall be installed over and attached to wood structural panel sheathing with a minimum thickness of 7/16 inch (11.1 mm), or another nailable substrate.

[BS] 1405.18.1.1 Accessories.

Accessories shall be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s instructions.

[BS] 1405.18.1.1.1 Starter strip.

Horizontal siding shall be installed with a starter strip at the initial course at any location.

[BS] 1405.18.1.1.2 Under windows and top of walls.

Where nail hem is removed such as under windows and at top of walls, nail slot punch or predrilled holes shall be constructed.

[BS] 1405.18.2 Fastener requirements.

Unless otherwise specified in the approved manufacturer’s instructions, nails shall be corrosion resistant, with a minimum 0.120-inch (3 mm) shank and minimum 0.313-inch (8 mm) head diameter. Nails shall be a minimum of 11/4 inches (32 mm) long or as necessary to penetrate sheathing or nailable substrate not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Where the nail fully penetrates the sheathing or nailable substrate, the end of the fastener shall extend not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) beyond the opposite face of the sheathing or nailable substrate. The spacing of fasteners shall conform to the approved manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION 1406
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS ON THE
EXTERIOR SIDE OF EXTERIOR WALLS
1406.1 General.

Section 1406 shall apply to exterior wall coverings; balconies and similar projections; and bay and oriel windows constructed of combustible materials.

1406.2 Combustible exterior wall coverings.

Combustible exterior wall coverings shall comply with this section.

Exception: Plastics complying with Chapter 26.

1406.2.1 Type I, II, III and IV construction.

On buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction, exterior wall coverings shall be permitted to be constructed of combustible materials, complying with the following limitations:

1.	Combustible exterior wall coverings shall not exceed 10 percent of an exterior wall surface area where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less.

2.	Combustible exterior wall coverings shall be limited to 40 feet (12 192 mm) in height above grade plane.

3.	Combustible exterior wall coverings constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 for exterior installation shall not be limited in wall surface area where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less and shall be permitted up to 60 feet (18 288 mm) in height above grade plane regardless of the fire separation distance.

4.	Wood veneers shall comply with Section 1405.5.

1406.2.1.1 Ignition resistance.

Where permitted by Section 1406.2.1, combustible exterior wall coverings shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 268.

Exceptions:

1.	Wood or wood-based products.

2.	Other combustible materials covered with an exterior weather covering, other than vinyl sidings, included in and complying with the thickness requirements of Table 1405.2.

3.	Aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.019 inch (0.48 mm).

1406.2.1.1.1 Fire separation 5 feet or less.

Where installed on exterior walls having a fire separation distance of 5 feet (1524 mm) or less, combustible exterior wall coverings shall not exhibit sustained flaming as defined in NFPA 268.

1406.2.1.1.2 Fire separation greater than 5 feet.

For fire separation distances greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), any exterior wall covering shall be permitted that has been exposed to a reduced level of incident radiant heat flux in accordance with the NFPA 268 test method without exhibiting sustained flaming. The minimum fire separation distance required for the exterior wall covering shall be determined from Table 1406.2.1.1.2 based on the maximum tolerable level of incident radiant heat flux that does not cause sustained flaming of the exterior wall covering.

TABLE 1406.2.1.1.2

MINIMUM FIRE SEPARATION FOR COMBUSTIBLE EXTERIOR WALL COVERINGS

FIRE
SEPARATION
DISTANCE
(feet)
	TOLERABLE
LEVEL INCIDENT
RADIANT HEAT
ENERGY (kW/m2)
		FIRE
SEPARATION
DISTANCE
(feet)
	TOLERABLE
LEVEL INCIDENT
RADIANT HEAT
ENERGY (kW/m2)

5	12.5		16	5.9
6	11.8		17	5.5
7	11.0		18	5.2
8	10.3		19	4.9
9	9.6		20	4.6
10	8.9		21	4.4
11	8.3		22	4.1
12	7.7		23	3.9
13	7.2		24	3.7
14	6.7		25	3.5
15	6.3			

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 Btu/H2 × °F = 0.0057 kW/m2 × K.

1406.2.2 Location.

Combustible exterior wall coverings located along the top of exterior walls shall be completely backed up by the exterior wall and shall not extend over or above the top of the exterior wall.

1406.2.3 Fireblocking.

Where the combustible exterior wall covering is furred out from the exterior wall and forms a solid surface, the distance between the back of the exterior wall covering and the exterior wall shall not exceed 15/8 inches (41 mm). The concealed space thereby created shall be fireblocked in accordance with Section 718.

Exception: The distance between the back of the exterior wall covering and the exterior wall shall be permitted to exceed 15/8 inches (41 mm) where the concealed space is not required to be fireblocked by Section 718.

1406.3 Balconies and similar projections.

Balconies and similar projections of combustible construction other than fire-retardant-treated wood shall be fire-resistance rated where required by Table 601 for floor construction or shall be of heavy timber construction in accordance with Section 2304.11. The aggregate length of the projections shall not exceed 50 percent of the building’s perimeter on each floor.

Exceptions:

1.	On buildings of Type I and II construction, three stories or less above grade plane, fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted for balconies, porches, decks and exterior stairways not used as required exits.

2.	Untreated wood, and plastic composites that comply with ASTM D7032 and Section 2612, are permitted for pickets and rails or similar guardrail devices that are limited to 42 inches (1067 mm) in height.

3.	Balconies and similar projections on buildings of Type III, IV and V construction shall be permitted to be of Type V construction, and shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where sprinkler protection is extended to these areas.

4.	Where sprinkler protection is extended to the balcony areas, the aggregate length of the balcony on each floor shall not be limited.

1406.4 Bay and oriel windows.

Bay and oriel windows shall conform to the type of construction required for the building to which they are attached.

Exception: Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted on buildings three stories or less above grade plane of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

SECTION 1407
METAL COMPOSITE MATERIALS (MCM)
1407.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, construction and quality of metal composite materials (MCM) for use as exterior wall coverings in addition to other applicable requirements of Chapters 14 and 16.

1407.2 Exterior wall finish.

MCM used as exterior wall finish or as elements of balconies and similar projections and bay and oriel windows to provide cladding or weather resistance shall comply with Sections 1407.4 through 1407.14.

1407.3 Architectural trim and embellishments.

MCM used as architectural trim or embellishments shall comply with Sections 1407.7 through 1407.14.

1407.4 Structural design.

MCM systems shall be designed and constructed to resist wind loads as required by Chapter 16 for components and cladding.

1407.5 Approval.

Results of approved tests or an engineering analysis shall be submitted to the building official to verify compliance with the requirements of Chapter 16 for wind loads.

1407.6 Weather resistance.

MCM systems shall comply with Section 1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and rain in accordance with this section and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1407.7 Durability.

MCM systems shall be constructed of approved materials that maintain the performance characteristics required in Section 1407 for the duration of use.

1407.8 Fire-resistance rating.

Where MCM systems are used on exterior walls required to have a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 705, evidence shall be submitted to the building official that the required fire-resistance rating is maintained.

Exception: MCM systems that are part of an exterior wall envelope not containing foam plastic insulation and are installed on the outer surface of a fire-resistance-rated exterior wall in a manner such that the attachments do not penetrate through the entire exterior wall assembly, shall not be required to comply with this section.

1407.9 Surface-burning characteristics.

Unless otherwise specified, MCM shall have a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in the maximum thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

1407.10 Type I, II, III and IV construction.

Where installed on buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction, MCMs and MCM systems shall comply with Sections 1407.10.1 through 1407.10.3 for installations up to 40 feet (12 192 mm) above grade plane. Where installed on buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction, MCMs and MCM systems shall comply with Sections 1407.10.1 through 1407.10.4 for installations greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm) above grade plane.

1407.10.1 Surface-burning characteristics.

MCM shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

1407.10.2 Thermal barriers.

MCM shall be separated from the interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier consisting of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275.

1407.10.3 Thermal barrier not required.

The thermal barrier specified for MCM in Section 1407.10.2 is not required where:

1.	The MCM system is specifically approved based on tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 286 and with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1, UL 1040 or UL 1715. Such testing shall be performed with the MCM in the maximum thickness intended for use. The MCM system shall include seams, joints and other typical details used in the installation and shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

2.	The MCM is used as elements of balconies and similar projections, architectural trim or embellishments.

1407.10.4 Full-scale tests.

The MCM system shall be tested in accordance with, and comply with, the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285. Such testing shall be performed on the MCM system with the MCM in the maximum thickness intended for use.

1407.11

Reserved.

1407.12 Type V construction.

MCM shall be permitted to be installed on buildings of Type V construction.

1407.13 Foam plastic insulation.

Where MCM systems are included in an exterior wall envelope containing foam plastic insulation, the exterior wall envelope shall also comply with the requirements of Section 2603.

1407.14 Labeling.

MCM shall be labeled in accordance with Section 1703.5.

SECTION 1408
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS
(EIFS)
1408.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, construction and quality of exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) for use as exterior wall coverings in addition to other applicable requirements of Chapters 7, 14, 16, 17 and 26.

1408.2 Performance characteristics.

EIFS shall be constructed such that it meets the performance characteristics required in ASTM E2568.

[BS] 1408.3 Structural design.

The underlying structural framing and substrate shall be designed and constructed to resist loads as required by Chapter 16.

1408.4 Weather resistance.

EIFS shall comply with Section 1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and rain in accordance with this section and the manufacturer’s application instructions.

1408.4.1 EIFS with drainage.

EIFS with drainage shall have an average minimum drainage efficiency of 90 percent when tested in accordance the requirements of ASTM E2273 and is required on framed walls of Type V construction, Group R1, R2, R3 and R4 occupancies.

1408.4.1.1 Water-resistive barrier.

For EIFS with drainage, the water-resistive barrier shall comply with Section 1404.2 or ASTM E2570.

1408.5 Installation.

Installation of the EIFS and EIFS with drainage shall be in accordance with the EIFS manufacturer’s instructions.

1408.6 Special inspections.

Reserved.

SECTION 1409
HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE
EXTERIOR-GRADE COMPACT LAMINATES (HPL)
1409.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, construction and quality of High-Pressure Decorative Exterior-Grade Compact Laminates (HPL) for use as exterior wall coverings in addition to other applicable requirements of Chapters 14 and 16.

1409.2 Exterior wall finish.

HPL used as exterior wall covering or as elements of balconies and similar projections and bay and oriel windows to provide cladding or weather resistance shall comply with Sections 1409.4 and 1409.14.

1409.3 Architectural trim and embellishments.

HPL used as architectural trim or embellishments shall comply with Sections 1409.7 through 1409.14.

[BS] 1409.4 Structural design.

HPL systems shall be designed and constructed to resist wind loads as required by Chapter 16 for components and cladding.

1409.5 Approval.

Results of approved tests or an engineering analysis shall be submitted to the building official to verify compliance with the requirements of Chapter 16 for wind loads.

1409.6 Weather resistance.

HPL systems shall comply with Section 1403 and shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and rain in accordance with this section and the manufacturer’s instructions.

1409.7 Durability.

HPL systems shall be constructed of approved materials that maintain the performance characteristics required in Section 1409 for the duration of use.

1409.8 Fire-resistance rating.

Where HPL systems are used on exterior walls required to have a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 705, evidence shall be submitted to the building official that the required fire-resistance rating is maintained.

Exception: HPL systems not containing foam plastic insulation, which are installed on the outer surface of a fire-resistance-rated exterior wall in a manner such that the attachments do not penetrate through the entire exterior wall assembly, shall not be required to comply with this section.

1409.9 Surface-burning characteristics.

Unless otherwise specified, HPL shall have a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

1409.10 Type I, II, III and IV construction.

Where installed on buildings of Type I, II, III and IV construction, HPL systems shall comply with Sections 1409.10.1 through 1409.10.4, or Section 1409.11.

1409.10.1 Surface-burning characteristics.

HPL shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

1409.10.2 Thermal barriers.

HPL shall be separated from the interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier consisting of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275.

1409.10.3 Thermal barrier not required.

The thermal barrier specified for HPL in Section 1409.10.2 is not required where:

1.	The HPL system is specifically approved based on tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 286, and with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1, or with UL 1040 or UL 1715. Such testing shall be performed with the HPL in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use. The HPL system shall include seams, joints and other typical details used in the installation and shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

2.	The HPL is used as elements of balconies and similar projections, architectural trim or embellishments.

1409.10.4 Full-scale tests.

The HPL system shall be tested in accordance with, and comply with, the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285. Such testing shall be performed on the HPL system with the HPL in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use.

1409.11 Alternate conditions.

HPL and HPL systems shall not be required to comply with Sections 1409.10.1 through 1409.10.4 provided such systems comply with Section 1409.11.1.

1409.11.1 Installations up to 40 feet in height.

HPL shall be permitted to be installed up to 40 feet (12 190 mm) in height above grade plane where installed in accordance with Section 1409.11.1.1 or 1409.11.1.2.

1409.11.1.1 Fire separation distance of 5 feet or less.

Where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less, the area of HPL shall not exceed 10 percent of the exterior wall surface.

1409.11.1.2 Fire separation distance greater than 5 feet.

Where the fire separation distance is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), there shall be no limit on the area of exterior wall surface coverage using HPL.

1409.12 Type V construction.

HPL shall be permitted to be installed on buildings of Type V construction.

1409.13 Foam plastic insulation.

HPL systems containing foam plastic insulation shall also comply with the requirements of Section 2603.

1409.14 Labeling.

HPL shall be labeled in accordance with Section 1703.5.

SECTION 1410
SOFFITS AND FASCIAS AT ROOF OVERHANGS
1410.1 General.

Soffits and fascias at roof overhangs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section.

1410.2 General wind requirements.

Soffits and fascias shall be capable of resisting the component and cladding loads for walls determined in accordance with Chapter 16 using an effective wind area of 10 square feet (0.93 m2).

1410.3 Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels. 

INSIGHTS

Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels shall comply with Section 1410.2 and shall be installed using fasteners specified by the manufacturer and shall be fastened at both ends to a supporting component such as a nailing strip, fascia or subfascia component in accordance with Figure 1410.3.1(1). Where the unsupported span of soffit panels is greater than 12 inches (406 mm), intermediate nailing strips shall be provided in accordance with Figure 1410.3.1(2) unless a larger span is permitted in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. Fasteners shall be corrosion resistant. Fascias shall comply with Section 1410.7 and the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. In the HVHZ, vinyl and aluminum soffit panels shall also comply with TAS 202 and TAS 203.

 INSIGHTS (1)

FIGURE 1410.3(1)

TYPICAL SINGLE-SPAN VINYL OR ALUMINUM SOFFIT PANEL SUPPORT

FIGURE 1410.3(2)

TYPICAL MULTI-SPAN VINYL OR ALUMINUM SOFFIT PANEL SUPPORT

1410.4 Fiber-cement soffit panels.

Fiber-cement soffit panels shall comply with Section 1410.2 and shall be a minimum of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in thickness and comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II, or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2. Panel joints shall occur over framing or over wood structural panel sheathing. Soffit panels shall be installed with spans and fasteners in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. Fasteners shall be corrosion resistant. In the HVHZ, fiber-cement soffit panels shall also comply with TAS 202 and TAS 203.

1410.5 Hardboard soffit panels.

Hardboard soffit panels shall comply with Section 1410.2 and shall be not less than 7/16 inch (11.11 mm) in thickness and fastened to framing or nailing strips to meet the required design wind pressures. Where the design wind pressure is 30 psf (1.44 kPa) and less, hardboard soffit panels are permitted to be attached to wood framing with 21/2-inch by 0.113-inch (64 mm by 2.9 mm) siding nails spaced not more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges and 12 inches (305 mm) on center at intermediate supports. Where the design wind pressure is greater than 30 psf (1.44 kPa), hardboard soffit panels shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. Fasteners shall be corrosion resistant. In the HVHZ, hardboard soffit panels shall also comply with TAS 202 and TAS 203.

1410.6 Wood structural panel soffit.

Wood structural panel soffits shall comply with Section 1410.2 and shall have a minimum panel performance category of 3/8. Fasteners shall be corrosion resistant. Alternatively, wood structural panel soffits are permitted to attached to wood framing in accordance with Table 1410.6.

TABLE 1410.6

PRESCRIPTIVE ALTERNATE FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SOFFITb, c, d, e

MAXIMUM
DESIGN
PRESSURE
(- or + psf)	MINIMUM
PANEL SPAN
RATING	MINIMUM PANEL
PERFORMANCE
CATEGORY	NAIL TYPE AND SIZE
(inches)
	FASTENERa SPACING ALONG EDGES
AND INTERMEDIATE SUPPORTS
(inches)
GALVANIZED
STEEL
	STAINLESS
STEEL

30	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	6f	4
40	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	6	4
50	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	4	4
8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	6	6
60	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	4	3
8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	6	4
70	24/16	7/16	8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	4
10d box (3 × 0.128 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4
80	24/16	7/16	8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	4
10d box (3 × 0.128 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4
90	32/16	15/32	8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	3
10d box (3 × 0.128 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.5 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kW/m2.

a.	Fasteners shall comply with Section 1410.6.

b.	Maximum spacing of soffit framing members shall not exceed 24 inches.

c.	Wood structural panels shall be of an exterior exposure grade.

d.	Wood structural panels shall be installed with strength axis perpendicular to supports with a minimum of two continuous spans.

e.	Wood structural panels shall be attached to soffit framing members with specific gravity of at least 0.42. Framing members shall be minimum 2 × 3 nominalwith the larger dimension in the cross section aligning with the length of fasteners to provide sufficient embedment depths.

f.	Spacing at intermediate supports is permitted to be 12 inches on center.

1410.7 Aluminum fascia.

Aluminum fascia shall have a minimum thickness of 0.019 inches and be installed per the manufacturer’s instructions and this code. Fasteners shall be aluminum or stainless steel. Aluminum fascia shall be attached in accordance with Section 1410.7.1, 1410.7.2 or 1410.7.3. The drip edge shall comply with 1507.2.9.3, and the thickness of the drip edge shall be in accordance with Table 1503.2.

1410.7.1 Fascia installation where the design wind pressure is 30 psf or less.

Where the design wind pressure is 30 psf (1.44 kPa) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4" × 0.057" × 0.177" head diameter) spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center.

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch below the drip edge.

1410.7.2 Fascia installation where the design wind pressure exceeds 30 psf but is 60 psf or less. 

INSIGHTS

Where the design wind pressure exceeds 30 psf (1.44 kPa) but is 60 psf (2.88 kPa) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached in accordance with Section 1410.7.2.1 or 1410.7.2.2.

 INSIGHTS (1)
1410.7.2.1. 

INSIGHTS

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the sub-fascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the sub-fascia is less than or equal to 6.5 inches (165 mm) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4" × 0.057" × 0.177" head diameter) spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center.

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch below the drip edge.

 INSIGHTS (1)
1410.7.2.2.

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the sub-fascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the sub-fascia is greater than 6.5 inches (165 mm), the top edge of the fascia shall be secured using utility trim installed beneath the drip edge with snap locks punched into the fascia spaced no more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center.

1410.7.3 Fascia installation where the design wind pressure exceeds 60 psf.

Where the design wind pressure is greater than 60 psf (2.88 kPa), aluminum fascia shall be attached in accordance with Section 1410.7.3.1 or 1410.7.3.2.

1410.7.3.1.

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the sub-fascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the sub-fascia is less than or equal to 4.5 inches (114 mm) or less aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4" × 0.057" × 0.177" head diameter) spaced a maximum of 16 inches (406 mm) on center.

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch below the drip edge.

1410.7.3.2.

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the sub-fascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the sub-fascia is greater than 4.5 inches (114 mm), the top edge of the fascia shall be secured using utility trim installed beneath the drip edge with snap locks punched into the fascia spaced no more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center.

1410.7.4 Corners on hip roofs.

Fascia shall be bent around corners and extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the corner. The next fascia material section shall overlap the extension a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) and be fastened through the return leg at the overlap.

1410.7.5 Corners on gable roofs.

Fascia shall be wrapped (tabbed) around and extend at least 1 inch (25 mm) beyond the corner. The gable fascia material section shall overlap the tab and be fastened through the fascia cover and the tab at the end with two face nails (11/4" × 0.057" × 0.177" head diameter) for a 2 × 4-inch sub-fascia and three face nails for 2 × 6-inch and greater sub fascia.

SECTION 1411
PLASTIC COMPOSITE DECKING
1411.1 Plastic composite decking.

Exterior deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guard systems constructed of plastic composites, including plastic lumber, shall comply with Section 2612.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-15]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 15
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
SECTION 1501
GENERAL
1501.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies, and rooftop structures.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Section 1503.7, Section 1507.18.1 and Sections 1512 through 1525.

SECTION 1502
DEFINITIONS
1502.1 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein.

AGGREGATE. In roofing, crushed stone, crushed slag or water-worn gravel used for surfacing for roof coverings.

BALLAST. In roofing, ballast comes in the form of large stones or paver systems or light-weight interlocking paver systems and is used to provide uplift resistance for roofing systems that are not adhered or mechanically attached to the roof deck.

BUILDING INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC ROOFING. A roofing product consisting of electricity generating photovoltaic component integrated into a roof covering.

BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.

FLASHING. The roofing component used to seal roofing systems, where the system is interrupted or terminated.

INTERLAYMENT. A layer of felt or nonbituminous saturated felt not less than 18 inches (457 mm) wide, shingled between each course of a wood-shake roof covering.

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN. A partially enclosed rooftop structure used to aesthetically conceal heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) electrical or mechanical equipment from view.

METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having a minimum installed weather exposure of 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more layers of polymer-modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate or held in place with an approved ballast layer.

PENTHOUSE. An enclosed, unoccupied structure above the roof of a building, other than a tank, tower, spire, dome cupola or bulkhead.

PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE. A complete, environmentally protected unit consisting of solar cells, optics and other components, exclusive of tracker, designed to generate DC power when exposed to sunlight.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL. A collection of modules mechanically fastened together, wired and designed to provide a field-installable unit.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL SYSTEM. A system that incorporates discrete photovoltaic panels, that converts solar radiation into electricity, including rack support systems.

POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. The drainage condition in which consideration has been made for all loading deflections of the roof deck, and additional slope has been provided to ensure drainage of the roof within 48 hours of precipitation.

RADIANT BARRIER. A material having a low-emittance surface of 0.1 or less installed in building assemblies.

REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an existing roof covering. See “Roof recover” and “Roof replacement.”

ROOF ASSEMBLY. A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof covering, roof deck, and may include a vapor retarder, thermal barrier, insulation or similar substrate.

ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.

ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface not including its supporting members or vertical supports.

ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without removing the existing roof covering.

ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.

ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and installing a new roof covering.

ROOF SECTION. A separation or division of a roof area by existing joints, parapet walls, flashing (excluding valleys), difference of elevation (excluding hips and ridges), roof type or legal description; not including the roof area required for a proper tie-off with an existing system.

ROOF SYSTEM. A roof system consists of a roof covering and other interacting roofing components and may include a vapor retarder, thermal barrier, insulation or other similar substrate. The system does not include the roof deck unless it is part of a single component serving as the roof covering and the roof deck.

ROOF VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, attics, cathedral ceilings or other enclosed spaces over which a roof assembly is installed.

ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any part of a building.

SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water to drain from a roof.

SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is field applied using one layer of membrane material (either homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.

UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of felt, sheathing paper, nonbituminous saturated felt or other approved material over which a steep-slope roof covering is applied.

VEGETATIVE ROOF. An assembly of interacting components designed to waterproof and normally insulate a building’s top surface that includes, by design, vegetation and related landscape elements.

SECTION 1503
WEATHER PROTECTION
1503.1 General.

Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed in accordance with this code, and installed in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s approved instructions such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or structure.

1503.2 Flashing.

Flashing shall be used to seal roofing systems, where the system is interrupted or terminated and shall be installed in such a manner so as to prevent moisture entering the wall and roof through joints in copings, through moisture-permeable materials and at intersections with parapet walls and other penetrations through the roof plane.

TABLE 1503.2

METAL FLASHING MATERIAL

MATERIAL	MINIMUM
THICKNESS
(INCHES)	GAGE	WEIGHT (LBS
PER SQ FT)

Copper			1 (16 oz)
Aluminum	0.024		
Stainless Steel		28	
Galvanized
Steel
	0.0179	26 (zinc
coated G90)
	
Aluminum
Zinc
Coated Steel	0.0179	26 (AZ50
Alum Zinc)
	
Zinc Alloy	0.027		
Lead			2.5 (40 oz)
Painted Terne			1.25 (20 oz)
1503.2.1 Locations.

Flashing shall be installed at wall and roof intersections, at gutters, wherever there is a change in roof slope or direction and around roof openings. Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall be corrosion resistant with a thickness of not less than provided in Table 1503.2 or in compliance with RAS 111.

Exception: This requirement does not apply to hip and ridge junctions.

1503.3 Coping.

Parapet walls shall be properly sealed with weatherproof materials. When coping is used, it shall be of noncombustible materials of a width no less than the thickness of the parapet wall.

[P] 1503.4 Roof drainage.

Unless roofs are sloped to drain over roof edges, design and installation of roof drainage systems shall comply with Section 1503 and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, Chapter 11.

[P] 1503.4.1 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or scuppers.

Where roof drains are required, secondary (emergency overflow) roof drains or scuppers shall be provided where the roof perimeter construction extends above the roof in such a manner that water will be entrapped if the primary drains allow buildup for any reason. The installation and sizing of secondary emergency overflow drains, leaders and conductors shall comply with Sections 1106 and 1107, as applicable, of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, Chapter 11.

1503.4.2 Scuppers.

Where required for roof drainage, a scupper shall be placed level with the roof surface in a wall or parapet. The scupper shall be located as determined by the slope and the contributing area of the roof. The exterior facing or lining of a scupper, if metal, shall be the same as flashing material required by Sections 1503 through 1510 for the particular type of covering specified for the building. For other type materials, follow manufacturer’s specifications.

1503.4.2.1 Overflow scuppers.

When other means of drainage of overflow water is not provided, overflow scuppers shall be placed in walls or parapets not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nor more than 4 inches (102 mm) above the finished roof covering and shall be located as close as practical to required vertical leaders or downspouts or wall and parapet scuppers. An overflow scupper shall be sized in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

1503.4.3 Gutters.

Gutters and leaders placed on the outside of buildings, other than Group R-3, private garages and buildings of Type V construction, shall be of noncombustible material or a minimum of Schedule 40 plastic pipe.

1503.5 Roof ventilation.

Attic ventilation shall be provided in accordance with Section 1203.2 and the vent product manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1503.6 Crickets and saddles.

A cricket or saddle shall be installed on the ridge side of any chimney or penetration greater than 30 inches (762 mm) wide as measured perpendicular to the slope. Cricket or saddle coverings shall be sheet metal or of the same material as the roof covering.

Exception: Unit skylights installed in accordance with Section 2405.5 and flashed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions shall be permitted to be installed without a cricket or saddle.

1503.7 Protection against decay and termites.

Condensate lines and roof downspouts shall discharge at least 1 foot (305 mm) away from the structure sidewall, whether by underground piping, tail extensions, or splash blocks. Gutters with downspouts are required on all buildings with eaves of less than 6 inches (152 mm) horizontal projection except for gable end rakes or on a roof above another roof.

SECTION 1504
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1504.1 Wind resistance of roofs.

Roof decks and roof coverings shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with Chapter 16 and Sections 1504.2, 1504.3 and 1504.4.

1504.1.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall be designed for wind speeds in accordance with Section 1507.2.7.

1504.2 Wind resistance of clay and concrete tile.

Wind loads on clay and concrete tile roof coverings shall be in accordance with Section 1609.6.

1504.2.1 Testing.

Testing of concrete and clay tile roof coverings shall be in accordance with Sections 1504.2.1.1, 1504.2.1.2, and 1504.2.1.3. Testing of underlayment or underlayment assembly for clay and concrete tile roof coverings shall be in accordance with Section 1504.2.1.4.

1504.2.1.1 Overturning resistance.

Concrete and clay roof tiles shall be tested to determine their resistance to overturning due to wind in accordance with SBCCI SSTD 11 and Chapter 15.

1504.2.1.2 Wind tunnel testing.

Where concrete and clay roof tiles do not satisfy the limitations in Chapter 16 for rigid tile, a wind tunnel test shall be used to determine the wind characteristics of the concrete or clay tile roof covering in accordance with Chapter 15 and either SBCCI SSTD 11 or ASTM C1569.

1504.2.1.3 Air permeability testing.

The lift coefficient for concrete and clay tile shall be 0.2 or shall be determined in accordance with SBCCI SSTD 11 or ASTM C1570.

1504.2.1.4 Underlayment testing.

Adhered or mechanically attached tile underlayment or underlayment assemblies shall be tested in accordance with FM 4474 or UL 1897.

1504.3 Wind resistance of nonballasted roofs.

Roof coverings installed on roofs in accordance with Section 1507 that are mechanically attached or adhered to the roof deck shall be designed to resist the design wind load pressures for components and cladding in accordance with Section 1609.

1504.3.1 Other roof systems.

Built-up, modified bitumen, fully adhered or mechanically attached single-ply roof systems, metal panel roof systems applied to a solid or closely fitted deck and other types of membrane roof coverings shall be tested in accordance with FM 4474, UL 580 or UL 1897.

1504.3.2 Metal panel roof systems.

Metal panel roof system through fastened or standing seam shall be tested in accordance with UL 580 or ASTM E1592 or TAS 125.

Exceptions: Metal roofs constructed of cold-formed steel, where the roof deck acts as the roof covering and provides both weather protection and support for structural loads, shall be permitted to be designed and tested in accordance with the applicable referenced structural design standard in Section 2210.1.

1504.3.3 Metal roof shingles.

Metal roof shingles applied to a solid or closely fitted deck shall be tested in accordance with FM 4474, UL 580, UL 1897, ASTM D3161 or TAS 107. Metal roof shingles tested in accordance with ASTM D3161 shall meet the classification requirements of Table 1504.3.3 for the appropriate maximum basic wind speed and the metal shingle packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with ASTM D3161 and the required classification in Table 1504.3.3.

TABLE 1504.3.3

CLASSIFICATION OF METAL ROOF SHINGLES TESTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ASTM D3161

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED FROM
FIGURE 1609.3(1), FIGURE 1609.3(2),
FIGURE 1609.3(3), FIGURE 1609.3(4) or
ASCE 7
	Vasd	ASTM D3161
110	85	D or F
116	90	D or F
129	100	D or F
142	110	F
155	120	F
168	130	F
181	140	F
194	150	F
1504.4 Ballasted low-slope single-ply roof systems.

Ballasted low-slope (roof slope < 2:12) single-ply roof system coverings installed in accordance with Sections 1507.12 and 1507.13 shall be designed in accordance with ANSI/SPRI RP-4.

1504.5 Edge systems for low-slope roofs.

Metal edge systems, except gutters and counterflashing, installed on builtup, modified bitumen and single-ply roof systems having a slope less than 2:12, shall be designed and installed for wind loads in accordance with Chapter 16 and tested for resistance in accordance with Test Methods RE-1, RE-2 and RE-3 of ANSI/SPRI ES-1, or RAS 111 except Vult wind speed shall be determined from Figure 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) or 1609.3(4) as applicable.

1504.5.1 Gutter securement for low-slope roofs.

Gutters that are used to secure the perimeter edge of the roof membrane on low-slope (less than 2:12 slope) built-up, modified bitumen and single-ply roofs, shall be designed, constructed and installed to resist wind loads in accordance with Section 1609 and shall be tested in accordance with Test Methods G-1 and G-2 of SPRI GT-1.

1504.6 Physical properties.

Roof coverings installed on low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section 1507 shall demonstrate physical integrity over the working life of the roof based upon 2,000 hours of exposure to accelerated weathering tests conducted in accordance with ASTM G152, ASTM G153, ASTM G154 or ASTM G155. Those roof coverings that are subject to cyclical flexural response due to wind loads shall not demonstrate any significant loss of tensile strength for unreinforced membranes or breaking strength for reinforced membranes when tested as herein required.

1504.7 Impact resistance.

Roof coverings installed on low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) in accordance with Section 1507 shall resist impact damage based on the results of tests conducted in accordance with ASTM D3746, ASTM D4272 or the “Resistance to Foot Traffic Test” of FM 4470. All structural metal roofing systems having a thickness equal to or greater than 22 gage and all nonstructural metal roof systems having a thickness equal to or greater than 26 gage shall be exempt from the tests listed above.

1504.8 Aggregate.

Aggregate shall be permitted as roof surfacing when installed on slopes of 3:12 or less, not less than 400 pound (182 kg) of roofing gravel or 300 pounds (145 kg) of slag per square shall be applied. A minimum of 50 percent of the total aggregate shall be embedded in the flood coat of bitumen or installed in accordance with its product approval. Aggregate shall be dry and free from dirt and shall be in compliance with the sizing requirements set forth in ASTM D1863. A building official may request a test to confirm compliance with these requirements.

Table 1504.8 Maximum Allowable Mean Roof Height Permitted for Buildings with Aggregate on the Roof in Areas Outside a Hurricane-Prone Region. Reserved.

1504.9 Margin of safety.

A margin of safety of 2:1 shall be applied to all wind-uplift resistance-test results except when a margin of safety is specified in the test standard.

Exception: Asphalt shingles testing resulting in a miles per hour rating as required in Section 1507.2.7.

SECTION 1505
FIRE CLASSIFICATION
[BF] 1505.1 General.

Fire classification of roof assemblies shall be in accordance with Section 1505. The minimum fire classification of roof assemblies installed on buildings shall comply with Table 1505.1 based on type of construction of the building. Class A, B and C roof assemblies and roof coverings required to be listed by this section shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. In addition, fire-retardant-treated wood roof coverings shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D2898.

Exception: Skylights and sloped glazing that comply with Chapter 24 or Section 2610.

TABLE 1505.1a, b

MINIMUM ROOF ASSEMBLY CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA	IB	IIA	IIB	IIIA	IIIB	IV	VA	VB
B	B	B	Cc	B	Cc	B	B	Cc

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Unless otherwise required in accordance with the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code or due to the location of the building within a fire district in accordance with Appendix D.

b.	Nonclassified roof assemblies shall be permitted on buildings of Group U occupancies, where there is a minimum fire-separation distance of 6 feet measured from the leading edge of the roof.

c.	Buildings that are not more than two stories above grade plane and having not more than 6,000 square feet of projected roof area and where there is a minimum 10-foot fire-separation distance from the leading edge of the roof to a lot line on all sides of the building, except for street fronts or public ways, shall be permitted to have roofs of No. 1 cedar or redwood shakes and No. 1 shingles constructed in accordance with Section 1505.7.

[BF] 1505.2 Class A roof assemblies.

Class A roof assemblies are those that are effective against severe fire test exposure. Class A roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identified as Class A by an approved testing agency. Class A roof assemblies shall be permitted for use in buildings or structures of all types of construction.

Exceptions:

1.	Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry or an exposed concrete roof deck.

2.	Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile or slate installed on noncombustible decks or ferrous, copper or metal sheets installed without a roof deck on noncombustible framing.

3.	Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounce per square foot (0.0416 kg/m2) copper sheets installed over combustible decks.

4.	Reserved.

[BF] 1505.3 Class B roof assemblies.

Class B roof assemblies are those that are effective against moderate fire-test exposure. Class B roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identified as Class B by an approved testing agency.

[BF] 1505.4 Class C roof assemblies.

Class C roof assemblies are those that are effective against light fire-test exposure. Class C roof assemblies and roof coverings shall be listed and identified as Class C by an approved testing agency.

[BF] 1505.5 Nonclassified roofing.

Nonclassified roofing is approved material that is not listed as a Class A, B or C roof covering.

[BF] 1505.6 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles shall be treated by impregnation with chemicals by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process, in accordance with AWPA C1. Each bundle shall be marked to identify the manufactured unit and the manufacturer, and shall also be labeled to identify the classification of the material in accordance with the testing required in Section 1505.1, the treating company and the quality control agency.

[BF] 1505.7 Special purpose roofs.

Reserved.

1505.8 Building-integrated photovoltaic products.

Building-integrated photovoltaic products installed as the roof covering shall be tested, listed and labeled for fire classification in accordance with Section 1505.1.

1505.9 Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems shall be tested, listed and identified with a fire classification in accordance with UL 1703 or UL 2703. The fire classification shall comply with Table 1505.1 based on the type of construction of the building.

[BF] 1505.10 Roof gardens and landscaped roofs.

Reserved.

SECTION 1506
MATERIALS
1506.1 Scope.

The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the application of roof-covering materials specified herein. Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Installation of roof coverings shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 1507.

1506.2 Material specifications and physical characteristics.

Roof-covering materials shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter.

1506.2.1 Compatibility of materials.

Roofs and roof coverings shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and with the building or structure to which the materials are applied.

1506.3 Product identification.

Roof-covering materials shall be delivered in packages bearing the manufacturer’s identifying marks and approved testing agency labels required in accordance with Section 1505. Bulk shipments and/or site manufactured materials shall be accompanied with the same information or issued in the form of a certificate or on a bill of lading by the manufacturer.

1506.4 Material specifications and physical characteristics.

Roof-covering materials shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. In the absence of applicable standards or where materials are of questionable suitability, testing by an approved agency shall be required by the building code official to determine the character, quality and limitations of application of the materials.

1506.5 Nails.

Nails shall be corrosion-resistant nails conforming to ASTM F1667 or an equal corrosion resistance by coating, electro galvanization, mechanical galvanization, hotdipped galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metal and alloys or other suitable corrosion-resistant material, or corrosion resistance shall be demonstrated in accordance with TAS114, Appendix E.

1506.6 Screws.

Wood screws conform to ANSI/ASME B18.6.1. Screws shall be corrosion resistant by coating, galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metal or other suitable corrosion-resistant material. The corrosion resistance shall be demonstrated through one of the following methods:

1.	Corrosion resistance equivalent to ASTM A641, Class 1;

2.	Corrosion resistance in accordance with TAS114, Appendix E; or

3.	Corrosion-resistant coating exhibiting not more than 5 percent red rust after 1000 hours exposure in accordance with ASTM B117.

1506.7 Clips.

Clips shall be corrosion-resistant clips. The corrosion resistance shall meet 0.90 ounce per square foot (0.458 kg/m2) measured according to ASTM A90/A90M, TAS 114, Appendix E or an equal corrosion-resistance coating, electro galvanization, mechanical galvanization, hot dipped galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metals and alloys or other suitable corrosion-resistant material. Stainless steel clips shall conform to ASTM A240/A240M, Type 304.

SECTION 1507
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS
1507.1 Scope.

Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1507.1.1 Underlayment.

Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. Underlayment materials required to comply with ASTM D226, D1970, D4869, D6757 and D8257 shall bear a label indicating compliance to the standard designation and, if applicable, type classification indicated. Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall be applied and attached in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.1 or 1507.1.1.2, as applicable.

Exceptions:

1.	For areas of a roof that cover exterior walkways and roofs of agricultural buildings, underlayment shall comply with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2.	Compliance with Section 1507.1.1.1 is not required for structural metal panels that do not require a substrate or underlayment.

1507.1.1.1 Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type roof shingles, wood shakes and wood shingles.

Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles, wood shakes and wood shingles shall comply with one of the following methods:

1.	The entire roof deck shall be covered with an approved self-adhering polymer modified bitumen underlayment complying with ASTM D1970 installed in accordance with both the underlayment manufacturer’s and roof covering manufacturer’s installation instructions for the deck material, roof ventilation configuration and climate exposure for the roof covering to be installed.

Exceptions:

1.	This method is not permitted for wood shingles or shakes.

2.	An existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and, where it is required, renailing off the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table 1507.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

2.	A minimum 33/4-inch-wide (95 mm) strip of selfadhering polymer-modified bitumen membrane complying with ASTM D1970 or self-adhering flexible flashing tape complying with AAMA 711, Level 3 [for exposure up to 176°F (80°C)], installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for the deck material, shall be applied over all joints in the roof decking. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table 1507.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the membrane strips.

3.	Two layers of ASTM D226 Type II or ASTM D4869 Type III, Type IV or ASTM D8257 underlayment shall be installed as follows: Apply a strip of underlayment for the first course that is half the width of a full sheet parallel to and starting at the eaves, fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Starting at the eave, apply a full sheet of underlayment for the second course. Apply the third course of underlayment overlapping the second course half the width of a full sheet plus 2 inches (51 mm). Overlap all successive courses half the width of a full sheet plus 1 inch (25 mm). End laps shall be 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be offset by 6 feet (1829 mm). Underlayment shall be attached to a nailable deck with corrosion-resistant fasteners with a maximum fastener spacing measured horizontally and vertically of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c. between side laps, and one row at the end and side laps fastened 6 inches (152 mm) o.c. Underlayment shall be attached using annular ring or deformed shank nails with metal or plastic caps with a nominal cap diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm). Metal caps are required where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, equals or exceeds 170 mph. Metal caps shall have a thickness of not less than 32-gage sheet metal. The minimum thickness of the outside edge of plastic caps shall be 0.035 inch (0.889 mm). The cap nail shank shall be not less than 0.083 inch (2.1082 mm) for ring shank cap nails. The cap nail shank shall have a length sufficient to penetrate through the roof sheathing or not less than 3/4 inch (19.05 mm) into the roof sheathing.

Exception:

1.	Use of ASTM D8257 underlayment is not permitted for wood shingles or shakes.

TABLE 1507.1.1.1

UNDERLAYMENT WITH SELF-ADHERING STRIPS OVER ROOF DECKING JOINTS

Roof Covering	Underlayment Type	Underlayment Attachment
Roof Slope 2:12
and Less Than 4:12
	Roof Slope 4:12 and Greater
Asphalt Shingles,
Metal Roof
Panels, Photovoltaic
Shingles
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869
Type III
or IV
ASTM D6757
ASTM D8257
	Apply in accordance with
Section 1507.1.1.1, Item 3.
	Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion, parallel to
and starting from the eave and lapped 4 inches; end laps
shall be 6 inches and shall be offset by 6 feet. Underlayment
shall be attached to a nailable deck with corrosion-resistant
fasteners with a maximum fastener spacing measured horizontally
and vertically of 12 inches o.c. between side laps
and one row at the end and side laps fastened 6 inches o.c.
Underlayment shall be attached using annular ring or
deformed shank nails with metal or plastic caps with a nominal
cap diameter of not less than 1 inch. Metal caps are
required where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, equals
or exceeds 170 mph. Metal caps shall have a thickness of
not less than 32-gage sheet metal. Power-driven metal caps
shall have a minimum thickness of 0.010 inch. The minimum
thickness of the outside edge of plastic caps shall be
0.035 inch. The cap nail shank shall be not less than 0.083
inch for ring shank cap nails. The cap nail shank shall have a
length sufficient to penetrate through the roof sheathing or
not less than 3/4 inch into the roof sheathing.
Metal Roof
Shingles,
Mineral-
Surface Roll
Roofing, Slate
and
Slate-type
Shingles
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869 Type III or IV
ASTM D8257
Wood Shingles,
Wood Shakes
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869 Type III or IV

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

1507.1.1.2 Underlayment for concrete and clay tile.

Underlayment for concrete and clay tile shall comply with Section 1507.3.3.

1507.2 Asphalt shingles.

The installation of asphalt shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section. or RAS 115.

1507.2.1 Deck requirements.

Asphalt shingles shall be fastened to solidly sheathed decks.

1507.2.2 Slope.

Asphalt shingles shall only be used on roof slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17- percent slope) or greater.

1507.2.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.2.4 Reserved.
1507.2.5 Asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall have self-seal strips or be interlocking and comply with ASTM D3462.

1507.2.6 Fasteners.

Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be galvanized, stainless steel, aluminum or copper roofing nails, minimum 12-gage [0.105 inch (2.67 mm)] shank with a minimum 3/8-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) head, of a length to penetrate through the roofing materials and a minimum of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the roof sheathing. Where the roof sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) thick, the nails shall penetrate through the sheathing. Fasteners shall comply with ASTM F1667.

1507.2.6.1

The nail component of plastic cap nails shall meet the corrosion-resistance requirements of Section 1506.5.

1507.2.7 Attachment.

Asphalt shingles shall have the minimum number of fasteners required by the manufacturer and Section 1504.1. Asphalt shingles shall be secured to the roof with not less than four fasteners per strip shingle or two fasteners per individual shingle. Where the roof slope exceeds 21 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21:12), asphalt shingles shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions for steep-slope roof applications.

1507.2.7.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall be tested and classified in accordance with ASTM D3161, ASTM D7158 or TAS 107. and shall meet the required classification in accordance with Table 1507.2.7.1 to resist the applicable wind speed per Figure 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) or 1609.3(4) based on the risk category. Asphalt shingle wrappers shall be labeled to indicate compliance with one of the required classifications, as shown in Table 1507.2.7.1.

TABLE 1507.2.7.1

CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT SHINGLES

MAXIMUM BASIC
WIND SPEED FROM
FIGURE 1609.3(1),
1609.3.(2), 1609.3(3),
1609.3(4) or ASCE 7	Vasd AS
DETERMINED IN
ACCORDANCE
WITH SECTION
1609.3.1	ASTM D7158	ASTM D3161
110	85	D, G or H	D or F
116	90	D, G or H	D or F
129	100	G or H	D or F
142	110	G or H	F
155	120	G or H	F
168	130	H	F
181	140	H	F
194	150	H	F
1507.2.8 Underlayment application.

Underlayment shall comply with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.2.8.1 High wind attachment.

Reserved.

1507.2.8.2 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.2.9 Flashings.

Flashing for asphalt shingles shall comply with this section or RAS 111. Flashing shall be applied in accordance with this section, the asphalt shingle manufacturer’s instructions or RAS 111.

1507.2.9.1 Base and counter flashing.

Base and counter flashing shall be installed as follows:

1.	In accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions, or

2.	In compliance with RAS-111, or

3.	A continuous metal minimum 4 inches by 4 inches “L” flashing shall be set in approved flashing cement and set flush to the base of the wall and over the underlayment. Both horizontal and vertical metal flanges shall be fastened 6 inches (152 mm) on center with approved fasteners. All laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) fully sealed in approved flashing cement. Flashing shall start at the lower portion of roof to insure water-shedding capabilities of all metal laps. The entire edge of the horizontal flange shall be sealed covering all nail penetrations with approved flashing cement and membrane. Shingles will overlap the horizontal flange and shall be set in approved flashing cement.

Base flashing shall be of either corrosion-resistant metal with a minimum thickness provided in Table 1503.2 or mineral surface roll roofing weighing a minimum of 77 pounds per 100 square feet (3.76 kg/m2). Counter flashing shall be corrosion-resistant metal with a minimum thickness provided in Table 1503.2.

1507.2.9.2 Valleys.

Valley linings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions before applying shingles. Valley linings of the following types shall be permitted:

1.	For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with metal, the valley lining shall be at least 16 inches (406 mm) wide and of any of the corrosion-resistant metals in Table 1503.2.

2.	For open valleys, valley lining of two plies of mineral-surfaced roll roofing complying with ASTM D3909 or ASTM D6380 Class M shall be permitted. The bottom layer shall be 18 inches (457 mm) and the top layer a minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) wide.

3.	For closed valleys (valleys covered with shingles), valley lining of one ply of smooth roll roofing complying with ASTM D6380 Class S, and at least 36 inches (914 mm) wide or types as described in Item 1 or 2 above shall be permitted. Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen underlayment complying with ASTM D1970 and not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide shall be permitted in lieu of the lining material.

Table 1507.2.9.2 Valley Lining Material. Reserved.

1507.2.9.3 Drip edge.

Provide drip edge at eaves and gables of shingle roofs. Overlap is to be a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm). Eave drip edges shall extend 1/2 inch (13 mm) below sheathing and extend back on the roof a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edge shall be installed over the underlayment. Self-adhering, ASTM D1970 underlayment may be installed over a primed drip edge flange. There shall be a minimum 4 inches (51 mm) width of roof cement installed over the drip edge flange or the self-adhering underlayment. Drip edge shall be mechanically fastened a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) on center. Where the Vasd, as determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1, is 110 mph (177 km/h) or greater or the mean roof height exceeds 33 feet (10 058 mm), drip edges shall be mechanically fastened a maximum of 4 inches (102 mm) on center.

1507.3 Clay and concrete tile.

The installation of clay and concrete tile shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.3.1 Deck requirements.

Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid sheathing except where the roof covering is specifically designed and tested in accordance with Section 1609.6.2 to be applied over structural spaced sheathing boards

1507.3.2 Deck slope.

Clay and concrete roof tile shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations of FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

1507.3.3 Underlayment.

Unless otherwise noted, underlayment shall be applied according to the underlayment manufacturer's installation instructions or the recommendations of the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the basic wind speed, Vasd, is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

Exception: Where an existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and, where it is required, renailing of the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with a two-ply system as described in the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

1507.3.3.1 Slope and underlayment requirements.

Refer to FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the basic wind speed Vasd is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1 for underlayment and slope requirements for specific roof tile systems.

1507.3.3.2 High-slope roofs.

Reserved.

1507.3.3.3 High wind attachment.

Reserved.

1507.3.4 Clay tile.

Clay roof tile shall comply with ASTM C1167.

1507.3.5 Concrete tile.

Concrete roof tile shall comply with ASTM C1492.

1507.3.6 Fasteners.

Tile fasteners shall be corrosion resistant and not less than 11-gage, [0.120 inch (3 mm)], 5/16-inch (8.0 mm) head, and of sufficient length to penetrate the deck a minimum of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) or through the thickness of the deck, whichever is less. Attaching wire for clay or concrete tile shall not be smaller than 0.083 inch (2.1 mm). Perimeter fastening areas include three tile courses but not less than 36 inches (914 mm) from either side of hips or ridges and edges of eaves and gable rakes.

1507.3.7 Attachment.

Clay and concrete roof tiles shall be fastened in accordance with Section 1609 or in accordance with FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the basic wind speed, Vasd, is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

Table 1507.3.7 Clay and Concrete Tile Attachment. Reserved.

1507.3.8 Application.

Tile shall be applied according to the manufacturer’s installation instructions or recommendations of the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the basic wind speed, Vasd, is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

1507.3.9 Flashing.

At the juncture of the roof vertical surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions or the recommendations of the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the basic wind speed, Vasd, is determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

1507.4 Metal roof panels.

The installation of metal roof panels shall comply with the provisions of this section. Metal roofing panels shall be factory or field manufactured in accordance with the manufacturers’ product approval specifications and limitations of use. Metal roofing panels shall be factory or field manufactured under a quality assurance program that is audited by a third-party quality assurance entity approved by the Florida Building Commission for that purpose.

1507.4.1 Deck requirements.

Metal roof panel roof coverings shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to spaced supports.

1507.4.2 Deck slope.

Minimum slopes for metal roof panels shall comply with the following:

1.	The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam metal roof panels without applied lap sealant shall be three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).

2.	The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered seam metal roof panels with applied lap sealant shall be one-half unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope). Lap sealants shall be applied in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.

3.	The minimum slope for standing-seam metal roof panel systems shall be one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

1507.4.3 Material standards.

Metal-sheet roof covering systems that incorporate supporting structural members shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 22. Metal-sheet roof coverings installed over structural decking shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials used for metal-sheet roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses shown in Table 1507.4.3(2).

TABLE 1507.4.3(1)

METAL ROOF COVERINGS

ROOF COVERING
TYPE
	STANDARD APPLICATION
RATE/THICKNESS

Aluminum	ASTM B209, 0.024 inch minimum thickness
for roll-formed panels and 0.019 inch minimum
thickness for press-formed shingles.
Aluminum-zinc
alloy coated steel
	ASTM A792 AZ 50
Cold-rolled copper	ASTM B370 minimum 16 oz/sq. ft and 12
oz/sq. ft high yield copper for metal-sheet
roof covering systems: 12 oz/sq. ft for preformed
metal shingle systems.

Copper	16 oz/sq. ft for metal-sheet roof-covering
systems; 12 oz/sq. ft for preformed metal
shingle systems.
Galvanized steel	ASTM A653 G-90 zinc-coated.a
Hard lead	2 lb/sq. ft
Lead-coated copper	ASTM B101
Prepainted steel	ASTM A755
Soft lead	3 lb/sq. ft
Stainless steel	ASTM A240/A204M, 300 Series Alloys
Steel	ASTM A924
Terne and terne-
coated stainless
	Terne coating of 40 lb per double base box,
field painted where applicable in accordance
with manufacturer’s installation instructions.
Zinc	0.027 inch minimum thickness; 99.995%
electrolytic high grade zinc with alloy additives
of copper (0.08% – 0.20%), titanium
(0.07% – 0.12%) and aluminum (0.015%).

For SI: 1 ounce per square foot = 0.305 kg/m2, 1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	For Group U buildings, the minimum coating thickness for ASTM A653 galvanized steel roofing shall be G-60.

TABLE 1507.4.3(2)

MINIMUM CORROSION RESISTANCE

55% Aluminum-zinc alloy coated steel	ASTM A792 AZ 50
5% Aluminum alloy-coated steel	ASTM A875 GF60
Aluminum-coated steel	ASTM A463 T2 65
Galvanized steel	ASTM A653 G-90
Prepainted steel	ASTM A755a

a.	Paint systems in accordance with ASTM A755 shall be applied over steel products with corrosion-resistant coatings complying with ASTM A792, ASTM A875, ASTM A463 or ASTM A653.

1507.4.4 Attachment.

Metal roof panels shall be secured to the supports in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s fasteners. In the absence of manufacturer recommendations, the following fasteners shall be used:

1.	Galvanized fasteners shall be used for steel roofs.

2.	Copper, brass, bronze, copper alloy or 300 series stainless-steel fasteners shall be used for copper roofs.

3.	Stainless-steel fasteners are acceptable for all types of metal roofs.

4.	Aluminum fasteners are acceptable for aluminum roofs attached to aluminum supports.

1507.4.5 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.4.5.1 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.5 Metal roof shingles.

The installation of metal roof shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.5.1 Deck requirements.

Metal roof shingles shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to spaced sheathing.

1507.5.2 Deck slope.

Metal roof shingles shall not be installed on roof slopes below three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).

1507.5.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.5.3.1 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.5.4 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.5.5 Material standards.

Metal roof shingle roof coverings shall comply with Table 1507.4.3(1). The materials used for metal-roof shingle roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses specified in the standards listed in Table 1507.4.3(2).

1507.5.6 Attachment.

Metal roof shingles shall be secured to the roof in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1507.5.7 Flashing.

Roof valley flashing shall be of corrosion-resistant metal of the same material as the roof covering or shall comply with the standards in Table 1507.4.3(1). The valley flashing shall extend at least 8 inches (203 mm) from the centerline each way and shall have a splash diverter rib not less than 0.75 inch (19.1 mm) high at the flow line formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

1507.6 Mineral-surfaced roll roofing.

The installation of mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall comply with this section.

1507.6.1 Deck requirements.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.

1507.6.2 Deck slope.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall not be applied on roof slopes below one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope).

1507.6.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.6.3.1 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.6.4 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.6.5 Material standards.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall conform to ASTM D3909 or ASTM D6380 Class M or Class WS.

1507.7 Slate shingles.

The installation of slate shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.7.1 Deck requirements.

Slate shingles shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.

1507.7.2 Deck slope.

Slate shingles shall only be used on slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12) or greater.

1507.7.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.7.3.1 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.7.4 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.7.5 Material standards.

Slate shingles shall comply with ASTM C406.

1507.7.6 Application.

Minimum headlap for slate shingles shall be in accordance with Table 1507.7.6. Slate shingles shall be secured to the roof with two fasteners per slate.

TABLE 1507.7.6

SLATE SHINGLE HEADLAP

SLOPE	HEADLAP
(inches)

4:12 < slope < 8:12	4
8:12 < slope < 20:12	3
slope = 20:12	2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1507.7.7 Flashing.

Flashing and counterflashing shall be made with sheet metal. Valley flashing shall be a minimum of 16 inches (381 mm) wide. Valley and flashing metal shall be a minimum thickness provided in Table 1503.2 nonferrous metal or stainless steel.

1507.8 Wood shingles.

All wood shingles shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau New Roof Construction Manual or RAS 130. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of wood shingles shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof in compliance with Section 1504.1.

Table 1507.8 Wood Shingle and Shake Installation. Reserved.

1507.8.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

1507.8.1.1 Solid sheathing required.

Reserved.

1507.8.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

1507.8.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.8.3.1 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.8.4 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.8.5 Material standards.

Wood shingles shall be of naturally durable wood and comply with the requirements of Table 1507.8.5.

TABLE 1507.8.5

WOOD SHINGLE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL	APPLICABLE
MINIMUM GRADES
	GRADING
RULES

Wood shingles of naturally durable wood	1, 2 or 3	CSSB

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

1507.8.6 Attachment.

Reserved.

1507.8.6.1 Nails.

Fasteners to attach wood shingles shall be Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal areas) stainless steel ring-shank nails with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the sheathing. Each shingle shall be attached with a minimum of two fasteners.

1507.8.7 Application.

Reserved.

Table 1507.8.7 Wood Shingle Weather Exposure and Roof Slope. Reserved.

1507.8.8 Flashing.

Reserved.

1507.8.9 Label required.

Each bundle of shingles shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency.

1507.9 Wood shakes.

All wood shakes shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau New Roof Construction Manual or RAS 130. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of wood shakes shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof in compliance with Section 1504.1.

1507.9.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

1507.9.1.1 Solid sheathing required.

Reserved.

1507.9.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

1507.9.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.9.3.1 Underlayment and high wind.

Reserved.

1507.9.4 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.9.5 Interlayment.

Reserved.

1507.9.6 Material standards.

Wood shakes shall comply with the requirements of Table 1507.9.6.

TABLE 1507.9.6

WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL	MINIMUM
GRADES
	APPLICABLE
GRADING
RULES

Wood shakes of naturally durable wood	1	CSSB
Taper sawn shakes of naturally durable
wood
	1 or 2	CSSB
Preservative-treated shakes and shingles of
naturally durable wood
	1	CSSB
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and shingles
of naturally durable wood
	1	CSSB
Preservative-treated taper sawn shakes of
Southern pine treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A,
Special Requirement 4.6)
	1 or 2	TFS

CSSB = Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

TFS = Forest Products Laboratory of the Texas Forest Services

1507.9.7 Attachment.

Reserved.

1507.9.7.1 Nails.

Fasteners to attach wood shakes shall be Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal areas) stainless steel ring-shank nails with a minimum penetration of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the sheathing. Each shake shall be attached with a minimum of two fasteners.

1507.9.8 Application.

Reserved.

Table 1507.9.8 Wood Shake Weather Exposure and Roof Slope. Reserved.

1507.9.9 Flashing.

Reserved.

1507.9.10 Label required.

Each bundle of shakes shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency.

1507.10 Built-up roofs.

The installation of built-up roofs shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.10.1 Slope.

Built-up roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage, except for coal-tar built-up roofs that shall have a design slope of not less than one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope).

1507.10.2 Material standards.

Built-up roof covering materials shall comply with the standards in Table 1507.10.2 or UL 55A.

TABLE 1507.10.2

BUILT-UP ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL STANDARD	STANDARD
Acrylic coatings used in roofing	ASTM D6083
Aggregate surfacing	ASTM D1863
Asphalt adhesive used in roofing	ASTM D3747
Asphalt cements used in roofing	ASTM D3019; D2822;
D4586

Asphalt-coated glass fiber base sheet	ASTM D4601
Asphalt coatings used in roofing	ASTM D1227; D2823;
D2824; D4479

Asphalt glass felt	ASTM D2178
Asphalt primer used in roofing	ASTM D41
Asphalt-saturated and asphalt-coated
organic felt base sheet
	ASTM D2626
Asphalt-saturated organic felt (perforated)	ASTM D226
Asphalt used in roofing	ASTM D312
Coal-tar cements used in roofing	ASTM D4022; D5643
Coal-tar saturated organic felt	ASTM D227
Coal-tar pitch used in roofing	ASTM D450; Type I or II
Coal-tar primer used in roofing,
dampproofing and waterproofing
	ASTM D43
Glass mat, coal tar	ASTM D4990
Glass mat, venting type	ASTM D4897
Mineral-surfaced inorganic cap sheet	ASTM D3909
Thermoplastic fabrics used in roofing	ASTM D5665, D5726
1507.10.3 Red rosin paper.

Red rosin paper shall be used when the membrane is applied directly to a wood deck or cementitious fiber decks.

1507.11 Modified bitumen roofing.

The installation of modified bitumen roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.11.1 Slope.

Modified bitumen membrane roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

1507.11.2 Material standards.

Modified bitumen roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D6162, ASTM D6163, ASTM D6164, ASTM D6222, ASTM D6223, ASTM D6298 or ASTM D6509.

1507.12 Single-ply roofing.

The installation of single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.12.1 Slope.

Single-ply membrane roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

1507.12.2 Material standards.

Single-ply roof coverings shall comply with the material standards in Table 1507.12.2.

TABLE 1507.12.2

SINGLE-PLY ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL	MATERIAL
STANDARD

Chlorosulfanted polyethylene (CSPE) or polyisobutylene (PIB)	ASTM D5019
Ethylene propylene diene monomer (EPDM)	ASTM D4637
Ketone Ethylene Ester (KEE)	ASTM D6754
Ketone Ethylene Ester (KEE)	ASTM D4434
Thermoplastic polyolefin (TPO)	ASTM D6878
1507.12.3 Ballasted low-slope roofs.

Ballasted low-slope roofs (roof slope < 2:12) shall be installed in accordance with this section and Section 1504.4. Stone used as ballast shall comply with ASTM D448 or ASTM D7655.

1507.13

Reserved.

1507.14 Sprayed polyurethane foam roofing.

The installation of sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section or in compliance with RAS 109 and 109-A.

1507.14.1 Slope.

Sprayed polyurethane foam roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

1507.14.2 Material standards.

Spray-applied polyurethane foam insulation shall comply with Type III or IV as defined in ASTM C1029.

1507.14.3 Application.

Foamed-in-place roof insulation shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. A liquid-applied protective coating that complies with Table 1507.14.3 shall be applied no less than 2 hours nor more than 72 hours following the application of the foam.

TABLE 1507.14.3

PROTECTIVE COATING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylic coating	ASTM D6083
Silicone coating	ASTM D6694
Moisture-cured polyurethane coating	ASTM D6947
1507.14.4 Foam plastics.

Foam plastic materials and installation shall comply with Chapter 26.

1507.15 Liquid-applied roofing.

The installation of liquid-applied roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.15.1 Slope.

Liquid-applied roofing shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

1507.15.2 Material standards.

Liquid-applied roofing shall comply with ASTM C836, ASTM C957 or ASTM D3468.

1507.15.3 Application.

Liquid-applied roofing shall be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer's installation instructions.

1507.15.4 Flashings.

Flashing shall be applied in accordance with Section 1507.15 and the liquid-applied roofing manufacturer's installation instructions.

1507.16 Vegetative roofs, roof gardens and landscaped roofs.

Vegetative roofs, roof gardens and landscaped roofs shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, Sections 1606.5 and 1607.13.2.2 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[BF] 1507.16.1 Structural fire resistance.

The structural frame and roof construction supporting the load imposed upon the roof by the vegetative roof, roof gardens or landscaped roofs shall comply with the requirements of Table 601.

1507.17 Photovoltaic modules/shingles.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles. The installation of building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1507.17.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

1507.17.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

1507.17.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section 1507.1.1.

1507.17.4 Underlayment application.

Reserved.

1507.17.4.1 High wind attachment.

Reserved.

1507.17.4.2 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

1507.17.5 Fasteners.

Reserved.

1507.17.6 Material standards.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703.

1507.17.7 Attachment.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1507.17.8 Wind resistance.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be tested in accordance with procedures and acceptance criteria in ASTM D3161 or TAS 107. Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall comply with the classification requirements of Table 1507.2.7.1 for the appropriate maximum basic wind speed. Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with the procedures in ASTM D3161 or TAS 107 and the required classification from Table 1507.2.7.1.

1507.18 Solar photovoltaic panels and modules.
1507.18.1 Photovoltaic panels/modules.

Solar photovoltaic panels/modules installed upon a roof or as an integral part of a roof assembly shall comply with the requirements of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

1507.18.1.1 Structural fire resistance.

The structural frame and roof construction supporting the load imposed upon the roof by the photovoltaic panels/modules shall comply with the requirements of Table 601.

SECTION 1508
ROOF INSULATION
[BF] 1508.1 General.

The use of above-deck thermal insulation shall be permitted provided such insulation is covered with an approved roof covering and passes the tests of NFPA 276 or UL 1256 when tested as an assembly.

Exceptions:

1.	Foam plastic roof insulation shall conform to the material and installation requirements of Chapter 26.

2.	Where a concrete or composite metal and concrete roof deck is used and the above-deck thermal insulation is covered with an approved roof covering.

[BF] 1508.1.1 Cellulosic fiberboard.

Cellulosic fiberboard roof insulation shall conform to the material and installation requirements of Chapter 23.

[BF] 1508.2 Material standards.

Above-deck thermal insulation board shall comply with the standards in Table 1508.2.

[BF] TABLE 1508.2

MATERIAL STANDARDS FOR ROOF INSULATION

Cellular glass board	ASTM C552 or ASTM C1902
Composite boards	ASTM C1289, Type III, IV, V or VI
Expanded polystyrene	ASTM C578
Extruded polystyrene	ASTM C578
Fiber-reinforced gypsum board	ASTM C1278
Glass-faced gypsum board	ASTM C1177
Lightweight insulating concrete	ASTM C495, ASTM C513, ASTM C796, ASTM C869
Mineral fiber insulation board	ASTM C726
Perlite board	ASTM C728
Polyisocyanurate board	ASTM C1289, Type I or II
Wood fiberboard	ASTM C208
SECTION 1509
ROOF COATINGS
1509.1 General.

The installation of a roof coating on a roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Section 1505 and this section.

1509.2 Material standards.

Roof coating materials shall comply with the standards in Table 1509.2.

TABLE 1509.2

ROOF COATING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylic coating	ASTM D6083
Asphaltic emulsion coating	ASTM D1227
Asphalt coating	ASTM D2823
Asphalt roof coating	ASTM D4479
Aluminum-pigmented asphalt coating	ASTM D2824
Silicone coating	ASTM D6694
Moisture-cured polyurethane coating	ASTM D6947
SECTION 1510
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
[BG] 1510.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the construction of rooftop structures.

[BG] 1510.2 Penthouses.

Penthouses in compliance with Sections 1510.2.1 through 1510.2.5 shall be considered as a portion of the story directly below the roof deck on which such penthouses are located. All other penthouses shall be considered as an additional story of the building.

[BG] 1510.2.1 Height above roof deck.

Penthouses constructed on buildings of other than Type I construction shall not exceed 18 feet (5486 mm) in height above the roof deck as measured to the average height of the roof of the penthouse.

Exceptions:

1.	Where used to enclose tanks or elevators that travel to the roof level, penthouses shall be permitted to have a maximum height of 28 feet (8534 mm) above the roof deck.

2.	Penthouses located on the roof of buildings of Type I construction shall not be limited in height.

[BG] 1510.2.2 Area limitation.

The aggregate area of penthouses and other enclosed rooftop structures shall not exceed one-third the area of the supporting roof deck. Such penthouses and other enclosed rooftop structures shall not be required to be included in determining the building area or number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of such penthouses shall not be included in determining the fire area specified in Section 901.7.

[BG] 1510.2.3 Use limitations.

Penthouses shall not be used for purposes other than the shelter of mechanical or electrical equipment, tanks, or vertical shaft openings in the roof assembly.

[BG] 1510.2.4 Weather protection.

Provisions such as louvers, louver blades or flashing shall be made to protect the mechanical and electrical equipment and the building interior from the elements.

[BG] 1510.2.5 Type of construction.

Penthouses shall be constructed with walls, floors and roofs as required for the type of construction of the building on which such penthouses are built.

Exceptions:

1.	On buildings of Type I construction, the exterior walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) and less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be permitted to have not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. The exterior walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.

2.	On buildings of Type I construction two stories or less in height above grade plane or of Type II construction, the exterior walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) and less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be permitted to have not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating or a lesser fire-resistance rating as required by Table 705.5 and be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood. The exterior walls and roofs of penthouses with a fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall be permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood and shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating. Interior framing and walls shall be permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood.

3.	On buildings of Type III, IV or V construction, the exterior walls of penthouses with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) and less than 20 feet (6096 mm) shall be permitted to have not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating or a lesser fire-resistance rating as required by Table 705.5. On buildings of Type III, IV or VA construction, the exterior walls of penthouses with a fire separation distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater shall be permitted to be of heavy timber construction complying with Sections 602.4 and 2304.11 or noncombustible construction or fire-retardant-treated wood and shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.

[BG] 1510.3 Tanks.

Tanks having a capacity of more than 500 gallons (1893 L) located on the roof deck of a building shall be supported on masonry, reinforced concrete, steel or heavy timber construction complying with Section 2304.11 provided that, where such supports are located in the building above the lowest story, the support shall be fire-resistance rated as required for Type IA construction.

[BG] 1510.3.1 Valve and drain.

In the bottom or on the side near the bottom of the tank, a pipe or outlet, fitted with a suitable quick-opening valve for discharging the contents into a drain in an emergency shall be provided.

[BG] 1510.3.2 Location.

Tanks shall not be placed over or near a stairway or an elevator shaft, unless there is a solid roof or floor underneath the tank.

[BG] 1510.3.3 Tank cover.

Unenclosed roof tanks shall have covers sloping toward the perimeter of the tanks.

[BG] 1510.4 Cooling towers.

Cooling towers located on the roof deck of a building and greater than 250 square feet (23.2 m2) in base area or greater than 15 feet (4572 mm) in height above the roof deck, as measured to the highest point on the cooling tower, where the roof is greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in height above grade plane shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. The base area of cooling towers shall not exceed one-third the area of the supporting roof deck.

Exception: Drip boards and the enclosing construction shall be permitted to be of wood not less than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, provided the wood is covered on the exterior of the tower with noncombustible material.

[BG] 1510.5 Towers, spires, domes and cupolas.

Towers, spires, domes and cupolas shall be of a type of construction having fire-resistance ratings not less than required for the building on top of which such tower, spire, dome or cupola is built. Towers, spires, domes and cupolas greater than 85 feet (25 908 mm) in height above grade plane as measured to the highest point on such structures, and either greater than 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in horizontal area or used for any purpose other than a belfry or an architectural embellishment, shall be constructed of and supported on Type I or II construction.

[BG] 1510.5.1 Noncombustible construction required.

Towers, spires, domes and cupolas greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in height above the highest point at which such structure contacts the roof as measured to the highest point on such structure, or that exceeds 200 square feet (18.6 m2) in area at any horizontal section, or which is intended to be used for any purpose other than a belfry or architectural embellishment, or is located on the top of a building greater than 50 feet (1524 mm) in building height shall be constructed of and supported by noncombustible materials and shall be separated from the building below by construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5 hours with openings protected in accordance with Section 711. Such structures located on the top of a building greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in building height shall be supported by noncombustible construction.

[BG] 1510.5.2 Towers and spires.

Enclosed towers and spires shall have exterior walls constructed as required for the building on top of which such towers and spires are built. The roof covering of spires shall be not less than the same class of roof covering required for the building on top of which the spire is located.

[BG] 1510.6 Mechanical equipment screens.

Mechanical equipment screens shall be constructed of the materials specified for the exterior walls in accordance with the type of construction of the building. Where the fire separation distance is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), mechanical equipment screens shall not be required to comply with the fire-resistance rating requirements.

[BG] 1510.6.1 Height limitations.

Mechanical equipment screens shall not exceed 18 feet (5486 mm) in height above the roof deck, as measured to the highest point on the mechanical equipment screen.

Exception: Where located on buildings of Type IA construction, the height of mechanical equipment screens shall not be limited.

[BG] 1510.6.2 Type I, II, III and IV construction.

Regardless of the requirements in Section 1510.6, mechanical equipment screens that are located on the roof decks of buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction shall be permitted to be constructed of combustible materials in accordance with any one of the following limitations:

1.	The fire separation distance shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) and the height of the mechanical equipment screen above the roof deck shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm) as measured to the highest point on the mechanical equipment screen.

2.	The fire separation distance shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) and the mechanical equipment screen shall be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 for exterior installation.

3.	Where exterior wall covering panels are used, the panels shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less when tested in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use, with each face tested independently in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The panels shall be tested in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use in accordance with, and shall comply with the acceptance criteria of, NFPA 285 and shall be installed as tested. Where the panels are tested as part of an exterior wall assembly in accordance with NFPA 285, the panels shall be installed on the face of the mechanical equipment screen supporting structure in the same manner as they were installed on the tested exterior wall assembly.

[BG] 1510.6.3 Type V construction.

The height of mechanical equipment screens located on the roof decks of buildings of Type V construction, as measured from grade plane to the highest point on the mechanical equipment screen, shall be permitted to exceed the maximum building height allowed for the building by other provisions of this code where complying with any one of the following limitations, provided the fire separation distance is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm):

1.	Where the fire separation distance is not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), the height above grade plane of the mechanical equipment screen shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm) more than the maximum building height allowed;

2.	The mechanical equipment screen shall be constructed of noncombustible materials;

3.	The mechanical equipment screen shall be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2 for exterior installation; or

4.	Where the fire separation distance is not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), the mechanical equipment screen shall be constructed of materials having a flame spread index of 25 or less when tested in the minimum and maximum thicknesses intended for use with each face tested independently in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

[BG] 1510.7 Photovoltaic systems.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed in accordance with this section.

[BG] 1510.7.1 Wind resistance.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with ASCE 7.

[BG] 1510.7.2 Fire classification.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems shall have the same fire classification as required for the roof assembly by Section 1505.

[BG] 1510.7.3 Installation.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

[BG] 1510.7.4 Photovoltaic panels and modules.

Photovoltaic panels and modules mounted on top of a roof shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

[BG] 1510.8 Other rooftop structures.

Rooftop structures not regulated by Sections 1510.2 through 1510.7 shall comply with Sections 1510.8.1 through 1510.8.5, as applicable.

[BG] 1510.8.1 Aerial supports.

Aerial supports shall be constructed of noncombustible materials.

Exception: Aerial supports not greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) in height as measured from the roof deck to the highest point on the aerial supports shall be permitted to be constructed of combustible materials.

[BG] 1510.8.2 Bulkheads.

Bulkheads used for the shelter of mechanical or electrical equipment or vertical shaft openings in the roof assembly shall comply with Section 1510.2 as penthouses. Bulkheads used for any other purpose shall be considered as an additional story of the building.

[BG] 1510.8.3 Dormers.

Dormers shall be of the same type of construction as required for the roof in which such dormers are located or the exterior walls of the building.

[BG] 1510.8.4 Fences.

Fences and similar structures shall comply with Section 1510.6 as mechanical equipment screens.

[BG] 1510.8.5 Flagpoles.

Flagpoles and similar structures shall not be required to be constructed of noncombustible materials and shall not be limited in height or number.

[BG] 1510.9 Structural fire resistance.

The structural frame and roof construction supporting imposed loads upon the roof by any rooftop structure shall comply with the requirements of Table 601. The fire-resistance reduction permitted by Table 601, Note a, shall not apply to roofs containing rooftop structures.

1510.10 Mechanical units.

Roof mounted mechanical units shall be mounted on curbs raised a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm) above the roof surface, or where roofing materials extend beneath the unit, on raised equipment supports providing a minimum clearance height in accordance with Table 1510.10.

Exception: In buildings where the existing rooftop equipment, in the opinion of the building official, provides sufficient clearance to repair, recover, replace and/or maintain the roofing system or any of its components, such existing equipment need not comply with Table 1510.10.

TABLE 1510.10

CLEARANCE BELOW RAISED ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICAL UNITS

WIDTH OF MECHANICAL UNIT
(inches)
	MINIMUM CLEARANCE ABOVE
SURFACES (inches)

< 24	14
24 < 36	18
36 < 48	24
48 < 60	30
> 60	48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1510.11 Cable- and raceway-type wiring methods.

Cable- and raceway-type wiring methods installed on rooftops and not encased in structural concrete shall be supported above the roof system and covering. Cable- and raceway-type wiring methods installed in locations under metal-corrugated sheet roof decking shall be supported so there is not less than 38 mm (11/2 in.) measured from the lowest surface of the roof decking to the top of the cable or raceway. A cable or raceway shall not be installed in concealed locations in metal-corrugated sheet decking–type roof.

1510.12 Lines, pipes, conduit and cables under roof decks.

Lines, pipes, conduit and cables installed below the roof deck shall have a minimum clearance of 11/2-inch (38 mm) from the lowest surface of the roof deck except where they penetrate the roof deck.

Exclusion: Lines, pipes, conduit and cables installed under structural concrete decks.

SECTION 1511
EXISTING ROOFING
1511.1 General.

Materials and methods of application used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.

Exceptions:

1.	Reroofing shall not be required to meet the minimum design slope requirement of one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in Section 1507 for roofs that provide positive roof drainage.

2.	An existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and, where it is required, renailing off the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table 1507.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

1511.1.1

Not more than 25 percent of the total roof area or roof section of any existing building or structure shall be repaired, replaced or recovered in any 12-month period unless the roof covering on the entire existing roof system or roof section is replaced or recovered to conform to the requirements of this code.

Exception: If an existing roofing system or roof section was built, repaired, or replaced in compliance with the requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, or any subsequent editions of the Florida Building Code, and 25 percent or more of such roofing system or roof section is being repaired, replaced, or recovered, only the repaired, replaced, or recovered portion is required to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code in effect, as applicable. Pursuant to Section 553.844(5), Florida Statutes, a local government may not adopt by ordinance an administrative or technical amendment to this exception.

1511.2 Structural and construction loads.

Structural roof components shall be capable of supporting the roof-covering system and the material and equipment loads that will be encountered during installation of the system.

1511.3 Recovering versus replacement.

New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers of roof coverings down to the roof deck where any of the following conditions occur:

1.	Where the existing roof or roof covering is water soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing.

2.	Where the existing roof covering is wood shake, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.

3.	Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.

4.	When blisters exist in any roofing, unless blisters are cut or scraped open and remaining materials secured down before applying additional roofing.

5.	Where the existing roof covering is to be used for attachment for a new roof system and compliance with the securement provisions of Section 1504.1 cannot be met.

Exceptions:

1.	Complete and separate roofing systems, such as standing-seam metal roof systems, that are designed to transmit the roof loads directly to the building’s structural system and that do not rely on existing roofs and roof coverings for support, shall not require the removal of existing roof coverings.

2.	Reserved.

3.	The application of a new protective coating over an existing spray polyurethane foam roofing system shall be permitted without tear-off of existing roof coverings.

4.	Where the existing roof assembly includes an ice barrier membrane that is adhered to the roof deck, the existing ice barrier membrane shall be permitted to remain in place and covered with an additional layer of ice barrier membrane in accordance with Section 1507.

1511.3.1 Roof recover.

Reserved.

1511.3.1.1 Exceptions.

Reserved.

1511.4 Roof recovering.

Where the application of a new roof covering over wood shingle or shake roofs creates a combustible concealed space, the entire existing surface shall be covered with gypsum board, mineral fiber, glass fiber or other approved materials securely fastened in place.

1511.5 Reinstallation/reuse of materials.

Existing or salvaged slate, clay or concrete tile shall be permitted for reinstallation or reuse, to repair an existing slate or tile roof, except that salvaged slate or tile shall be of like kind in both material and profile. Damaged, cracked or broken slate or tile shall not be reinstalled. The building official may permit salvaged slate, clay and concrete tile to be installed on additions and new construction, when the tile is tested in compliance with the provisions of Section 1507 and installed in accordance with Section 1507. Existing vent flashing, metal edgings, drain outlets, collars and metal counterflashings shall not be reinstalled where rusted, damaged or deteriorated. Aggregate surfacing materials shall not be reinstalled.

1511.6 Flashings.

Flashings shall be reconstructed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s installation instructions or RAS 111. Metal flashing to which bituminous materials are to be adhered shall be primed prior to installation.

SECTION 1512
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—GENERAL
1512.1 Scope.

Sections 1512 through 1525 set forth minimum requirements for the materials and installation of roofing components, roofing systems, roofing assemblies and the waterproofing thereof.

1512.2 Application.

These high-velocity hurricane zone roofing requirements with associated roofing application standards (RAS) and testing application standards (TAS) are to be implemented in the HVHZ, or where the jurisdiction having authority has adopted their use in accordance with Section 553.73 of the Florida Statutes.

1512.2.1

All roofing components, roofing systems and roofing assemblies for construction regulated by this code shall comply with this chapter. All roofing components, roofing systems and roofing assemblies shall have a valid and current product approval. In the event that the manufacturers published literature or instructions are in conflict with those of the product approval, the product approval shall prevail. Where items specifically and expressly addressed in this chapter are in conflict with the product approval, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.

1512.2.2

Innovative products and/or systems outside those currently recognized under this chapter may have a product approval issued based on performance testing; in such case(s) the conditions set in the product approval shall prevail.

1512.2.3

For roofing systems to be installed on a specific building or structure, where an existing product approval may not be applied, such roofing system shall be permitted to be approved on a one-time project basis by the authority having jurisdiction, provided the applicant demonstrates, by testing and/or rational analysis that such roofing system complies with the provision of this code.

1512.2.4

Where a product approval does not address a detail for a specific job condition, the permit applicant may propose to the building official an alternate detail to address the specific need of the job. The building official shall be permitted to approve such proposal if it can be demonstrated that the provisions of this code will be met.

1512.2.5 Workmanship standards.

All roofing work shall be performed by a qualified contractor licensed to perform roofing, in compliance with the tolerances, quality and methods of construction established herein or set forth in the standards adopted by these high-velocity hurricane zone requirements. Roofing assemblies detailed in the product approval shall be installed in strict compliance with the method of application set forth in such product approval or, if not part of the product approval, in compliance with manufacturer’s published application instructions, or as approved by the building official. (Aesthetic issues not affecting the performance of the roof are not part of this chapter.)

1512.2.5.1 Appearance.

Where the architectural appearance of the underside of the roof is to be preserved, an alternate method of attachment complying with the windload requirements of Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones) may be proposed unless otherwise addressed in Chapter 15. The alternative attachment shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Florida-registered architect or a Florida-registered engineer, which architect or engineer shall be proficient in structural design.

1512.3

Permits outside these high-velocity hurricane zone requirements shall comply with Section 105. Permits within the HVHZ shall be required for all work in connection with the application, repair or maintenance of any roofing component or any roofing assembly and/or any of its components except as otherwise permitted in Section 105 of this code.

1512.3.1

All new roofing construction, including recovering and reroofing, repair or maintenance shall have an HVHZ Uniform Roofing Permit Application, as required by the authority having jurisdiction, completed and executed by a licensed contractor.

1512.3.2

The HVHZ Uniform Roofing Permit Application shall include calculations in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code, unless the roofing assembly is less than the height/pressure threshold allowed in the applicable protocols herein.

1512.3.3

Reserved.

1512.3.4

Attachments to the HVHZ Uniform Roofing Permit Application shall include two copies of each of the following documents: properly executed OWNERS NOTIFICATION FOR ROOFING CONSIDERATIONS herein; the fire directory listing pages, product approval, and applicable detail drawings; the municipal permit application; other components approvals; and any other additional data required by the authority having jurisdiction needed to determine the integrity of the roofing system.

1512.4 Inspections.
1512.4.1

All roofing work for which a permit is required shall be inspected by the building official. One or more inspections may be performed at the same time at the request of the roofing contractor or when feasible. Lack of roofing contractor’s personnel at the job site, in and of itself, shall not be cause to fail the inspection. Certain roofing inspections shall be performed during specific phases of the applications as noted below:

1512.4.2

For discontinuous roofing systems (as defined herein or in Chapter 2):

1512.4.2.1

During or after application of the base sheet, anchor sheet or underlayment of any roofing system.

1512.4.2.2

During the installation of the cap sheet.

1512.4.2.3

During the installation of any prepared roof covering, such as shingles, tiles, slates, shakes and similar.

1512.4.2.4

Upon completion of all adhesive-set and mortar-set tile systems, and prior to the final inspection, a field verification and static uplift test, in compliance with TAS 106 shall be required to confirm tile adhesion to the underlayment. This test may be required by the building official for mechanically attached tile systems. All results of this test shall be submitted to the building official.

1512.4.3

For continuous roofing systems (as defined herein or in Chapter 2):

1512.4.3.1

During application of any roofing system prior to the full concealment of the adhesion/attachment process to the roof deck or to the existing roofing assembly.

1512.4.3.2

In cases where a roof area is less than 1,500 square feet (139 m2), and when the building official is not able to perform any of the above requested inspection in a timely manner, the building official may authorize to continue with the work and may require that satisfactory evidence be provided to show that the covered work was performed in compliance with this code.

1512.4.3.3

After all roofing work has been completed, a final inspection shall be performed by the building official.

SECTION 1513
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
DEFINITIONS
1513.1 Definitions.

For definitions outside Sections 1512 through 1525 and accompanied RAS and TAS, see Chapter 2. For the purposes of Sections 1512 through 1525, accompanying RAS, TAS and roofing products approval, roofing terms shall be defined in compliance with ASTM D1079, unless otherwise defined below. The definitions listed below shall take preference. Other terms used herein shall be defined as set forth in Chapter 2 of this code.

AIR PERMEABLE ROOFING SYSTEM. A roofing system consisting of a prepared roof covering over an approved underlayment on a sloped roof. The components within the prepared roof covering are discontinuously laid and small, with unsealed side and head laps. Air permeable roofing systems shall be applied over sheathed decks with either mechanical attachment or a mortar/adhesive bond. Any roofing system with sealed side or head laps shall not be defined as an air permeable roofing system. The authority having jurisdiction may require testing in compliance with TAS 116, to determine whether a roofing system is air permeable.

ANCHOR SHEET. A roofing felt mechanically attached to a nailable deck with approved fasteners to which insulation is then installed in a solid mopping of asphalt. The roofing membrane is then installed to the insulation in the usual manner.

ARCHITECTURAL METAL PANEL. Water shedding (hydrokinetic) roof panel fastened to a roof deck.

ASTM (ASTM International). A scientific and technical organization that is responsible for the development of standards on characteristics and performance of materials, products, systems, as adopted for the high-velocity hurricane zone.

BASE SHEET. The bottom or first ply of a roofing assembly over which subsequent roofing plies are applied. A base sheet may be designed for mechanical attachment, full or partial adhesion to the substrate.

BUILDING INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC ROOFING. A roofing product consisting of electricity generating photovoltaic component integrated into a roof covering.

“CLASS A” ROOFING ASSEMBLY. A roofing assembly that, in combination with the roof slope, has been classified by an approved testing agency, with a listing and follow-up service, as “Class A” in compliance with ASTM E108 or UL 790.

“CLASS B” ROOFING ASSEMBLY. A roofing assembly that, in combination with the roof slope, has been classified by an approved testing agency, with a listing and follow-up service, as “Class B” in compliance with ASTM E108 or UL 790.

“CLASS C” ROOFING ASSEMBLY. A roofing assembly that, in combination with the roof slope, has been classified by an approved testing agency, with a listing and follow-up service, as “Class C” in compliance with ASTM E108 or UL 790.

CONTINUOUS ROOFING SYSTEM. A roof covering, composed from a single or multiple layers, forming a homogenous membrane over the entire roof surface, applied to either a flat or pitched roof surface(s).

CORROSION RESISTANT. Any component that passes FM Global Test Standard 4470’s Appendix, as modified, and set forth in TAS 114.

COUNTER BATTENS. Vertical wood strips installed on sloped roofs over which horizontal battens are secured. The primary roof covering is attached or secured to these horizontal battens.

COUNTERFLASHING. Formed metal or elastomeric sheeting secured on or into a wall, curb, pipe, roof-top unit or other surface to cover and protect the upper edge of a base flashing and its associated fasteners.

DISCONTINUOUS ROOFING SYSTEM. A roofing system with unsealed overlapping components, where the combined roofing system has openings at the point of overlap, applied to a sloped surface with a pitch of 2:12, or greater. Discontinuous roofing systems include asphalt shingles; concrete, clay or metal tile; wood shingles or shakes; and cement fiber roofing systems.

DRY-IN. The process of applying the first layer of felt in a roofing system.

FASTENER WITHDRAWAL RESISTANCE TEST. A static pullout test of mechanical fasteners, which are used to anchor any roofing component, to determine the force required to withdraw a fastener from the substrate. Testing shall be in compliance with the test procedure detailed in TAS 105.

FIRE-RESISTANT ROOF COVERING. Any Class A, Class B or Class C roofing system applied to the appropriate deck type within the specified slope of the listed classification.

FLASHING. The roofing component used to seal roofing systems, where the system is interrupted or terminated.

FLAT ROOF TILE PROFILE. Those tiles with less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) rise.

FM APPROVALS. A research and testing organization that is responsible for examination and testing of construction and other products on behalf of member insurance companies.

HIGH ROOF TILE PROFILE. Those tiles having a rise-to-width ratio greater than 0.20.

LAP. See NRCA Manual, 4th edition.

LOW ROOF TILE PROFILE. Those tiles having a rise-towidth ratio less or equal than 0.20; except those tiles meeting the flat profile definition.

METAL PROFILE. Including but not limited to eave and gable drip, gravel stop, raised edge systems and fascia systems. All composite and nonmetallic flashing materials shall have a product approval.

METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure equal or greater than 3 square feet (0.3 m2) per sheet.

METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.3 m2) per sheet.

MINIMUM CHARACTERISTIC RESISTANCE FORCE. A force or pressure which is representative of data from withdrawal resistance testing; static uplift testing; and/or wind uplift testing after the data has been statistically analyzed to a 95-percent level of precision.

MOMENT. A quantity that represents the effect of a force applied at a particular point in relation to a specific point or axis.

NET FREE VENTILATING AREA (NFVA). The gross area of the smallest plane area of the ventilating device reduced by the percentage of physical obstruction to the plane area.

NRCA. The NRCA Roofing and Waterproofing Manual, 5th edition, as published by the National Roofing Contractors Association.

PREPARED ROOF COVERING. Any manufactured or processed roof covering designed for use as the top layer of a discontinuous roofing system applied to a sloped roof.

RAS. Roofing Application Standards.

RECOVERING. The process of covering an existing roofing assembly with a new roofing system or a prepared roofing system.

REPAIR. The work of corrective procedures by replacing or altering an existing roofing component or system to eliminate water intrusion.

REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an existing roofing system, either in its entirety or in existing sections.

RIDGE VENT. A ventilator located within 18 inches (457 mm) of the ridge that allows the escape of warm and/or moist air from the attic area or rafter cavity.

ROOF COVERING. An assembly of multiple field-applied components or a single component designed to weatherproof a building’s top surface. A roof covering may be a roofing assembly or form a portion thereof.

ROOF DECK. Solid or spaced sheathing to which the roofing or waterproofing system is applied.

ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and installing a new roof covering.

ROOF SECTION. A separation or division of a roof area by existing expansion joints, parapet walls, flashing (excluding valleys), difference of elevation (excluding hips and ridges), roof type or legal description; not including the roof area required for a proper tie-off with an existing system.

ROOFING ACCESSORY. A type of roofing product as described in Section 1517.6 of this code.

ROOFING ASSEMBLY. An assembly of interacting roofing components [includes the roof deck, vapor retarder (if present), insulation, and roof covering].

ROOFING COATINGS, ADHESIVES AND MASTICS. Any and all liquid materials applied to the roofing membrane layer to enhance ultraviolet light resistance; increase resistance to fire; increase reflectivity of the roofing assembly; or, in some way, enhance the performance of the roofing assembly. Roofing coatings, adhesives or mastics shall not contain asbestos materials.

ROOFING COMPONENT. A roofing product that is incorporated into various roofing assemblies.

ROOFING MAINTENANCE. The work of extending the longevity of a roofing system through preventative care, such as refilling pitch pans, applying coatings, regraveling, resurfacing and recaulking.

ROOFING SYSTEM. A system of interacting roofing components, generally consisting of membrane or primary roof covering and insulation (not including the roof deck) designed to weatherproof, and sometimes to improve, the building’s thermal resistance.

STRUCTURAL METAL PANEL. Roof covering intended to be self-supporting between structural members (see Sections 2003.8.2 and 2222.4).

TAS. Testing Application Standard.

UNDERLAYMENT. One or more water-shedding layers applied to a sloped roof prior to the application of a prepared roof covering. The primary purpose of an underlayment is defined as a water shedding layer to function in combination with a prepared roof covering.

WOOD SHAKES. Tapered or straight pieces of red cedar, or other wood types, of widths ranging from 3 inches to 14 inches (76 mm to 356 mm) ranging in lengths from 18 inches to 32 inches (457 mm to 813 mm) applied to a sloped roof, in conjunction with an approved underlayment, forming a discontinuous prepared roof system.

WOOD SHINGLES. Tapered pieces of red cedar, or other wood types, sawn on both faces, of widths ranging from 3 inches to 14 inches (76 mm to 356 mm) and lengths of 16 inches (406 mm), 18 inches (457 mm), and 24 inches (610 mm) applied to a sloped roof forming a discontinuous prepared roof system.

SECTION 1514
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WEATHER PROTECTION
1514.1 General.

Roof decks shall be covered with roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof coverings shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s installation instructions such that the roof covering shall serve to protect the building or structure. All roof coverings, roof systems and roof assemblies shall be designed and installed to resist the windload requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code.

1514.2 Flashings.

All roof flashing and terminations shall be designed and installed to resist the windload requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code, and shall be in compliance with the provisions set forth in RAS 111.

1514.2.1 Locations.

Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall conform with the provisions of RAS 111.

1514.2.2 Membrane flashings.

All membrane flashing shall be installed according to the roof assembly manufacturer’s published literature and in accordance with the provisions set forth in RAS 111.

1514.2.2.1

Membrane flashings shall be embedded in hot bitumen or an approved adhesive.

1514.2.3 Metal flashings and terminations.

Metal flashing and terminations shall be of the material and thickness described in Section 1517.6 and RAS 111 of this code, and shall be designed and installed in accordance with RAS 111.

1514.2.3.1

Metal surfaces shall be primed with an ASTM D41 or ASTM D43 primer, as appropriate and allowed to dry prior to receiving hot bitumen or cold adhesive.

1514.2.4 Metal counterflashing.

Metal counterflashing shall be of the material and thickness described in Section 1517.6 and RAS 111 of this code, and shall be installed in accordance with RAS 111.

1514.2.4.1

Metal counterflashing shall be built into walls, set in reglets or applied as stucco type and shall be turned down over base flashing not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

1514.2.4.2

Metal counterflashing shall be side lapped a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm).

1514.2.4.3

Metal counterflashing, where set in reglets or surface-mounted, shall be waterproofed, in accordance with applicable application standards.

1514.2.4.4

Where metal counterflashing is used as the means of sealing (such as a vented system) it shall be set in an approved sealant, sealed with an approved adhesive on the top flange and all joints shall be sealed with an approved sealant and lapped a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm).

1514.2.5 Roof penetration flashing.
1514.2.5.1

All pipes shall be flashed with approved lead sleeve-type, pitch pans or other approved methods detailed in the roofing system assembly product approval. Lead flashing shall not be less than 2.5 pounds per square foot (12.2 kg/m2). Flanges shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm).

1514.2.5.2

Other roof penetrations shall be suitably flashed with curbs, collars, pitch pans, in compliance with RAS 111 or an approved method, in compliance with the roofing system assembly product approval.

1514.2.5.3

No roof penetration shall be located in roof valleys.

1514.3 Coping.

Copings shall be designed and installed to resist the windload requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code, and shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in RAS 111.

1514.4 Roof drainage.

Unless roofs are sloped to drain over roof edges, roof drains shall be installed at each low point of the roof. If required, roof drains shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Where required for primary roof drainage, scuppers shall be placed level with the roof surface in a wall or parapet. The scupper shall be located as determined by the roof slope and contributing roof area. Scuppers shall be sized in accordance with the provisions contained in ASCE 7, Chapter 8 with commentary and shall comply with Section 1611 herein.

1514.4.1 Gutters.

Gutters shall be in compliance with RAS 111.

1514.4.2 Overflow drains and scuppers.

Where roof drains are required, overflow drains or overflow scuppers sized in accordance with Florida Building Code, Plumbing and ASCE 7, Chapter 8 with commentary shall be installed with the inlet flow line located not less than 2 inches (51 mm) or more than 4 inches (102 mm) above the low point of the finished roofing surface, excluding sumps. Overflow scuppers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in any dimension and shall be located as close as practical to required vertical leaders, conductors or downspouts. Overflow drains and scuppers shall also comply with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, and Section 1611 of this code.

1514.4.2.1

When overflow scuppers and roof drains are installed, they shall be lined with approved metal or other approved materials set forth herein.

1514.4.2.2

When recovering, reroofing or repairing an existing roof, the existing number or size of required scuppers and/or roof drains shall not be reduced, unless a new drainage system is designed by a registered design professional, in compliance with the provisions of this code.

1514.4.3 Sizing and discharge.

Roof drains, gutters, conductors and leaders shall be sized and discharge in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing and ASCE 7, Chapter 8 with commentary.

SECTION 1515
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
1515.1 General.

All roof assemblies, roof coverings and roof systems shall have product approval, and shall meet the following minimum requirements.

1515.1.1

All continuous roofing assemblies shall be tested in compliance with FM Test Standards 4470 and/or 4471 (for metal roofing), as modified for the purposes of this code and set forth in TAS 114. Only those components listed within the roofing assembly product approval shall be approved for use with the roof covering. Roofing assemblies shall be acceptable for use in this code’s jurisdiction providing they are in compliance with the fire classification required for the structure to which the roofing assembly is to be installed.

1515.1.2

All fastening devices and fastening assemblies used for insulation, anchor sheet or roof coverings shall be tested in compliance with Section 1523 of this code.

1515.1.3

All roofing assemblies shall be tested by a testing laboratory, certified by the certification agency in accordance with TAS 301, to confirm compliance with the fire classification and other sections of this code.

1515.1.4

All roofing membranes and components shall be tested in compliance with the physical property test requirements detailed in TAS 110.

1515.1.5

No loose laid ballasted or nonballasted system shall be permitted.

1515.2 Guidelines for roofing applications.

TABLE 1515.2

MINIMUM SLOPE

SYSTEM TYPE	SLOPE
Fibrous Cement Shingles	4:12
Metal Panels	
 Architectural	2:121
 Metal Shingles	4:12
Mortar or Adhesive Tile	2:12
Mechanically Fastened Tile	4:12
Asphalt Shingles	
 Laminated	2:12
 3-Tab	2:12
Quarry Slate	31/2:12
Wood	
 Shakes	4:12
 Shingles	31/2:12

1.	Standing seam metal roof panel systems that pass the requirements of the Static Water Leakage Test criteria of ASTM E2140 shall be permitted to be installed to a minimum slope of 1:12.

1515.2.1 Decks.

All roofing systems and prepared roof coverings shall be installed over solid decks, unless otherwise specifically allowed in other sections of this code.

1515.2.2 Minimum slope.

All roofing assemblies must be installed in compliance with the slope requirements specified in the product control approval, in compliance with Table 1515.2.

1515.2.2.1

In new construction the minimum deck slope shall be not less than 1/4:12.

1515.2.3 Deck preparation.
1515.2.3.1

Reserved.

1515.2.3.2

All eaves shall provide a firm nailable substrate for secure attachment of perimeter edge metal in compliance with RAS 111.

1515.2.3.3

Perimeter edge metal shall be fastened with nails or fasteners fabricated from similar or compatible material. The nails or fasteners shall be as set forth in the roofing assembly product approval.

1515.2.4 Impact resistance.

Roof coverings installed on low slope roofs in accordance with Section 1519 shall resist impact damage based on the results of tests conducted in accordance with ASTM D3746, ASTM D4272, FM 4470 or TAS 114.

1515.2.5 Ridge vents.

Ridge vents shall have a product approval, and shall be tested for wind driven rain in accordance with TAS 110 and Section 1523.

SECTION 1516
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FIRE CLASSIFICATION
1516.1 General.

Roof assemblies shall be divided into the classes defined below. Class A, B and C roof assemblies and roof coverings required to be listed by this section shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. In addition, fire-retardant-treated-wood roof coverings shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D2898.

1516.2

Fire-resistant roofing assemblies and coverings shall be provided on all structures. Fire classification of roofing assemblies and coverings shall be based on the exposure hazard as follows:

1516.2.1 Class A.

Zero feet to 20 feet (0 to 6.1 m) distance separation measured horizontally from the closest point of any building edge to the nearest point to an adjoining structure, and all buildings with occupation greater than 300 persons.

Exception: Brick, masonry, slate, clay or concrete roof tile and exposed concrete roof deck are considered to meet Class A roof covering provisions without testing.

1516.2.2 Class B.

All other structures, except as noted below.

1516.2.3 Class C.

Structures not occupied by humans.

1516.2.4

All roofing assemblies shall be installed at a slope no greater than the maximum allowed for the required fire classification.

1516.2.5

Waterproofing assembly must possess a Class A, Class B or Class C fire rating as required herein.

SECTION 1517
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—MATERIALS
1517.1 Scope.

Every roofing component shall comply with the applicable ASTM material standards adopted by this code. All such products shall bear the testing logo imprinted on the material and/or container or shall be marked in a distinctive manner to define compliance with the standards and shall be subject to be evaluated for compliance. The certification agency shall carry out random testing of labeled products to confirm compliance with ASTM material standard.

1517.2 Compatibility of materials.

Reserved.

1517.3 Material specification and physical characteristics.

Reserved.

1517.4 Product identification.

All roofing components shall be labeled and/or identified as mandated by the product approval.

1517.4.1

ASTM standard roll goods shall be marked with a yellow line to identify the ASTM standard, or such other marking as may be deemed appropriate by the product approval.

1517.5 Fasteners.
1517.5.1

Nails shall be minimum 12 gage, annular ring shank nails having not less than 20 rings per inch, heads not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in diameter; and lengths sufficient to penetrate through the thickness of plywood panel or wood plank decking not less than 3/16 inch (4.8 mm), or to penetrate into a 1 inch (25 mm) or greater thickness of lumber not less than 1 inch. Nails or wood screws shall be hot-dipped electro- or mechanically galvanized to a thickness sufficient to resist corrosion in compliance with TAS 114, Appendix E, Section 2 (ASTM G85). All nails shall be listed by a certification agency. All nail cartons or carton labels shall be labeled to note compliance with the corrosion-resistance requirements. No roofing material shall be fully or partially adhered directly to a nailable deck, unless otherwise noted in the roof assembly product approval.

1517.5.2

Such fasteners shall be applied through “Tin caps” no less than 15/8 inches (41 mm) and not more than 2 inches (51 mm) in diameter and of not less than 32 gage (0.010 inch) sheet metal. “Cap nails” or prefabricated fasteners with integral heads complying with this section shall be an acceptable substitute. All “tin caps,” “cap nails” or prefabricated fasteners with integral heads shall be tested for corrosion resistance in compliance with TAS 114 Appendix E, Section 2 (ASTM G85), and shall be product control listed. All of cartons or carton labels “tin caps,” “cap nails” or prefabricated fasteners with integral heads shall be labeled to note compliance with the corrosion-resistance requirements.

1517.6 Metal roofing accessories.

All metal accessories for roofs shall be not less than 26 gage G-90 galvanized or stainless steel, 16 ounce copper, 0.025-inch (0.6 mm) thick aluminum, lead sheet with a minimum 2.5 lb/sf (12.2 kg/m2) or equivalent noncorrosive metal alloys or composite materials manufactured for use as roof termination. All composite and nonmetallic flashing materials shall have a product approval.

1517.6.1

Metal accessories may be of a manufactured, shop-fabricated or field-fabricated type, providing the materials and fasteners are in compliance with the minimum requirements of this code and shall be sized, designed and installed in compliance with methods set forth in RAS 111.

1517.6.2

Gravel stop or drip edge profiles shall be as follows:

1517.6.2.1

The vertical face shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm) and shall extend down not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) below the sheathing or other member immediately contiguous thereto. In all cases, the deck flange shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in width. Gravel stop or drip edge shall be sized, designed and installed in compliance with RAS 111.

1517.6.2.2

Gravel stop or drip edge shall be designed so that the bottom (the kick of the metal) of the drip edge shall have a minimum of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) clearance from the structure.

1517.6.2.3

Reserved.

1517.6.2.4

Gravel stops shall be installed after all roofing felts have been applied, or in compliance with the application method set forth in the roofing assembly product approval. All asphalt or approved cold adhesive bonding areas shall be coated with ASTM D41 or ASTM D43, as required, and allowed to dry prior to application.

1517.6.2.5

Gravel stops and drip edges shall be joined by lapping a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) and the entire interior of the joints shall be coated with approved flashing cement. Cover and splice plates shall be of the same material as the gravel stop and drip edge, and shall be sized, fabricated and installed in compliance with RAS 111.

1517.6.2.6

The deck flange shall be nailed with an approved minimum 12 gage annular ring shank nail at 4 inches (102 mm) o.c. The nail shall be manufactured from similar and/or compatible material to the termination profile. All composite materials shall be fastened with nonferrous nails.

SECTION 1518
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROOF COVERINGS WITH SLOPES 2:12 OR GREATER
1518.1 General.

Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and themanufacturer’s installation instructions.

1518.2 Underlayments.

Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. Underlayment materials required to comply with ASTM D226, D1970, D4869, D6757 and D8257 shall bear a label indicating compliance with the standard designation and, if applicable, type classification indicated. Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall be applied and attached in accordance with Section 1518.1, 1518.2, 1518.5, 1518.6, 1518.7, 1518.8, 1518.9, 1518.10 or 1518.11, as applicable.

Exceptions:

1.	For areas of a roof that cover exterior walkways and roofs of agricultural buildings, underlayment shall comply with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2.	Compliance with Section 1518.2.1 is not required for structural metal panels that do not require a substrate or underlayment.

1518.2.1 Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles.

Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles shall comply withone of the following methods:

1.	The entire roof deck shall be covered with anapproved self-adhering polymer modified bitumenunderlayment complying with ASTM D1970installed in accordance with both the underlaymentmanufacturer’s and roof covering manufacturer’sinstallation instructions for the deck material, roofventilation configuration and climate exposure forthe roof covering to be installed.

Exception: An existing self-adhering modifiedbitumen underlayment that has been previouslyinstalled over the roof decking and, where it isrequired, renailing of the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed orverified. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table 1507.1.1.1 for the applicableroof covering shall be applied over the entire roofover the existing self-adhered modified bitumenunderlayment.

2.	A minimum 33/4-inch-wide (95 mm) strip of selfadhering polymer-modified bitumen membrane complying with ASTM D1970 or self-adhering flexible flashing tape complying with AAMA 711, Level 3 [for exposure up to 176°F (80°C)], installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructionsfor the deck material, shall be applied over all jointsin the roof decking. An approved underlayment inaccordance with Table 1518.2.1 for the applicableroof covering shall be applied over the entire roofover the membrane strips.

3.	Two layers of ASTM D226 Type II, D4869 Type IIIor IV, or D8257 underlayment shall be installed asfollows: Apply a strip of underlayment for the firstcourse that is half the width of a full sheet parallel toand starting at the eaves, fastened sufficiently tohold in place. Starting at the eave, apply a full sheetof underlayment for the second course. Apply thethird course of underlayment overlapping the secondcourse half the width of a full sheet plus 2 inches (51mm). Overlap all successive courses half the widthof a full sheet plus 1 inch (25.4 mm). End laps shallbe 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be offset by 6 feet(1829 mm). Underlayment shall be attached to anailable deck with corrosion-resistant fasteners witha maximum fastener spacing measured horizontallyand vertically of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c. betweenside laps, and one row at the end and side laps fastened 6 inches (152 mm) o.c. Underlayment shall beattached using annular ring or deformed shank nailswith metal or plastic caps with a nominal cap diameter of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm). Metal caps arerequired where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult,equals or exceeds 170 mph (76 m/s). Metal capsshall have a thickness of not less than 32-gage sheetmetal. The minimum thickness of the outside edgeof plastic caps shall be 0.035 inch (0.889 mm). Thecap nail shank shall be not less than 0.083 inch(2.1082 mm) for ring shank cap nails. The cap nailshank shall have a length sufficient to penetratethrough the roof sheathing or not less than 3/4 inch(19.05 mm) into the roof sheathing.

TABLE 1518.2.1

UNDERLAYMENT WITH SELF-ADHERING STRIPS OVER ROOF DECKING JOINTS

ROOF COVERING	UNDERLAYMENT TYPE	UNDERLAYMENT ATTACHMENT
Roof Slope 2:12 and Less Than 4:12	Roof Slope 4:12 and Greater
Asphalt Shingles, Metal Roof Panels, PhotovoltaicShingles	ASTM D226 Type II ASTM D4869 Type III or IVASTM D6757	Apply in accordance with
Section 1518.2.1, Item 3
	
Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion,
parallel to and starting from the eave and
lapped 4 inches; end laps shall be 6 inches and
shall be offset by 6 feet. Underlayments shall
be fastened with approved minimum 12 gage
by 11/4 in. corrosion-resistant annular ring
shank roofing nails fastened through minimum
32 gage by 15/8 in. diameter approved tin caps.
Underlayment shall be attached to a nailable
deck in a grid pattern of 12 inches between the
overlaps, with 6-inch spacing at the overlaps.
Nails shall be of sufficient length to penetrate
through the sheathing or wood plank a minimum of 1/8
in. or penetrate 1 inch or greater
thickness of lumber a minimum of 1 in., except
where architectural appearance is to be preserved,
in which case a minimum of 3/4 in. nail may be used.

Metal Roof Shingles,
Mineral-Surface Roll
Roofing, Slate and Slatetype Shingles, Wood
Shingles, Wood Shake
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869 Type III or IV
ASTM D8257

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

1518.2.2

Where the architectural appearance of the underside is to be preserved, the underlayment shall be securedin accordance with Section 1519.5.2.

1518.2.3

Tin caps and nails or cap nails shall be as definedin Section 1517.5.2.

1518.2.4

Underlayment nails shall be as defined in Section 1517.5.1.

1518.3

Reserved.

1518.4

Reserved.

1518.5 Fiber cement shingles.

Fiber-cement shingles shall be applied in compliance with the shingle manufacturer’s roofing assembly product approval. The roofing system assembly product approval shall meet the following minimum requirements:

1518.5.1

All nonasbestos fiber-cement shingles shall conform to ASTM C 1225.

1518.5.2

Fiber-cement shingles shall be installed in compliance with the nailing requirements set forth in the product approval; however, attachment of each component shall be with not less than two corrosion-resistant fasteners. If adhesive is used at the head or side laps, the system shall be defined as a “sealed system” with load calculations in compliance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

1518.5.3

All intersections shall be flashed in metal as provided in Section 1517.6 and RAS 111.

1518.5.4

Fiber-cement shingles shall be tested as set forth in Section 1523.

1518.6 Quarry slate.

Quarry slates shall be applied in compliance with the slate manufacturer’s product approval. The roofing assembly product approval shall meet the following minimum requirements:

1518.6.1

Quarry slates shall be installed with not less than two approved fasteners per slate.

1518.6.2

All terminations and intersections shall be flashed in metal as provided in Section 1517.6 and RAS 111.

1518.6.3

Quarry slates shall be tested in compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 1523.

1518.6.4

Installation of all quarry roof slates shall be limited to a roof mean height of 33 feet (10 m), unless otherwise specifically noted in the product approval.

1518.7 Asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles layout, alignment and placement of mechanical attachment shall be in compliance with the product approval, and shall be installed in accordance with RAS 115.

1518.7.1.

Underlayments meeting or exceeding minimum underlayment specifications, as detailed in Section 1518, shall be applied in compliance with the application methods detailed in the product approval. Where the architectural appearance of the underside of the roof is to be preserved, refer to Section 1519.5.2.

1518.7.2

Installation of all asphalt shingles shall be limited to a roof mean height of 33 feet (10 m), unless otherwise specifically noted in the product approval.

1518.7.3

The asphalt shingle product approval shall meet the following minimum requirements.

1518.7.3.1

Where asphalt shingles are to be installed over insulated roof deck, a suitable nailable substrate, in accordance with Section 1520.5.7 must be installed over the insulation prior to the installation of approved underlayment and shingles.

1518.7.3.2

Asphalt shingles shall be installed in compliance with the product approval, but in no case with less than six approved roofing nails or approved fastening devices which penetrate through the thickness of sheathing or wood plank a minimum of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) or penetrate into a 1 inch (25 mm) or greater thickness of lumber a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm), except where architectural appearance is to be preserved, in which case a minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) ring shank roofing nail may be used.

1518.7.3.3

Intersections, eaves, rakes, valleys, gable ends, and the starter course of asphalt shingles shall be set in an 8-inch (203 mm) wide bed of approved cold adhesive or roofing cement. Application of adhesive or cement shall be in compliance with the application instructions of the product approval. Shingles shall not extend more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) beyond the eave and rake drip.

1518.7.3.4

All perimeter termination and valleys shall be fabricated from metal. Minimum metal requirements are set forth in Section 1517.6 and RAS 111.

1518.7.3.5

Asphalt shingles shall be tested in compliance with the provisions set forth in Section 1523.

1518.8 Clay and concrete roof tile.

Tile shall be clay, concrete or composition material of various configurations complying with the physical property requirements of this code. All tile and tile systems shall be tested in compliance with the provisions set forth in Section 1523.

1518.8.1 Application.

All tile systems shall be installed over solid sheathed decks. All tile installation shall be in accordance with RAS 118, RAS 119, and RAS 120, as applicable.

1518.8.1.1

Roof tile mortar shall either be a premixed unit having a product approval and tested in compliance with TAS 123 or a job-site mix approved by the building official and in compliance with RAS 113.

1518.8.2

The roof tile product approval shall specify the slope requirement for each tile and underlayment system in accordance with Table 1515.2.

1518.8.3

All roof tile fasteners shall be tested and comply with the requirements set forth in Section 1523.

1518.8.4 All tile systems.

All tile application designs shall comply with the following limitations in order to withstand the wind loads prescribed in this section, as well as all wind load requirements set forth in Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones).

1518.8.4.1

Roof tile systems, combining mechanically fastened tile and mortar and/or adhesive, shall be acceptable.

1518.8.4.2

In an air permeable tile roofing system: (1) the length of each tile shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and not greater than 21 inches (533 mm) and the exposed width of the tile shall be between 8.5 inches and 15 inches (216 mm and 381 mm); (2) the maximum thickness of the nose (leading edge) of the tile shall not exceed 1.3 inches (33 mm); and (3) mortar or adhesive set system shall have at least two-thirds of the tile free of mortar and/or adhesive contact.

1518.8.5

The proposed method of attachment for tile systems which are considered to be air permeable, shall provide sufficient attachment resistance (Mf) (listed in tile product approval) to meet or exceed the moment of resistance (Mr) as determined by following the procedures outlined in RAS 127. The aerodynamic multiplier (k) needed in RAS 127 shall be part of the tile product approval and shall be derived from the following formulas:

for direct deck application	k = (0.156) × (b) × (l)2
for batten application	k = (0.144) × (b) × (l)2
Where b (in feet) = exposed width of the tiles
Where l (in feet) = length of tiles
1518.8.6

The proposed method of attachment for tile systems which are not considered air permeable shall provide a minimum characteristic force (F') (listed in tile product control approval) to meet or exceed the required uplift resistance (Fr) as determined by following the procedures outlined in RAS 127.

1518.8.7

Tile systems shall extend beyond the drip edge (not including the rake) not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) but not more than 2 inches (51 mm).

1518.8.8

Reserved.

1518.8.9

Reserved.

1518.8.10

Mortar or adhesive set tiles applied at an incline from 6:12 up to and including 7:12 shall have the first course of tile (this applies to pan only on two-piece barrel tile) mechanically fastened with not less than one fastener per tile. As an alternate, the first course of tile shall be applied in mortar over a single layer of minimum 20 gage galvanized wire mesh with openings of not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) or greater than 11/2 inches (38 mm) with minimum exposure of 12 inches (305 mm) which is mechanically attached to the deck through the underlayment with approved fasteners and tin-cap when back-nailing the cap sheet. Additionally, for roof inclines of 6:12 up to and including 7:12, every third tile of every fifth course, shall be mechanically fastened with not less than one fastener per tile. For roof inclines above 7:12, in addition to the mortar or adhesive, all tiles shall be mechanically fastened with not less than one fastener per tile. Apply approved flashing cement to seal all tile fastener penetrations, for all roof inclines.

1518.8.11

All tile systems shall be shingle lapped interlocking and installed with the headlap as specified in the tile system product approval. In no case shall the minimum headlap be less than 2 inches (51 mm) for mortar or adhesive set tile, or less than 3 inches (76 mm) for mechanically set tile, unless restricted by product design.

1518.8.12

Where tiles are to be installed over an insulated roof deck, a suitable nailable substrate, in accordance with Sections 1520.5.6 and 1520.5.7 must be installed over the insulation prior to the installation of approved underlayment and tiles.

1518.8.13

For mortar or adhesive set tile, no more than two tiles shall be loose per roofing square [100 square feet (9.3 m2)]. No loose tile shall be adjacent to each other.

1518.9 Metal panels/shingles.

Steel panels/shingles shall be a minimum of G-90 corrosion resistant, and shall be not less than 26 gage in thickness. Aluminum panels/shingles shall not be less than 0.025 inch (0.685 mm) thick. All other metal panel/shingle products shall be an equivalent weight. All metal panel/shingle assemblies shall be capable of withstanding foot traffic without damage to the metal panels/shingles. Metal panels/shingles shall have product approval for a complete metal system, which shall include the panel/shingle, underlayment and all related accessories to provide a complete waterproof system.

1518.9.1

All metal panels/shingles assemblies shall be tested in accordance with Section 1523 and TAS 125.

1518.9.2

The entire application method of all metal panel/shingle systems shall be detailed in the product approval and RAS 133, as applicable.

1518.9.3

Metal shingles may be applied as a recover over a single layer of asphalt shingles or smooth surface roofing, providing the deck is solid sheathed and in compliance with the provisions of this code, the existing prepared roof covering is in compliance with provisions of this code and the entire metal shingle system is applied as set forth in the product approval.

1518.9.4

Metal panel/shingle systems shall not extend more than 1 inch (25 mm) beyond the roof eave.

1518.9.5

All intersections shall be flashed in metal as provided in Section 1517.6, RAS 111 and the roof assembly product approval.

1518.10 Wood shingles and shakes.

All wood shingles and shakes shall be installed in accordance with RAS 130. Installation of all wood shingles and shakes shall be limited to a roof mean height of 33 feet (10 m), unless otherwise specifically noted in the product approval.

1518.10.1

All wood shingle/shake systems shall be tested in accordance with Section 1523.

1518.11 Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles.

The installation of building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.

1518.11.1 Material standards.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703.

1518.11.2 Attachment.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval.

1518.11.3 Wind resistance.

Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be tested in accordance with procedures and acceptance criteria in TAS 107. Building integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingle packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with the procedures in TAS 107.

SECTION 1519
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROOF COVERINGS WITH SLOPES LESS THAN 2:12
1519.1 General.

All adhered roofing components shall be bonded to the various types of substrates in compliance with the requirements set forth in the roofing assembly product approval and the following minimum requirements. The authority having jurisdiction may adopt RAS 150 as the means of complying with the requirements listed in this section.

1519.2

All packaged asphalt shall have the following data printed on the carton wrapper:

1519.2.1

ASTM designation and type;

1519.2.2

Flash point as determined by ASTM D92, Flash and Fire Point by Cleveland Open Cup; and

1519.2.3

Equiviscous temperature (EVT) at which the asphalt attains a viscosity of 125 centipoise (25 centipoise for coal tar) as determined by ASTM D4402, Viscosity Determinations of Unfilled Asphalt Using the Brookfield Thermoset Apparatus.

1519.3

Asphalt types, as defined by ASTM D312, shall be employed in all roofing assemblies. Application of asphalt shall be in compliance with Table 1519.3A and Table 1519.3B or as detailed in the roofing assembly product approval.

TABLE 1519.3A

SLOPE AND APPLICATION TEMPERATURE CRITERIA

MAXIMUM1
	Slope
(in./ft)
	Temperature (°F)
ASTM D312
TYPES OF
ASPHALT			MOP	MECHANICAL
Type I	Dead Level	1/4	350 ± 25	375 ± 25
Type II	Flat	1/2	400 ± 25	425 ± 25
Type III	Steep	3	425 ± 25	450 ± 25
Type IV	Special
Steep
(All roof tile
systems)
	N/A	450 ± 25	475 ± 25

1 inch = 25.4 mm; °C = 5/9 (°F - 32).

1.	Temperature and slope measurements are at point of application.

TABLE 1519.3B

SLOPE AND APPLICATION TEMPERATURE CRITERIA

ASTM D450
COAL TAR
TYPE NO.	TYPE OF
COAL TAR
	MAXIMUM
SLOPE
(in./ft)	TEMPERATURE
RANGE
(°F)
Type I	Coal Tar Pitch	1/4	360 ± 25
Type II	Coal Tar
Bitumen
	1/4	375 ± 25

1 inch = 25.4 mm; °C = 5/9 (°F - 32).

1519.4

Back nailing of interply sheets shall not be required when using ASTM D312 Type IV asphalt on slopes less than 3:12.

1519.5 Mechanical attachment.

All mechanically attached roofing components shall be attached to the various types of substrates in compliance with the requirements set forth in the roofing assembly product approval and the following minimum requirements.

1519.5.1 Base sheet attachment on wood decks.

Nails shall be minimum 12 gage, annular ring shank nails having not less than 20 rings per inch; heads not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in diameter; and lengths sufficient to penetrate through the thickness of plywood panel or wood plank decking not less than 3/16 inch (5 mm), or to penetrate into a 1-inch (25.4 mm), or greater, thickness of lumber not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm). Nails shall be hot dipped; electro- or mechanically galvanized to a thickness sufficient to resist corrosion in compliance with Appendix E of TAS 114. All nails shall have product approval. All nail cartons or carton labels shall be labeled to note compliance with the corrosion-resistance requirements. No roofing material shall be fully or partially adhered, unless otherwise noted in the roof assembly product approval directly to a nailable deck.

1519.5.1.1

Tin caps shall meet the requirements of Section 1517.5.2.

1519.5.1.2

Prefabricated fastener systems complying with Sections 1519.5.1 and 1519.5.1.1 may be used, provided they are product approved.

1519.5.1.3

Spacing of such fasteners shall be in compliance with patterns set forth in the roofing assembly product approval.

1519.5.2

Where the architectural appearance of the underside is to be preserved, a base sheet may be secured in an alternate method of attachment prepared, signed, and sealed by a Florida-registered architect or engineer, or in buildings where the mean roof height does not exceed 15 feet (4.6 m), a base sheet may be secured with 11/4-inch (32 mm) fasteners on supporting members, with a minimum of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) fasteners between the supporting members, all of which shall be secured through tin caps and nailed 6 inches (152 mm) o.c. in all directions.

1519.5.3 Lightweight insulating concrete.

All lightweight insulating concrete shall be vented per roofing system manufacturer recommendations.

1519.5.3.1

Lightweight concrete shall not be applied over an existing roof deck unless the supporting structure has been approved as adequate to sustain the added weight. Calculations verifying the adequacy of the existing structure to sustain the added weight shall be prepared, signed, sealed and dated by a Florida-registered architect or engineer, who is proficient in structural design, and submitted with the uniform roofing permit application.

1519.5.4 Other nailable decks.

The mechanical attachment of roofing components to other nailable decks shall be governed by the roofing assembly product approval.

1519.6 Cast-in-place and precast structural concrete decks.

Cast-in-place and precast structural concrete decks are considered nonnailable. Concrete decks shall be clean, dry and fully primed with ASTM D41 or ASTM D43, as required, primer applied at a rate of not less than 1 gallon (3.8 L) per square. Hot asphalt or cold adhesive shall not be applied until the primer has fully dried.

1519.6.1

Reserved.

1519.7 Steel decks.

Steel decks shall be covered with a roof insulation panel having its own product approval and listed in the roofing assembly product approval. Insulation panels shall be mechanically fastened in compliance with the mechanical attachment patterns listed in the roofing assembly product approval and in accordance with the provisions of RAS 117.

1519.7.1

If the deck thickness on an existing steel deck is less than 22 gage, a field fastener withdrawal-resistance test shall be conducted in compliance with TAS 105 to confirm compliance with the wind load requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). Test results shall be submitted with the uniform roofing permit application for review prior to issuance of the roofing permit. The field fastener withdrawal-resistance test shall be carried out by an approved testing laboratory.

1519.7.2

Steel decks shall be welded or mechanically attached to the structure in compliance with the design pressure requirements set forth in Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones).

1519.7.3

Composite wood and insulation panels shall be mechanically attached to steel decks in compliance with the attachment requirements enumerated in the insulation roofing component product approval. The composite wood insulation panel shall be in compliance with the minimum sheathing requirements of this code.

1519.8 Flashing.

All flashing shall be installed according to the roof assembly manufacturer’s published details and literature and in accordance with RAS 111.

1519.9 Valleys.

Valleys in BUR shall be installed according to the roof assembly manufacturer’s published literature for high wind areas and in compliance with the applicable detail described in the product approval.

1519.10 Parapet walls.

All parapet wall details shall be installed in accordance with the roofing system product approval, manufacturer’s published details and literature and in accordance with approved methods detailed in RAS 111.

1519.11 Insulation.

Roof insulation shall be applied in compliance with the roofing system product approval and RAS 117.

1519.12 Surfacing.

Roofing assemblies shall be surfaced in compliance with the product approval. Surfacing shall be in sufficient quantity to comply with the required fire classification. Aggregate surfacing shall not be used on slopes greater than 3:12. Aggregate shall be embedded in a flood coat of bitumen applied over a prepared top ply.

1519.12.1

On slopes of 3:12 or less, not less than 400 pound (182 kg) of roofing gravel or 300 pounds (145 kg) of slag per square shall be applied. A minimum of 50 percent of the total aggregate shall be embedded in the flood coat of bitumen. Aggregate shall be dry and free from dirt and shall be in compliance with the sizing requirements set forth in ASTM D1863. A building official may request a test to confirm compliance with these requirements.

1519.12.2

On inclines greater than 3:12, a smooth surface coating shall be applied.

1519.12.3

Mineral surfaced cap sheet applications shall not require any additional surfacing unless required with the particular assembly for a fire classification.

1519.12.4

All smooth surface applications shall be coated with an aluminized or emulsion coating, having a valid and current product approval and shall be in compliance with the application instructions in said product approval. Coating quantity shall be in compliance with the required fire rating classification for the structure.

1519.13 Attachment of metal termination.

All edge metal and terminations shall be installed according to manufacturer’s published literature, provided it meets the minimum requirements as set forth in RAS 111 and Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones).

1519.14 Expansion joints.

Expansion joint covers and expansion joint components shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the roofing assembly manufacturer’s published literature.

1519.15 Venting roofing assemblies.

All roof assemblies shall be applied to a dry substrate. Vapor retarders shall be installed, where applicable, to reduce moisture vapor flow into insulation from the warm, humid building interior, leading to internal condensation. Vents shall be installed to assist in the expulsion of moisture vapor where such vapor may enter the roofing assembly or moisture, as defined in Section 1521.12. Venting units shall not allow vapor to enter the roofing assembly when the high vapor pressure side is above the roofing membrane.

1519.16 Waterproofing.

Waterproofing systems may be installed in lieu of an approved roof system over sloped or horizontal decks specifically designed for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, whether the deck is above occupied or unoccupied space. In new construction the minimum deck slope shall be 1/4:12.

1519.16.1

The waterproofing system must possess a current and valid product approval.

1519.16.2

If an overburden or wearing surface is not to be installed, the waterproofing system must be approved by the manufacturer for use in vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic locations.

1519.16.3

Reserved.

1519.16.4

If any portion of the waterproofing membrane is to remain exposed, the waterproofing system shall be ultra-violet resistant.

1519.16.5

Flashings must be installed in accordance with the waterproofing manufacturer’s published specifications and in compliance with the material and attachment standards of RAS 111.

1519.16.6

The waterproofing system shall be flood tested in accordance with ASTM D5957.

1519.16.6.1

The flood test shall take place after installation of the waterproofing membrane and prior to the installation of any above membrane components, wearing surface or overburden.

1519.16.6.2

An approved testing lab shall provide written verification to the building official confirming that the flood test was performed along with the results, prior to final inspection.

SECTION 1520
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROOF INSULATION
1520.1 General.

All roof insulation shall have a product approval as an approved roofing component for use in roofing assemblies. All insulation shall be tested for physical properties in accordance with TAS 110.

1520.2 Foam plastic.

Reserved.

1520.2.1

Foam insulation panels shall be overlaid with a perlite, fiberglass, wood fiber or mineral wool overlay unless specifically stated to the contrary in the roof assembly product approval.

1520.3 Cellulose fiberboard.

Reserved.

1520.4 Insulation fasteners, membrane fasteners and stress plates.

All insulation fasteners, membrane fasteners and stress plates shall have a roof component product approval, and shall be tested in compliance with RAS 117 Appendices A, B and C, and TAS 110 and TAS 114, Appendix E, Section 3 (DIN 50018), for corrosion resistance.

1520.5 Application.

Roof insulation shall be applied in strict compliance with the application methods detailed in the roof assembly product approval and with the requirements set forth in RAS 117.

1520.5.1

Roof insulation, either on the ground or on the roof top, shall be kept dry. The building official shall instruct the removal of the insulation from the job when elevated moisture levels are found in the insulation or where panels cannot achieve 85-percent adhesion.

1520.5.2

When applied in hot asphalt or cold adhesive, no insulation panel’s dimension shall be greater than 4 feet (1219 mm).

1520.5.3

Strip or spot mopping of insulation panels shall be used as an application method only when approved in the roof assembly product approval.

1520.5.4

Where more than one layer of insulation is applied, joints between layers shall be staggered.

1520.5.5

Application in approved cold adhesive shall be as detailed in the product approval and shall be in compliance with the required fire classification.

1520.5.6

Nail boards or composite panels with a nailable surface may be applied to sloped decks for the application of prepared roof covering or metal roofing systems, providing that the nailing surface is minimum 15/32-inch (12 mm) exterior grade plywood sheathing, and has been attached to the deck with approved fastening assemblies in accordance with the windload requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). Composite panels shall be gapped a minimum of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) to allow for expansion of the sheathing panel.

1520.5.7

Suitable nailable decks installed over rigid board roof insulation in buildings of mean roof height of 35 feet (10.7 m) or less, shall be a minimum of 15/32-inch (12 mm) exterior grade plywood sheathing. These decks shall be fastened to every structural roof frame member or to the existing deck under the insulation, at intervals of not more than 24 inches (610 mm) apart, with a minimum #12 approved insulation fastener spaced at a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) apart in one direction with a minimum penetration of 11/2 inches (38 mm) into the structural member or deck. In these cases the maximum thickness of the rigid insulation board shall not exceed 2 inches (51 mm). An alternate method of attachment may be proposed, provided it is in compliance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), and it is prepared, signed and sealed by a Florida-registered architect or a Florida professional engineer, which architect or engineer shall be proficient in structural design.

1520.5.8

Mechanical attachment of insulation panels at uneven areas shall be acceptable. Hollowing, cutting or scoring of insulation panels to provide contact shall not be acceptable.

SECTION 1521
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
REROOFING
1521.1 General.

Materials and methods of application used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering, system or assembly shall comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 1512 through 1525.

1521.2

Repairs shall be carried out with roofing components as defined in this chapter having a product approval.

1521.3

Repairs shall be carried out in such a manner as to not create additional ponding water.

1521.4

Not more than 25 percent of the total roof area or roofsection of any existing building or structure shall be repaired,replaced or recovered in any 12-month period unless the roofcovering on the entire existing roof system or roof section isreplaced or recovered to conform to the requirements of thiscode.

Exception: If an existing roofing system or roof sectionwas built, repaired, or replaced in compliance with therequirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, or anysubsequent editions of the Florida Building Code, and 25percent or more of such roofing system or roof section isbeing repaired, replaced, or recovered, only the repaired,replaced, or recovered portion is required to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code ineffect, as applicable. Pursuant to Section 553.844(5), Florida Statutes, a local government may not adopt by ordinance an administrative or technical amendment to thisexception.

1521.5

A roofing system shall not be applied over an existing roof or over an existing roof deck where the roof sheathing has not been fastened in compliance with this code or where the roof sheathing will not permit effective fastening or where sheathing is water soaked or deteriorated so that effective attachment is not possible. All areas of deteriorated sheathing shall be removed and replaced. The building official shall not be required to inspect the renailing of the sheathing under this section.

1521.6

Structural concrete decks shall be allowed to dry or shall be dried prior to application of an ASTM D41 or ASTM D43, as required, or roofing system proprietary primer where the base sheet or base insulation layer is bonded to the concrete deck.

1521.7

On lightweight insulating concrete, gypsum and cementitious wood fiber roof decks a field fastener withdrawal-resistance test, in compliance with TAS 105, shall be carried out to confirm compliance with wind load requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

1521.7.1

If the tested fasteners exhibit a minimum characteristic resistance force less than 80 percent than that listed in the product approval, a structural engineer shall examine the deck’s integrity and provide a proposed attachment specification. Such specification shall be submitted with the uniform roofing permit application for review and approval by the building official prior to the issuance of a roofing permit. Calculations for the attachment of the anchor sheet/base sheet or insulation over these deck types shall be in compliance with RAS 117.

1521.8

Steel decks shall be examined prior to recover for indication of corrosion. Any corrosion identified and exposed on the roof side shall be treated with a rust inhibitor, providing the field fastener withdrawal resistance values of the proposed mechanical fasteners comply with the requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code. All steel decks less than 22 gage shall be field tested for fastener withdrawal resistance for compliance with Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones) prior to application of a new roofing system. Test results shall be submitted with the uniform roofing permit application.

1521.9

One additional roofing system may be applied over an original roofing assembly, providing the existing roofing assembly complies with the requirements of Section 1521.

1521.10

If the recover roofing assembly is to be bonded to an existing roofing membrane, the existing roofing membrane shall be tested in compliance with TAS 124 for uplift resistance. The existing roofing membrane shall resist the design pressures calculated under Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code. Test results shall be submitted with the uniform roofing permit application.

1521.11

If the recover roofing assembly is mechanically attached through either a base sheet or insulation layer, the attachment assembly shall be field tested for fastener withdrawal resistance in compliance with TAS 105, and laboratory tested for pull-over resistance to insure compliance with wind uplift requirements set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code. Test results shall be submitted with the uniform roofing permit application. Recover roofing assembly anchor sheet or base sheet shall not be mechanically fastened directly to existing gravel roof unless all gravel is completely removed.

1521.12

Moisture content of the existing roofing assembly to be covered by a new roofing system shall not exceed 5 percent by weight in the roofing membrane and 8 percent by weight in commercially manufactured rigid board roof insulation as verified by moisture survey performed in accordance with TAS 126. Test results shall be submitted with the Uniform Roofing Permit Application. Testing for moisture content shall not be required for existing lightweight insulating concrete, gypsum, and cementitious wood fiber roof decks. All existing lightweight insulating concrete, gypsum and cementitious wood fiber roof decks shall be tested in accordance with Section 1521.7 to confirm compliance with wind load requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

1521.13

Prior to starting the work the contractor has the responsibility of notifying the owner of any possibility of ponding water and recommending a structural review if ponding water is a possibility.

1521.14

If the new roofing system is to be bonded to the existing roof surface, the surface shall be free of all loose gravel, dirt and silt and dry prior to commencement of the roofing application. All blisters shall be cut and repaired prior to roofing application.

1521.14.1

If the existing roof surface has gravel embedded in hot asphalt, all loose gravel shall be removed together with any dirt and silt. The dry membrane surface shall be primed with ASTM D41 primer or proprietary roofing system primer and allowed to dry thoroughly. A flood coat of ASTM D312, Type III or IV asphalt shall be applied to sufficient depth to cover the remaining embedded gravel. The prepared substrate shall be suitable for application of a new insulation layer only.

1521.14.2

In the case of existing coal tar assemblies, the existing roof surface shall be primed with ASTM D43 primer or covered with a mechanically attached separation board prior to application of a new coal tar assembly. If an existing coal tar assembly is to be covered with an asphalt applied roofing system, only the separation board is acceptable. The attachment of the entire assembly, including the separation board, shall meet the design pressure requirements set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

1521.14.3

Insulation shall have a product approval as a roofing component approved for use as a part of the roofing assembly. The insulation panels shall be bonded or mechanically attached in compliance with the product approval and RAS 117.

1521.15

Where an existing sloped roof is sheathed with spaced sheathing, any existing prepared roof covering shall be removed. New sheathing shall be applied in compliance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), or open spacing shall be filled with dimensional lumber to create solid wood sheathing providing the spaced sheathing is in compliance with this code. Spaced sheathing is approved for use with wood shakes and wood shingles only.

1521.16

No recover application shall take place over existing wood shingles, shakes, slate, tile or metal shingles.

1521.17

Asphalt shingle assemblies may be applied over one existing layer of asphalt shingles having not more than 1/8-inch (3.2 mm) difference in level in the existing shingle material. Recover over an existing shingle system shall be with a product having a product approval as prepared roof covering, in strict compliance with the application method detailed in the product approval.

1521.17.1

Application of elastomeric and or maintenance coating systems over existing asphalt shingles shall be in accordance with the shingle manufacturer’s approved installation instructions.

1521.18

Sprayed polyurethane foam (PUF) and elastomeric coating systems may be applied over existing roofing assemblies providing the PUF system has obtained a product approval, the deck has been prepared in compliance with the product approval and this code, the application is in strict compliance with the foam manufacturer’s published application instructions for the environmental conditions at the time of application and post-application inspections conform to RAS 109.

1521.18.1

No PUF system shall be applied over existing composition shingles.

1521.18.2

Upon completion of a PUF system, an inspection of the system shall be carried out by an authorized representative of the coating manufacturer. A certification shall be furnished to the building official within 30 days of completion, confirming that the quality control tests detailed in the PUF system product approval have been carried out with satisfactory results.

1521.18.3

Should a PUF system have inadequate adhesion to meet the design pressures, as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), the roofing system shall be removed and replaced with a roofing system tested to adequate adhesion. An additional inspection shall be required once the roofing system has been replaced. A field adhesion test may be requested by the building official during the application or at the completion of the project to confirm adequate adhesion.

1521.18.4

The PUF system shall comply with Section 1521.

1521.18.5

All PUF systems shall be installed by licensed roofing contractors holding an applicator’s certificate from the manufacturer holding the product approval for the PUF system.

1521.19

Roof coverings or roofing components, such as tile, slate or similar, shall not be applied over an existing roofing system.

1521.20

Lightweight insulating concrete shall not be applied over an existing roofing system unless the existing roofing assembly is verified to be adequate to accept the new lightweight insulating concrete and is in compliance with the testing required herein.

1521.21

Reserved.

SECTION 1522
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES AND COMPONENTS
1522.1 Rooftop structures.

Rooftop structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code.

1522.2 Rooftop-mounted equipment.

All rooftop equipment and supports shall be secured to the structure in compliance with the loading requirements of Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones). The use of wood “sleepers” shall not be permitted.

1522.3

Machinery, piping, conduit, ductwork, signs and similar equipment may be mounted on roofs in compliance with the following:

TABLE 1522.3

ROOF MOUNTED EQUIPMENT HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS

WIDTH OF EQUIPMENT
(in.)
	HEIGHT OF LEGS
(in.)

Up to 24	14
25 to 36	18
37 to 48	24
49 to 60	30
61 and wider	48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1522.3.1

Permanently mounted rooftop equipment shall be installed to provide clearances, in accordance with Table 1522.3, to permit repairs, replacement and/or maintenance of the roofing system or any of its components.

1522.3.2

When reroofing, recovering, performing repair or roof maintenance, and where the roof top equipment is moved to properly execute such work, the minimum clearances of the said equipment support shall be in accordance with Table 1522.3.

1522.3.3

In buildings where the existing rooftop equipment, in the opinion of the building official, provides sufficient clearance to repair, recover, replace and/or maintain the roofing system or any of its components, such existing equipment need not comply with Table 1522.3.

1522.3.4

Electrical conduit, mechanical piping or any other service lines running on the roof shall be raised not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the finished roof surface.

1522.3.5

Condensate lines shall not drain on the roofing system or any of its components. Condensate lines need not comply with the minimum clearance requirements.

SECTION 1523
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
TESTING
1523.1 Scope.

This section defines the minimum testing requirements for substrates, roofing components, roofing systems and roofing assemblies. All roofing products shall be tested for physical properties, water-infiltration, uplift performance and fire resistance, as addressed within this code.

1523.1.1

Testing requirements for physical properties of all roofing products shall be as set forth in TAS 110.

1523.1.2

Reserved.

1523.2 Application.

Testing for substrates, roofing components, roofing systems and roofing assemblies shall comply with the provisions herein and those of Florida Building Code, Building, TAS and RAS listed in this code.

1523.3 Laboratory certification.

All testing required by this code shall be performed by an approved testing laboratory.

1523.4 Margin of safety.

A margin of safety of 2:1 shall be applied to all wind uplift resistance test results. All in-situ (on-site) testing shall have an applied 1.45:1 margin of safety.

1523.5 Material labeling.

All products shall be identified with the product approval number or logo; or the manufacturer’s name or logo. ASTM standard roll goods shall be marked with a yellow line to identify the ASTM standard, or such other marking indicated in the product approval.

1523.5.1

All asphalt shingles, tile products and metal roofing panels and clips shall be labeled on the underside with the Florida Building Code, Building insignia, or product approval number, or the wording “Florida Building Code, Building Product Approved,” and manufacturer’s initials or manufacturer’s logo, or as specified in the manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6 Testing requirements.
1523.6.1

The certification agency, at its discretion, may carry out, observe or delegate the inspection and testing to an independent testing laboratory for any approved product. Should the manufacturer fail to meet the minimum requirements set forth in this code or specifically listed in the manufacturer’s product control approval, the certification agency shall have the authority to withdraw the approval until such time as the manufacturer complies with the approved physical properties. The certification agency shall have the authority, and shall charge the manufacturer for any cost incurred.

1523.6.2 Continuous roofing systems.

All continuous roofing systems shall be tested in compliance with TAS 110 and TAS 114 in its entirety. All continuous roofing systems shall resist a minimum of 90 pounds per square foot (psf) (4309 Pa) tested wind uplift pressure resistance. Continuous roofing system testing requirements shall be as follows:

1523.6.2.1 Spray applied polyurethane foam.

All spray applied polyurethane foam systems shall be tested in compliance to RAS 109 and TAS 110 and TAS 114.

1523.6.2.1.1

Physical properties testing for acrylic coatings used on spray applied polyurethane foam roofing assemblies shall be tested in compliance with ASTM D6083 and federal specification TTC-555B, Test Specification for Wind Driven Rain Infiltration Resistance.

1523.6.3 Liquid applied roofing membranes systems.

All liquid applied roofing membranes systems shall be tested in compliance with TAS 114, in addition to the physical properties testing requirements set forth in TAS 110, and fire resistance.

1523.6.3.1

For liquid applied acrylic roofing membrane assemblies, physical properties testing shall be in compliance with ASTM D6083 and federal specification TTC-555B, Test Specification for Wind Driven Rain Infiltration Resistance.

1523.6.4

The building official may request that a quality control field uplift test be carried out on a continuous roofing system in compliance with test procedure TAS 124. Single-ply systems are not required to meet the deflection requirements established in the test protocol if mechanically attached. The roofing system shall resist the design pressures as calculated in compliance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), and as established in TAS 124, Section 4.

1523.6.4.1

Should a roofing system fail to meet a quality control field uplift test, the roofing contractor may propose to the building official an acceptable method of repair that is in compliance with the requirements of this code.

1523.6.5 Discontinuous roofing systems.

All discontinuous roofing systems shall be tested in compliance with TAS 100 for wind-driven water infiltration resistance. Test specimens used for this test shall be constructed at the approved test facility. Testing requirements shall be as follows:

1523.6.5.1 Asphalt shingle systems.

All asphalt shingle systems shall comply with the following requirements: TAS 100, TAS 107, ASTM D3462 and ASTM D3018. Asphalt shingle systems shall have a quality control testing program by an approved independent listing agency having an unannounced follow-up visit. Follow-up test results shall be made available to the certification agency upon request.

1523.6.5.2 Clay and cement roof tiles.

All roof tiles shall be tested in compliance with TAS 100. Physical properties testing for clay roof tiles shall be in compliance with ASTM C1167. Physical properties testing for concrete roof tiles shall be in compliance with TAS 112. All approved roof tile manufacturers shall submit a quarterly TAS 112 Appendix A test report to the certification agency for review. All roof tiles shall resist a minimum wind uplift resistance as determined by Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code and RAS 127. Clay and cement roof tile systems requirements are as follows:

1523.6.5.2.1 Underlayment.

All underlayments used in discontinuous roof tile systems shall be tested in compliance with TAS 103 and TAS 104, unless otherwise specifically listed in the applicable RAS.

1523.6.5.2.2 Mortar or adhesive set roof tile systems.

All mortar or adhesive set tile systems shall be tested for static uplift resistance in compliance with TAS 101, the results of which shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.2.1

Additionally, roof tile system manufacturers may test for wind characteristics in compliance with TAS 108, provided the system is determined to be air permeable by testing in compliance with TAS 116; and the tiles meet the size criteria set forth in TAS 108. The result from this testing shall be an aerodynamic multiplier (l) which represents the system’s wind characteristics and shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.2.2

Systems which are tested for wind characteristics, in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above, shall have the results of the TAS 101 testing treated as attachment resistance moment (Mf), which is representative of the tile bond’s resistance to overturning moment, and the tile’s restoring moment due to gravity (Mg). Such systems shall use the system’s aerodynamic multiplier (l) in conjunction with the system’s attachment resistance moment (Mf) and restoring moment due to gravity (Mg), as determined from the TAS 101 static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 127 as a momentbased system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.2.3

Systems that are not tested in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above shall have their product control approval based on the system’s uplift minimum characteristic resistance force (F'), as determined from TAS 101 static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 127 as an uplift-based system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.2.4

Testing in accordance with TAS 106 shall be considered a product application quality control test to determine the general adhesion properties of the system.

1523.6.5.2.3 Mechanically fastened, rigid roofing systems.

All mechanically attached set tile systems shall be tested for static uplift resistance in compliance with TAS 102 or TAS 102(A), the results of which shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s NOA.

1523.6.5.2.3.1

Additionally, roof tile system manufacturers may test for wind characteristics in compliance with TAS 108, provided the system is determined to be air permeable by testing in compliance with TAS 116; and the tiles meet the size criteria set forth in TAS 108. The result from this testing shall be an aerodynamic multiplier (k) which represents the system’s wind characteristics and shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.3.2

Systems which are tested for wind characteristics in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above shall have the results of the TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) testing treated as an attachment resistance moment (Mf) which is representative of the rigid component’s attachment resistance to an overturning moment, and the tile’s restoring moment due to gravity (Mg). Such systems shall use the system’s aerodynamic multiplier (k), in conjunction with the system’s attachment-resistance moment (Mf) and restoring moment due to gravity (Mg), as determined from the TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 127 as a moment-based system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.3.3

Systems that are not tested in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above shall have their product control approval based on the system’s uplift minimum characteristic resistance force (F'), as determined from TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 127 as an uplift-based system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.3.4

TAS 106 quality control field static uplift testing shall be considered a product application quality control test to determine the general uplift-resistance properties of the system.

1523.6.5.2.4 Metal shingles/panels.

All metal roofing shall be tested in compliance with TAS 100. All metal roofing shall resist a minimum wind uplift resistance as determined by Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones) for a roof slope of 9.5 degrees (0.0166 rad) and a roof mean height of 15 feet (4.6 m). All metal roofing systems testing requirements shall be as follows:

1523.6.5.2.4.1

All metal roofing shall be tested in compliance with requirements set forth in TAS 110 and TAS 125, and shall be tested for winddriven rain infiltration resistance in compliance with TAS 100.

1523.6.5.2.4.1.1

Standing seam metal roof panel systems that pass the requirements of the Static Water Leakage Test criteria of ASTM E2140 shall be permitted to be installed to a minimum slope of 1:12.

1523.6.5.2.4.2

Rigid metal shingle systems may be tested in an identical manner to nail-on or batten tile systems as set forth in this code.

1523.6.5.2.5 Wood shingles or shakes.

All wood shingles and shakes shall be tested, as a system, for wind-driven rain infiltration resistance in compliance with TAS 100. The same specimens as tested in TAS 100 shall be tested for pull-through tear resistance, and such values shall be listed in the manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.6 Fiber cement shingle or tile panels.

All fiber cement shingles or tiles shall resist a minimum wind uplift resistance as determined by Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) for a roof slope of 9.5 degrees (0.0166 rad) and a roof mean height of 15 feet (4.6 m). All fiber cement shingle or tiles shall be tested in compliance with the following requirements. Wind-driven water resistance in compliance with TAS 100, physical properties in compliance with TAS 110, TAS 135 and uplift resistance.

1523.6.5.2.6.1

Additionally, fiber cement tile system manufacturers may test for wind characteristics in compliance with TAS 108, provided the system is determined to be air permeable by testing in compliance with TAS 116 and the tiles meet the size criteria set forth in TAS 108. The result from this testing shall be an aerodynamic multiplier (k) which represents the system’s wind characteristics and shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.6.2

Systems which are tested for wind characteristics in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above shall have the results of the TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) testing treated as an attachment-resistance moment (Mf) which is representative of the rigid component’s attachment resistance to an overturning moment, and the tile’s restoring moment due to gravity (Mg). Such systems shall use the system’s aerodynamic multiplier (l), in conjunction with the system’s attachment-resistance moment (Mf) and restoring moment due to gravity (Mg), as determined from the TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 127 as a moment-based system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.6.3

Systems that are not tested in compliance with TAS 108 as specified above shall have their product approval based on the system’s uplift minimum characteristic resistance force (F'), as determined from TAS 102 or TAS 102(A) static uplift testing. These results shall be used in conjunction with the attachment calculations outlined in RAS 115 as an uplift-based system. Such calculations shall be submitted to the building official for review.

1523.6.5.2.6.4

TAS 106 quality control field static uplift testing shall be considered a product application quality control test to determine the general uplift-resistance properties of the system.

1523.6.5.2.7 Quarry roof slate.

All quarry roof slate shall be tested in compliance with TAS 100 and TAS 110.

1523.6.5.2.8 Roof board insulation.

All roof board insulation shall be tested for physical properties as set forth in Section 8 of TAS 110.

1523.6.5.2.9 Insulation fasteners, membrane fasteners and stress plates.

All insulation fasteners, membrane fasteners and stress plates shall be tested in compliance with TAS 117 Appendices A, B and C, and TAS 110 and TAS 114, Appendix E, Section 3, (DIN 50018), for corrosion resistance.

1523.6.5.2.10 Roofing nails and tin-caps.

All roofing nails and tin-caps shall be tested for corrosion resistance in compliance with TAS 114, Appendix E, Section 2 (ASTM G85).

1523.6.5.2.11 Roof tile nails or fasteners.

All roof tile nails or fasteners, except those made of copper, monel, aluminum or stainless steel, shall be tested for corrosion in compliance with TAS 114, Appendix E, Section 2 (ASTM G85), for salt spray for 1000 hours.

1523.6.5.2.11.1

Tile fasteners used in coastal building zones, as defined in Chapter 16 (HighVelocity Hurricane Zones), shall be copper, monel, aluminum or stainless steel.

1523.6.5.2.12 Roofing adhesives, mastics and coatings.

All roofing adhesives, mastics and coatings shall be tested in compliance with TAS 110 and TAS 121.

1523.6.5.2.12.1

All roofing adhesives, mastics and coatings shall have a quality control testing program by an approved independent listing agency having unannounced follow-up visits.

1523.6.5.2.12.2

Acrylic roof coatings shall be tested for physical properties in compliance with ASTM D6083.

1523.6.5.2.13 Ridge vents of metal, plastic or composition material.

All ridge vents shall be tested in compliance with TAS 100(A) for wind driven water infiltration. All ridge ventilators shall be restricted to roof mean height as tested in compliance with TAS 100(A), and shall be listed in the system manufacturer’s product approval.

1523.6.5.2.13.1

All plastic ridge ventilators shall be tested for physical properties as set forth in TAS 110 and Chapter 26 of this code.

1523.6.5.2.13.2

All plastic ridge ventilator manufacturers shall have an unannounced follow-up quality control program from an approved listing agency. Follow-up test results shall be made available to the certification agency upon request.

1523.6.5.2.14 Edge metal, flashings, and coping.

All edge metal, flashing and copings, not specifically described in RAS 111, shall be tested in compliance with TAS 110, TAS 111(A), TAS 111(B) or TAS 111(C), respectively.

1523.6.5.2.15 Roof tile premixed bagged mortar.

All premixed roof tile mortar shall comply with the requirements set forth in TAS 110 and TAS 123, and shall have a quality control testing program by an approved independent listing agency having unannounced follow-up visits. Follow-up test results shall be made available to the certification agency upon request.

1523.6.5.2.16 Roof tile adhesive used in repair or supplemental tile attachment.

All roof tile adhesive used in repair or supplemental tile attachment shall comply with the requirements set forth in TAS 110 and TAS 123(A).

1523.6.5.2.17 Roof tile adhesive used in adhesive set tiles systems.

All roof tile adhesive used in adhesive set tile systems shall comply with the requirements set forth in TAS 110 and TAS 123. Physical properties shall be as follows:

1523.6.5.2.17.1

Tested for compressive strength in compliance with ASTM D1621 with a minimum strength of 18 psi (121 kPa) parallel to rise, and 12 psi (82.7 kPa) perpendicular to rise.

1523.6.5.2.17.2

Tested for density in compliance with ASTM D1622 with a minimum density of 1.6 lb/ft3 (25.6 kg/m3).

1523.6.5.2.17.3

Tested for tensile strength in compliance with ASTM D1623 with a minimum requirement of 28 psi (193 kPa) parallel to rise.

1523.6.5.2.17.4

Tested for dimensional stability taken from a free rise sample specimen. Tested in compliance with ASTM D2126 with a maximum volume change of +0.07-percent volume change at -40°F (-40°C) for two weeks; and +6.0-percent volume change at 158°F (70°C) and 100 percent RH for two weeks.

1523.6.5.2.17.5

Tested in compliance with ASTM D2856 from a free rise sample specimen with a minimum requirement for 85 percent.

1523.6.5.2.17.6

Tested for water absorption in compliance with ASTM D2842 with a maximum requirement of 10 percent.

1523.6.5.2.17.7

Tested in compliance with ASTM E96 for moisture vapor transmission for a maximum of 3.1 perms.

SECTION 1524
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
REQUIRED OWNER’S NOTIFICATION FOR
ROOFING CONSIDERATIONS
1524.1 Scope.

As it pertains to this section, it is the responsibility of the roofing contractor to provide the owner with the required roofing permit, and to explain to the owner the content of this section. The provisions of Chapter 15 of the Florida Building Code, Building govern the minimum requirements and standards of the industry for roofing system installations. Additionally, the following items should be addressed as part of the agreement between the owner and the contractor. The owner’s initials in the designated space indicates that the item has been explained.

1.	Aesthetics-workmanship. Reserved.

2.	Renailing wood decks. When replacing roofing, the existing wood roof deck may have to be renailed in accordance with the current provisions of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of the Florida Building Code, Building. (The roof deck is usually concealed prior to removing the existing roof system.)

3.	Common roofs. Reserved.

4.	Exposed ceilings. Exposed, open beam ceilings are where the underside of the roof decking can be viewed from below. The owner may wish to maintain the architectural appearance; therefore, roofing nail penetrations of the underside of the decking may not be acceptable. The owner provides the option of maintaining this appearance.

5.	Ponding water. Reserved.

6.	Overflow scuppers (wall outlets). It is required that rainwater flow off so that the roof is not overloaded from a buildup of water. Perimeter/edge walls or other roof extensions may block this discharge if overflow scuppers (wall outlets) are not provided. It may be necessary to install overflow scuppers in accordance with the requirements of: Chapters 15 and 16 herein and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

SECTION 1525
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—UNIFORM PERMIT APPLICATION


Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023)

High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Uniform Permit Application Form



INSTRUCTION PAGE



COMPLETE THE NECESSARY SECTIONS OF THE UNIFORM ROOFING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM AND ATTACH THE REQUIRED DOCUMENTS AS NOTED BELOW:

Roof System	Required Sections of the
Permit Application Form
	Attachments Required
See List Below

Low Slope Application	A,B,C	1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Prescriptive BUR-RAS 150	A,B,C	4,5,6,7
Asphalt Shingles	A,B,D	1,2,4,5,6,7
Concrete or Clay Tile	A,B,D,E	1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Metal Roofs	A,B,D	1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Wood Shingles and Shakes	A,B,D	1,2,4,5,6,7
Other	As Applicable	1,2,3,4,5,6,7

ATTACHMENTS REQUIRED:

1.	Fire Directory Listing Page
2.	From Product Approval:
 Front Page
 Specific System Description
 Specific System Limitations
 General Limitations
 Applicable Detail Drawings

3.	Design Calculations per Chapter 16, or if applicable, RAS 127 or RAS 128
4.	Other Component of Product Approval
5.	Municipal Permit Application
6.	Owners Notification for Roofing Considerations (Reroofing Only)
7.	Any Required Roof Testing/Calculation Documentation

Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023)

High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Uniform Permit Application Form

Section A (General Information)

Master Permit No.___________________________________________________ Process No. _______________
Contractor’s Name____________________________________________________________________________
Job Address_________________________________________________________________________________
ROOF CATEGORY
◻	Low Slope	◻	Mechanically Fastened Tile	◻	Mortar/Adhesive Set Tiles
◻	Asphalt Shingles	◻	Metal Panel/Shingles	◻	Wood Shingles/Shakes
		◻	Prescriptive BUR-RAS 150		
ROOF TYPE
◻	New roof	◻	Repair	◻	Maintenance	◻	Reroofing	◻	Recovering
ROOF SYSTEM INFORMATION
Low Slope Roof Area (SF)______	Steep Sloped Roof Area (SF)______	Total (SF)______
Section B (Roof Plan)

Sketch Roof Plan: Illustrate all levels and sections, roof drains, scuppers, overflow scuppers and overflow drains. Include dimensions of sections and levels, clearly identify dimensions of elevated pressure zones and location of parapets.

Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023)


High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Uniform Permit Application Form
Section C (Low Slope Application)

Fill in specific roof assembly components and identify manufacturer

(If a component is not used, identify as “NA”)

System Manufacturer:______________________________
Product Approval No.:______________________________
Design Wind Pressures, From RAS 128 or Calculations:
Zone 1′:_____ Zone 1:_____ Zone 2:_____ Zone 3:_____

Max. Design Pressure, from the specific product
approval system:__________________________________

Deck:
 Type:______________________________________
 Gauge/Thickness:___________________________
 Slope:_____________________________________

Anchor/Base Sheet & No. of Ply(s): ___________________
Anchor/Base Sheet Fastener/Bonding Material:
_________________________________________________

Insulation Base Layer: _____________________________
Base Insulation Size and Thickness: _________________
Base Insulation Fastener/Bonding Material:
_________________________________________________

Top Insulation Layer: ______________________________
Top Insulation Size and Thickness: __________________
Top Insulation Fastener/Bonding Material:
______________________________________________

Base Sheet(s) & No. of Ply(s): _______________________
Base Sheet Fastener/Bonding Material:
_________________________________________________

Ply Sheet(s) & No. of Ply(s): _________________________
Ply Sheet Fastener/Bonding Material:
_________________________________________________

Top Ply: _________________________________________
Top Ply Fastener/Bonding Material:
_________________________________________________

Surfacing: _____________________________________
Fastener Spacing for Anchor/Base Sheet Attachment:
Zone 1′: ____” oc @ Lap, # Rows ____ @ ____” oc
Zone 1: ____” oc @ Lap, # Rows ____ @ ____” oc
Zone 2: ____” oc @ Lap, # Rows ___ @ ____” oc
Zone 3: ____” oc @ Lap, # Rows ____ @ ____” oc
Number of Fasteners Per Insulation Board:
Zone 1′:_____ Zone 1:_____ Zone 2:_____ Zone 3:_____

Illustrate Components Noted and Details as Applicable:
Woodblocking, Gutter, Edge Termination, Stripping, Flashing,
Continuous Cleat, Cant Strip, Base Flashing, Counterflashing,
Coping, Etc.
Indicate: Mean Roof Height, Parapet Height, Height of Base
Flashing, Component Material, Material Thickness, Fastener
Type, Fastener Spacing or Submit Manufacturers Details that
Comply with RAS 111 and Chapter 16.
Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023)


High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Uniform Permit Application Form
Section D (Steep Sloped Roof System)
Roof System Manufacturer: ___________________________________________________________________________
Notice of Acceptance Number: _________________________________________________________________________
Minimum Design Wind Pressures, If Applicable (From RAS 127 or Calculations):
Zone 1:_____ Zone 2:_____ Zone 3:_____
Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023)


High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Uniform Permit Application Form
Section E (Tile Calculations)

For Moment based tile systems, choose either Method 1 or 2. Compare the values for Mr with the values from Mf. If the Mf values are greater than or equal to the Mr values, for each area of the roof then the tile attachment method is acceptable.


Method 1 “Moment-Based Tile Calculations Per RAS 127”

(Zone 1:____ × λ ____ = ____) – Mg: ____ = Mr1 ____	Product Approval Mf __________
(Zone 2:____ × λ ____ = ____) – Mg: ____ = Mr2 ____	Product Approval Mf __________
(Zone 3:____ × λ ____ = ____) – Mg: ____ = Mr3 ____	Product Approval Mf __________

Method 2 “Simplified Tile Calculations Per Table Below”

Required Moment of Resistance (Mr) From Table Below _______ Product Approval Mf _______
Mr required Moment Resistance*
Mean Roof Height Roof Slope	15′	20′	25′	30′	40′
2:12	-46	-47.6	-49.4	-50.9	-53.3
3:12	-47.3	-48.9	-50.7	-52.2	-54.6
4:12	-47.2	-52.0	-53.8	-55.3	-57.9
5:12	-39.8	-41.5	-42.8	-43.7	-45.7
6:12	-39.6	-40.6	-41.9	-42.9	-44.8
7:12	-39.4	-40.3	-41.6	-42.6	-44.6

Method 2 may be utilized within Broward County Exposure C only.

For Uplift-based tile systems use Method 3. Compare the values for F′ with the values for Fr. If the F′ values are greater than or equal to the Fr values, for each area of the roof, then the tile attachment method is acceptable.

Method 3 “Uplift-Based Tile Calculations Per RAS 127”

(Zone 1:____ × L ____ = ____ × w: = ____) – W: ____ × cos r ____ = Fr1 ____	Product Approval F′ __________
(Zone 2:____ × L ____ = ____ × w: = ____) – W: ____ × cos r ____ = Fr2 ____	Product Approval F′ __________
(Zone 3:____ × L ____ = ____ × w: = ____) – W: ____ × cos r ____ = Fr3 ____	Product Approval F′ __________
Where to Obtain Information
Description	Symbol	Where to find
Design Pressure	Zones 1, 2, 3	From applicable table in RAS 127 or by an engineering analysis
prepared by PE based on ASCE 7

Mean Roof Height	H	Job Site
Roof Slope	θ	Job Site
Aerodynamic Multiplier	λ	Product Approval
Restoring Moment due to Gravity	Mg	Product Approval
Attachment Resistance	Mf	Product Approval
Required Moment Resistance	Mg	Calculated
Minimum Attachment Resistance	F'	Product Approval
Required Uplift Resistance	Fr	Calculated
Average Tile Weight	W	Product Approval
Tile Dimensions	L = length W = width	Product Approval
All calculations must be submitted to the building official at the time of permit application.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-16]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 16
STRUCTURAL DESIGN
SECTION 1601
GENERAL
1601.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the structural design of buildings, structures and portions thereof regulated by this code.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Sections 1605, 1607, 1611, 1616 through 1626, and, as applicable in flood hazard areas, Section 1612.

SECTION 1602
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
1602.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN.

DEAD LOADS.

DESIGN STRENGTH.

DIAPHRAGM.

Diaphragm, blocked.

Diaphragm boundary.

Diaphragm chord.

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES.

FABRIC PARTITION.

FACTORED LOAD.

HELIPAD.

ICE-SENSITIVE STRUCTURE.

IMPACT LOAD.

LIMIT STATE.

LIVE LOAD.

LIVE LOAD (ROOF).

LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD).

LOAD EFFECTS.

LOAD FACTOR.

LOADS.

NOMINAL LOADS.

OTHER STRUCTURES.

PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE).

RESISTANCE FACTOR.

RISK CATEGORY.

STRENGTH, NOMINAL.

STRENGTH, REQUIRED.

STRENGTH DESIGN.

SUSCEPTIBLE BAY.

VEHICLE BARRIER.

NOTATIONS.

D	=	Dead load.
Di	=	Weight of ice in accordance with Chapter 10 of ASCE 7.
F	=	Load due to fluids with well-defined pressures and maximum heights.
Fa	=	Flood load in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7.
H	=	Load due to lateral earth pressures, ground water pressure or pressure of bulk materials.
L	=	Live load.
Lr	=	Roof live load.
R	=	Rain load.
T	=	Cumulative effect of self-straining load forces and effects.
Vasd	=	Nominal design wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour (mph) (km/hr) where applicable.
VT	=	Tornado speed, miles per hour (mph) (m/s) determined from Chapter 32 of ASCE 7.
Vult	=	Ultimate design wind speed (3-second gust), miles per hour (mph) (km/hr) determined from Figure 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) or 1609.3(4) or ASCE 7.
W	=	Load due to wind pressure.
Wi	=	Wind-on-ice in accordance with Chapter 10 of ASCE 7.
SECTION 1603
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
1603.1 General.

Construction documents shall show the size, section and relative locations of structural members with floor levels, column centers and offsets dimensioned. The design loads and other information pertinent to the structural design required by Sections 1603.1.1 through 1603.1.9 shall be indicated on the construction documents.

1603.1.1 Floor live load.

The uniformly distributed, concentrated and impact floor live load used in the design shall be indicated for floor areas. Use of live load reduction in accordance with Section 1607.11 shall be indicated for each type of live load used in the design.

1603.1.2 Roof live load.

The roof live load used in the design shall be indicated for roof areas (Section 1607.13).

1603.1.3 Roof snow load data.

Reserved.

1603.1.4 Wind design data.

The following information related to wind loads shall be shown, regardless of whether wind loads govern the design of the lateral force-resisting system of the structure:

1.	Ultimate design wind speed, Vult, (3-second gust), miles per hour (km/hr), tornado speed, VT (mph) and nominal design wind speed, Vasd, (mph) as determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

2.	Risk category.

3.	Effective plan area, Ae, for tornado design in accordance with Chapter 32 of ASCE 7.

4.	Wind exposure. Applicable wind direction if more than one wind exposure is utilized.

5.	Applicable internal pressure coefficients and applicable tornado internal pressure coefficients.

6.	Design wind pressures and their applicable zones with dimensions to be used for exterior component and cladding materials not specifically designed by the registered design professional responsible for the design of the structure, psf (kN/m2). Where design for tornado loads is required, the design pressures shown shall be the maximum of wind or tornado pressures.

1603.1.5 Earthquake design data.

Reserved.

1603.1.6 Geotechnical information.

The design load-bearing values of soils shall be shown on the construction documents.

1603.1.7 Flood design data.

For buildings located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, the documentation pertaining to design, if required in Section 1612.5, shall be included and the following information, referenced to the datum on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), shall be shown, regardless of whether flood loads govern the design of the building:

1.	Flood design class assigned according to ASCE 24.

2.	In flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas or coastal A zones, the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including the basement.

3.	In flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas or coastal A zones, the elevation to which any nonresidential building will be dry floodproofed.

4.	In coastal high hazard areas and coastal A zones, the proposed elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, including the basement.

1603.1.8 Special loads.

Special loads that are applicable to the design of the building, structure or portions thereof, including but not limited to the loads of machinery or equipment, that are of greater magnitude than the loads defined in the specified floor and roof loads shall be specified by their descriptions and locations.

1603.1.8.1 Photovoltaic panel systems.

The dead load of rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems, including rack support systems, shall be indicated on the construction documents.

1603.1.9 Roof rain load data.

Design rainfall intensity, i (in./hr) (cm/hr), shall be shown regardless of whether rain loads govern the design.

SECTION 1604
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
1604.1 General.

Building, structures and parts thereof shall be designed and constructed in accordance with strength design, load and resistance factor design, allowable stress design, empirical design or conventional construction methods, as permitted by the applicable material chapters.

1604.2 Strength.

Buildings and other structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the factored loads in load combinations defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate strength limit states for the materials of construction. Alternatively, buildings and other structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the nominal loads in load combinations defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate specified allowable stresses for the materials of construction.

Loads and forces for occupancies or uses not covered in this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

1604.3 Serviceability.

Structural systems and members thereof shall be designed to have adequate stiffness to limit deflections and lateral drift.

TABLE 1604.3

DEFLECTION LIMITSa, b, c, h, i

CONSTRUCTION	L	S or W f	D + Ld, g
Roof members:e			
 Supporting plaster or stucco ceiling	l/360	l/360	l/240
 Supporting nonplaster ceiling	l/240	l/240	l/180
 Not supporting ceiling	l/180	l/180	l/120
 Members supporting screen surfacej			l/60
Floor members	l/360	—	l/240
Exterior walls:			
 With plaster or stucco finishes	—	l/360	—
 With other brittle finishes	—	l/240	—
 With flexible finishes	—	l/120	—
Interior partitions:b			
 With plaster or stucco finishes	l/360	—	—
 With other brittle finishes	l/240	—	—
 With flexible finishes	l/120	—	—
Farm buildings	—	—	l/180
Greenhouses	—	—	l/120

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	For structural roofing and siding made of formed metal sheets, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/60. For secondary roof structural members supporting formed metal roofing, the live load deflection shall not exceed l/150. For secondary wall members supporting formed metal siding, the design wind load deflection shall not exceed l/90. For roofs, this exception only applies when the metal sheets have no roof covering.

b.	Flexible, folding and portable partitions are not governed by the provisions of this section. The deflection criterion for interior partitions is based on the horizontal load defined in Section 1607.15.

c.	See Section 2403 for glass supports.

d.	The deflection limit for the D+L load combination only applies to the deflection due to the creep component of long-term dead load deflection plus the short-term live load deflection. For lumber, structural glued laminated timber, prefabricated wood I-joists and structural composite lumber members that are dry at time of installation and used under dry conditions in accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS, the creep component of the long-term deflection shall be permitted to be estimated as the immediate dead load deflection resulting from 0.5D. For lumber and glued laminated timber members installed or used at all other moisture conditions or cross-laminated timber and wood structural panels that are dry at time of installation and used under dry conditions in accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS, the creep component of the long-term deflection is permitted to be estimated as the immediate dead load deflection resulting from D. The value of 0.5D shall not be used in combination with ANSI/AWC NDS provisions for long-term loading.

e.	The above deflections do not ensure against ponding. Roofs that do not have sufficient slope or camber to ensure adequate drainage shall be investigated for ponding. See Section 1611 for rain and ponding requirements and Section 1503.4 for roof drainage requirements.

f.	The wind load is permitted to be taken as 0.42 times the “component and cladding” loads for the purpose of determining deflection limits herein. Where members support glass in accordance with Section 2403 using the deflection limit therein, the wind load shall be no less than 0.6 times the “component and cladding” loads for the purpose of determining deflection.

g.	For steel structural members, the dead load shall be taken as zero.

h.	For aluminum structural members or aluminum panels used in skylights and sloped glazing framing, roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers not supporting edge of glass or aluminum sandwich panels, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/60. For continuous aluminum structural members supporting edge of glass, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/175 for each glass lite or l/60 for the entire length of the member, whichever is more stringent. For aluminum sandwich panels used in roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers, the total load deflection shall not exceed 1/120.

i.	For cantilever members, l shall be taken as twice the length of the cantilever.

j.	Screen surfaces shall be permitted to include a maximum of 25-percent solid flexible finishes.

1604.3.1 Deflections.

The deflections of structural members shall not exceed the more restrictive of the limitations of Sections 1604.3.2 through 1604.3.5 or that permitted by Table 1604.3.

1604.3.2 Reinforced concrete.

The deflection of reinforced concrete structural members shall not exceed that permitted by ACI 318.

1604.3.3 Steel.

The deflection of steel structural members shall not exceed that permitted by AISC 360, AISI S100, ASCE 8, SJI 100 or SJI 200, as applicable.

1604.3.4 Masonry.

The deflection of masonry structural members shall not exceed that permitted by TMS 402.

1604.3.5 Aluminum.

The deflection of aluminum structural members shall not exceed that permitted by AA ADM1.

1604.3.6 Limits.

The deflection limits of Section 1604.3.1 shall be used unless more restrictive deflection limits are required by a referenced standard for the element or finish material.

1604.4 Analysis.

Load effects on structural members and their connections shall be determined by methods of structural analysis that take into account equilibrium, general stability, geometric compatibility and both short- and long-term material properties.

Members that tend to accumulate residual deformations under repeated service loads shall have included in their analysis the added eccentricities expected to occur during their service life.

Any system or method of construction to be used shall be based on a rational analysis in accordance with well-established principles of mechanics. Such analysis shall result in a system that provides a complete load path capable of transferring loads from their point of origin to the load-resisting elements.

The total lateral force shall be distributed to the various vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system in proportion to their rigidities, considering the rigidity of the horizontal bracing system or diaphragm. Rigid elements assumed not to be a part of the lateral force-resisting system are permitted to be incorporated into buildings provided their effect on the action of the system is considered and provided for in the design. A diaphragm is rigid for the purpose of distribution of story shear and torsional moment when the lateral deformation of the diaphragm is less than or equal to two times the average story drift. Where required by ASCE 7, provisions shall be made for the increased forces induced on resisting elements of the structural system resulting from torsion due to eccentricity between the center of application of the lateral forces and the center of rigidity of the lateral force-resisting system.

Every structure shall be designed to resist the overturning effects caused by the lateral forces specified in this chapter. See Section 1609 for wind loads and Section 1610 for lateral soil loads.

1604.5 Risk category.

Each building and structure shall be assigned a risk category in accordance with Table 1604.5. Where a referenced standard specifies an occupancy category, the risk category shall not be taken as lower than the occupancy category specified therein. Where a referenced standard specifies that the assignment of a risk category be in accordance with ASCE 7, Table 1.5-1, Table 1604.5 shall be used in lieu of ASCE 7, Table 1.5-1.

TABLE 1604.5

RISK CATEGORY OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

RISK CATEGORY	NATURE OF OCCUPANCY
I	Buildings and other structures that represent a low hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:

•	Agricultural facilities.

•	Certain temporary facilities.

•	Minor storage facilities.

•	Screen enclosures.


II	Buildings and other structures except those listed in Risk Categories I, III and IV.
III	Buildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:

•	Buildings and other structures whose primary occupancy is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300.

•	Buildings and other structures containing one or more public assembly spaces each having an occupant load greater than 300 and a cumulative occupant load of these public assembly spaces of greater than 2,500.

•	Buildings and other structures containing Group E or Group I-4 occupancies or combination thereof, with an occupant load greater than 250.

•	Buildings and other structures containing educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade with an occupant load greater than 500.

•	Group I-2 occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or more resident care recipients but not having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.

•	Group I-3 occupancies.

•	Any other occupancy with an occupant load greater than 5,000.a

•	Power-generating stations, water treatment facilities for potable water, wastewater treatment facilities and other public utility facilities not included in Risk Category IV.

•	Buildings and other structures not included in Risk Category IV containing quantities of toxic or explosive materials that:

Exceed maximum allowable quantities per control area as given in Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2) or per outdoor control area in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code; and

Are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released.b


IV	Buildings and other structures designated as essential facilities, including but not limited to:

•	Group I-2 occupancies having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.

•	Fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations and emergency vehicle garages.

•	Designated earthquake, hurricane or other emergency shelters.

•	Designated emergency preparedness, communications and operations centers and other facilities required for emergency response.

•	Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as emergency backup facilities for Risk Category IV structures.

•	Buildings and other structures containing quantities of highly toxic materials that:

Exceed maximum allowable quantities per control area as given in Table 307.1(2) or per outdoor control area in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code; and

Are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released.b

•	Aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency aircraft hangars.

•	Buildings and other structures having critical national defense functions.

•	Water storage facilities and pump structures required to maintain water pressure for fire suppression.

a.	For purposes of occupant load calculation, occupancies required by Table 1004.5 to use gross floor area calculations shall be permitted to use net floor areas to determine the total occupant load.

b.	Where approved by the building official, the classification of buildings and other structures as Risk Category III or IV based on their quantities of toxic, highly toxic or explosive materials is permitted to be reduced to Risk Category II, provided it can be demonstrated by a hazard assessment in accordance with Section 1.5.3 of ASCE 7 that a release of the toxic, highly toxic or explosive materials is not sufficient to pose a threat to the public.

1604.5.1 Multiple occupancies.

Where a building or structure is occupied by two or more occupancies not included in the same risk category, it shall be assigned the classification of the highest risk category corresponding to the various occupancies. Where buildings or structures have two or more portions that are structurally separated, each portion shall be separately classified. Where a separated portion of a building or structure provides required access to, required egress from or shares life safety components with another portion having a higher risk category, both portions shall be assigned to the higher risk category.

Exception: Where a storm shelter designed and constructed in accordance with ICC 500 is provided in a building, structure or portion thereof normally occupied for other purposes, the risk category for the normal occupancy of the building shall apply unless the storm shelter is a designated emergency shelter in accordance with Table 1604.5.

1604.6 In-situ load tests.

The building official is authorized to require an engineering analysis or a load test, or both, of any construction whenever there is reason to question the safety of the construction for the intended occupancy. Engineering analysis and load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Section 1708.

1604.7 Preconstruction load tests.

Materials and methods of construction that are not capable of being designed by approved engineering analysis or that do not comply with the applicable referenced standards, or alternative test procedures in accordance with Section 1707, shall be load tested in accordance with Section 1709.

1604.8 Anchorage.

Buildings and other structures, and portions thereof, shall be provided with anchorage in accordance with Sections 1604.8.1 through 1604.8.3, as applicable.

1604.8.1 General.

Anchorage of the roof to walls and columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, shall be provided to resist the uplift and sliding forces that result from the application of the prescribed loads.

1604.8.2 Structural walls.

Walls that provide vertical load-bearing resistance or lateral shear resistance for a portion of the structure shall be anchored to the roof and to all floors and members that provide lateral support for the wall or that are supported by the wall. The connections shall be capable of resisting the horizontal forces specified in Section 1.4.5 of ASCE 7. Required anchors in masonry walls of hollow units or cavity walls shall be embedded in a reinforced grouted structural element of the wall. See Sections 1609 for wind design requirements.

1604.8.3 Decks.

Where supported by attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary structure and designed for both vertical and lateral loads as applicable. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where positive connection to the primary building structure cannot be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-supporting. Connections of decks with cantilevered framing members to exterior walls or other framing members shall be designed for both of the following:

1.	The reactions resulting from the dead load and live load specified in Section 1606 and Table 1607.1, in accordance with Section 1605, acting on all portions of the deck.

2.	The reactions resulting from the dead load and live load specified in Section 1606 and Table 1607.1, in accordance with Section 1605, acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck, and no live load on the remaining portion of the deck.

1604.9 Counteracting structural actions.

Structural members, systems, components and cladding shall be designed to resist forces due to wind, with consideration of overturning, sliding and uplift. Continuous load paths shall be provided for transmitting these forces to the foundation. Where sliding is used to isolate the elements, the effects of friction between sliding elements shall be included as a force.

SECTION 1605
LOAD COMBINATIONS
1605.1 General.

Buildings and other structures and portions thereof shall be designed to resist the strength load combinations specified in ASCE 7, Section 2.3, the allowable stress design load combinations specified in ASCE 7, Section 2.4, or the alternative allowable stress design load combinations of Section 1605.2.

Exceptions:

1.	The modifications to load combinations of ASCE 7, Section 2.3, ASCE 7, Section 2.4, and Section 1605.2 specified in ASCE 7, Chapters 18 and 19 shall apply.

2.	Where the allowable stress design load combinations of ASCE 7, Section 2.4 are used, crane hook loads need not be combined with roof live loads or with more than one-half of the wind loads.

3.	Where design for tornado loads is required, the alternative allowable stress design load combinations of Section 1605.2 shall not apply where tornado loads govern the design.

1605.1.1 Stability.

Regardless of which load combinations are used to design for strength, where overall structure stability (such as stability against overturning, sliding, or buoyancy) is being verified, use of the load combinations specified in ASCE 7, Section 2.3, ASCE 7, Section 2.4, and in Section 1605.2 shall be permitted. Where the load combinations specified in ASCE 7, Section 2.3 are used, strength reduction factors applicable to soil resistance shall be provided by a registered design professional. The stability of retaining walls shall be verified in accordance with Section 1807.2.3.

1605.2 Alternative allowable stress design load combinations.

In lieu of the load combinations in ASCE 7, Section 2.4, structures and portions thereof shall be permitted to be designed for the most critical effects resulting from the following combinations. Where using these alternative allowable stress load combinations that include wind load, allowable stresses are permitted to be increased or load combinations reduced where permitted by the material chapter of this code or the referenced standards. For load combinations that include the counteracting effects of dead and wind loads, only two-thirds of the minimum dead load likely to be in place during a design wind event shall be used. Where using these alternative load combinations to evaluate sliding, overturning and soil bearing at the soil-structure interface, the reduction of foundation overturning from Section 12.13.4 in ASCE 7 shall not be used.

(Equation 16-1)

(Equation 16-2)

(Equation 16-3)

(Equation 16-4)

(Equation 16-5)

(Equation 16-6)

Exception: Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof live loads or one-half of the wind load.

SECTION 1606
DEAD LOADS
1606.1 General.

Dead loads are those loads defined in Chapter 2 of this code. Dead loads shall be considered permanent loads.

1606.2 Weights of materials of construction.

For purposes of design, the actual weights of materials of construction shall be used. In the absence of definite information, values used shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

1606.3 Weight of fixed service equipment.

In determining dead loads for purposes of design, the weight of fixed service equipment, including the maximum weight of the contents of fixed service equipment, shall be included. The components of fixed service equipment that are variable, such as liquid contents and movable trays, shall not be used to counteract forces causing overturning, sliding, and uplift conditions in accordance with Section 1.3.6 of ASCE 7.

Exception: Where force effects are the result of the presence of the variable components, the components are permitted to be used to counter those load effects. In such cases, the structure shall be designed for force effects with the variable components present and with them absent.

1606.4 Photovoltaic panel systems.

The weight of photovoltaic panel systems, their support system, and ballast shall be considered as dead load.

1606.5 Vegetative and landscaped roofs.

The weight of all landscaping and hardscaping materials for vegetative and landscaped roofs shall be considered as dead load. The weight shall be computed considering both fully saturated soil and drainage layer materials and fully dry soil and drainage layer materials to determine the most severe load effects on the structure.

SECTION 1607
LIVE LOADS
1607.1 General.

Live loads are those loads defined in Chapter 2 of this code.

TABLE 1607.1

MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, L0, AND MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

OCCUPANCY OR USE	UNIFORM
(psf)
	CONCENTRATED (pounds)	ALSO SEE SECTION
1. Apartments (see residential)	—	—	—
2. Access floor systems			
  Office use	50	2,000	—
  Computer use	100	2,000
3. Armories and drill rooms	150b	—	—
4. Assembly areas		—	—
  Fixed seats (fastened to floor)	60a
  Follow spot, projections and control rooms	50
  Lobbies	100a
  Movable seats	100a
  Stage floors	150b
  Platforms (assembly)	100b
  Reviewing stands, grandstands and bleachers	100a
See Section 1607.21

  Stadiums and arenas with fixed seats
   (fastened to the floor)
	60a
See Section 1607.21

  Other assembly areas	100a
5. Balconies and decks	1.5 times the live load for
the area served. Not required
to exceed 100 psf.	—	—
6. Catwalks for maintenance and service access	40	300	—
7. Cornices	60	—	—
8. Corridors		—	—
  First floor	100
  Other floors	Same as occupancy served
except as indicated

9. Dining rooms and restaurants	100a	—	—
10. Dwellings (see residential)	—	—	—
11. Elevator machine room and control room grating (on area of 2 inches by 2 inches)	—	300	—
12. Finish light floor plate construction (on area of 1 inch by 1 inch)	—	200	—
13. Fire escapes	100	—	—
  On single-family dwellings only	40
14. Fixed ladders	See Section 1607.16	—
15. Garages			—
  Passenger vehicles only	40c	See Section 1607.7
  Trucks and buses	See Section 1607.8
16. Handrails, guards and grab bars	See Section 1607.9	—
17. Helipads	See Section 1607.6	—
18. Hospitals			—
  Corridors above first floor	80	1,000
  Operating rooms, laboratories	60	1,000
  Patient rooms	40	1,000
19. Hotels (see residential)	—	—	
20. Libraries			See Section 1607.17
   Corridors above first floor	80	1,000
   Reading rooms	60	1,000
   Stack rooms	150b	1,000
21. Manufacturing			—
   Heavy	250b	3,000
   Light	125b	2,000
22. Marquees, except one- and two-family dwellings	75	—	—
23. Office buildings			—
   Corridors above first floor	80	2,000
   File and computer rooms shall be designed for heavier
   loads based on anticipated occupancy
	—	—
   Lobbies and first-floor corridors	100	2,000
   Offices	50	2,000
24. Penal institutions		—	—
   Cell blocks	40
   Corridors	100
25. Recreational uses:		—	—
   Bowling alleys, poolrooms and similar uses	75a
   Dance halls and ballrooms	100a
   Gymnasiums	100a
   Ice skating rink	250b
   Roller skating rink	100a
26. Residential		—	See Section 1607.20
  One- and two-family dwellings	
   Uninhabitable attics without storage	10
   Uninhabitable attics with storage	20
   Habitable attics and sleeping areas	30
   Canopies, including marquees	20
   All other areas	40
  Hotels and multifamily dwellings	
   Private rooms and corridors serving them	40
   Public roomsm and corridors serving them	100
27. Roofs			See Section 1607.13.2
  Ordinary flat, pitched, and curved roofs
   (that are not occupiable)
	20	
  Roof areas used for assembly purposes	100a	
  Roof areas used for occupancies other than assembly	Same as occupancy served	
  Vegetative and landscaped roofs:		
   Roof areas not intended for occupancy	20	
   Roof areas used for assembly purposes	100a	
   Roof areas used for other occupancies	Same as occupancy served	
  Awnings and canopies:		
   Fabric construction supported by a skeleton structure	5a	
   All other construction, except one-and two-family dwellings	20	
  Primary roof members exposed to a work floor		
   Single panel point of lower chord of roof trusses or any
     point along primary structural members supporting
     roofs over manufacturing, storage warehouses, and
     repair garages		2,000
   All other primary roof members		300
  All roof surfaces subject to maintenance workers		300
28. Schools			—
   Classrooms	40	1,000
   Corridors above first floor	80	1,000
   First-floor corridors	100	1,000
29. Scuttles, skylight ribs and accessible ceilings	—	200	—
30. Sidewalks, vehicular driveways and yards, subject to trucking	250b	8,000	See Section 1607.18
31. Stairs and exits		
   One- and two-family dwellings	40	300	See Section 1607.19
   All other	100	300	See Section 1607.19
32. Storage areas above ceilings	20	—	—
33. Storage warehouses (shall be designed for heavier loads if required for anticipated storage)		—	—
  Heavy	250b
  Light	125b
34. Stores			—
 Retail		
  First floor	100	1,000
  Upper floors	75	1,000
 Wholesale, all floors	125b	1,000
35. Vehicle barriers	See Section 1607.9.3	—
36. Walkways and elevated platforms (other than exitways)	60	—	—
37. Yards and terraces, pedestrian	100a	—	—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 pound = 0.004448 kN,1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m3.

a.	Live load reduction is not permitted.

b.	Live load reduction is only permitted in accordance with Section 1607.11.1.2 or Item 1 of Section 1607.11.2.

c.	Live load reduction is only permitted in accordance with Section 1607.11.1.3 or Item 2 of Section 1607.11.2.

1607.2 Loads not specified.

For occupancies or uses not designated in Section 1607, the live load shall be determined in accordance with a method approved by the building official.

1607.3 Uniform live loads.

The live loads used in the design of buildings and other structures shall be the maximum loads expected by the intended use or occupancy but shall in no case be less than the minimum uniformly distributed live loads given in Table 1607.1.

1607.4 Concentrated live loads.

Floors, roofs and other similar surfaces shall be designed to support the uniformly distributed live loads prescribed in Section 1607.3 or the concentrated live loads, given in Table 1607.1, whichever produces the greater load effects. Unless otherwise specified, the indicated concentration shall be assumed to be uniformly distributed over an area of 21/2 feet by 21/2 feet (762 mm by 762 mm) and shall be located so as to produce the maximum load effects in the structural members.

1607.5 Partition loads.

In office buildings and in other buildings where partition locations are subject to change, provisions for partition weight shall be made, whether or not partitions are shown on the construction documents, unless the specified live load is 80 psf (3.83 kN/m2) or greater. The partition load shall be not less than a uniformly distributed live load of 15 psf (0.72 kN/m2).

1607.6 Helipads.

Helipads shall be designed for the following live loads:

1.	A uniform live load, L, as specified below. This load shall not be reduced.

1.1.	40 psf (1.92 kN/m2) where the design basis helicopter has a maximum take-off weight of 3,000 pounds (13.35 kN) or less.

1.2.	60 psf (2.87 kN/m2) where the design basis helicopter has a maximum take-off weight greater than 3,000 pounds (13.35 kN).

2.	A single concentrated live load, L, of 3,000 pounds (13.35 kN) applied over an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches (114 mm by 114 mm) and located so as to produce the maximum load effects on the structural elements under consideration. The concentrated load is not required to act concurrently with other uniform or concentrated live loads.

3.	Two single concentrated live loads, L, 8 feet (2438 mm) apart applied on the landing pad (representing the helicopter’s two main landing gear, whether skid type or wheeled type), each having a magnitude of 0.75 times the maximum take-off weight of the helicopter, and located so as to produce the maximum load effects on the structural elements under consideration. The concentrated loads shall be applied over an area of 8 inches by 8 inches (203 mm by 203 mm) and are not required to act concurrently with other uniform or concentrated live loads.

Landing areas designed for a design basis helicopter with maximum take-off weight of 3,000-pounds (13.35 kN) shall be identified with a 3,000 pound (13.34 kN) weight limitation. The landing area weight limitation shall be indicated by the numeral “3” (kips) located in the bottom right corner of the landing area as viewed from the primary approach path. The indication for the landing area weight limitation shall be a minimum 5 feet (1524 mm) in height.

1607.7 Passenger vehicle garages.

Floors in garages or portions of a building used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be designed for the uniformly distributed live loads indicated in Table 1607.1 or the following concentrated load:

1.	For garages restricted to passenger vehicles accommodating not more than nine passengers, 3,000 pounds (13.35 kN) acting on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches(114 mm by 114 mm).

2.	For mechanical parking structures without slab or deck that are used for storing passenger vehicles only, 2,250 pounds (10 kN) per wheel.

1607.8 Heavy vehicle loads.

Floors and other surfaces that are intended to support vehicle loads greater than a 10,000-pound (4536 kg) gross vehicle weight rating shall comply with Sections 1607.8.1 through 1607.8.5.

1607.8.1 Loads.

Where any structure does not restrict access for vehicles that exceed a 10,000-pound (4536 kg) gross vehicle weight rating, those portions of the structure subject to such loads shall be designed using the vehicular live loads, including consideration of impact and fatigue, in accordance with the codes and specifications required by the jurisdiction having authority for the design and construction of the roadways and bridges in the same location of the structure.

1607.8.2 Fire truck and emergency vehicles.

Where a structure or portions of a structure are accessed and loaded by fire department access vehicles and other similar emergency vehicles, the structure shall be designed for the greater of the following loads:

1.	The actual operational loads, including outrigger reactions and contact areas of the vehicles as stipulated and approved by the building official; or

2.	The live loading specified in Section 1607.8.1.

1607.8.3 Heavy vehicle garages.

Garages designed to accommodate vehicles that exceed a 10,000-pound (4536 kg) gross vehicle weight rating, shall be designed using the live loading specified by Section 1607.8.1. For garages the design for impact and fatigue is not required.

Exception: The vehicular live loads and load placement are allowed to be determined using the actual vehicle weights for the vehicles allowed onto the garage floors, provided such loads and placement are based on rational engineering principles and are approved by the building official, but shall not be less than 50 psf (2.9 kN/m2). This live load shall not be reduced.

1607.8.4 Forklifts and movable equipment.

Where a structure is intended to have forklifts or other movable equipment present, the structure shall be designed for the total vehicle or equipment load and the individual wheel loads for the anticipated vehicles as specified by the owner of the facility. These loads shall be posted in accordance with Section 1607.8.5.

1607.8.4.1 Impact and fatigue.

Impact loads and fatigue loading shall be considered in the design of the supporting structure. For the purposes of design, the vehicle and wheel loads shall be increased by 30 percent to account for impact.

1607.8.5 Posting.

The maximum weight of vehicles allowed into or on a garage or other structure shall be posted by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent in accordance with Section 106.1.

1607.9 Loads on handrails, guards, grab bars and seats.

Handrails and guards shall be designed and constructed for the structural loading conditions set forth in Section 1607.9.1. Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches shall be designed and constructed for structural loading conditions set forth in Section 1607.9.2.

1607.9.1 Handrails and guards.

Handrails and guards shall be designed to resist a linear load of 50 pounds per linear foot (plf) (0.73 kN/m) in accordance with Section 4.5.1 of ASCE 7. Glass handrail assemblies and guards shall also comply with Section 2407.

Exceptions:

1.	For one- and two-family dwellings, only the single concentrated load required by Section 1607.9.1.1 shall be applied.

2.	In Group I-3, F, H and S occupancies, for areas that are not accessible to the general public and that have an occupant load less than 50, the minimum load shall be 20 pounds per foot (0.29 kN/m).

1607.9.1.1 Concentrated load.

Handrails and guards shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 200 pounds (0.89 kN) in accordance with Section 4.5.1 of ASCE 7.

1607.9.1.2 Guard component loads.

Balusters, panel fillers, and guard infill components, including all rails except the handrail and the top rail, shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 50 pounds (0.22 kN) in accordance with Section 4.5.1.2 of ASCE 7.

1607.9.2 Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches.

Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 250 pounds (1.11 kN) applied in any direction at any point on the grab bar, shower seat, or seat of the accessible bench so as to produce the maximum load effects.

1607.9.3 Vehicle barriers.

Vehicle barriers for passenger vehicles shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 6,000 pounds (26.70 kN) in accordance with Section 4.5.3 of ASCE 7. Garages accommodating trucks and buses shall be designed in accordance with an approved method that contains provisions for traffic railings.

1607.10 Impact loads.

The live loads specified in Sections 1607.3 through 1607.9 shall be assumed to include adequate allowance for ordinary impact conditions. Provisions shall be made in the structural design for uses and loads that involve unusual vibration and impact forces.

1607.10.1 Elevators.

Members, elements and components subject to dynamic loads from elevators shall be designed for impact loads and deflection limits prescribed by ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

1607.10.2 Machinery.

For the purpose of design, the weight of machinery and moving loads shall be increased as follows to allow for impact: (1) light machinery, shaft-or motor-driven, 20 percent; and (2) reciprocating machinery or power-driven units, 50 percent. Percentages shall be increased where specified by the manufacturer.

1607.10.3 Elements supporting hoists for façade access and building maintenance equipment.

In addition to any other applicable live loads, structural elements that support hoists for façade access and building maintenance equipment shall be designed for a live load of 2.5 times the rated load of the hoist or the stall load of the hoist, whichever is larger.

1607.10.4 Fall arrest, lifeline and rope descent system anchorages.

In addition to any other applicable live loads, fall arrest, lifeline, and rope descent system anchorages and structural elements that support these anchorages shall be designed for a live load of not less than 3,100 pounds (13.8 kN) for each attached line, in any direction that the load can be applied.

Anchorages of horizontal lifelines and the structural elements that support these anchorages shall be designed for the maximum tension that develops in the horizontal lifeline from these live loads.

1607.11 Reduction in uniform live loads.

Except for uniform live loads at roofs, all other minimum uniformly distributed live loads, Lo, in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.11.1 or 1607.11.2. Uniform live loads at roofs are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.13.2.

1607.11.1 Basic uniform live load reduction.

Subject to the limitations of Sections 1607.11.1.1 through 1607.11.1.3 and Table 1607.1, members for which a value of KLLAT is 400 square feet (37.16 m2) or more are permitted to be designed for a reduced uniformly distributed live load, L, in accordance with the following equation:

(Equation 16-7)

where:

L = Reduced design live load per square foot (m2) of area supported by the member.

Lo = Unreduced design live load per square foot (m2) of area supported by the member (see Table 1607.1).

KLL = Live load element factor (see Table 1607.11.1).

AT = Tributary area, in square feet (m2).

L shall be not less than 0.50Lo for members supporting one floor and L shall be not less than 0.40Lo for members supporting two or more floors.

TABLE 1607.11.1

LIVE LOAD ELEMENT FACTOR, KLL

ELEMENT	KLL
Interior columns	4
Exterior columns without cantilever slabs	4
Edge columns with cantilever slabs	3
Corner columns with cantilever slabs	2
Edge beams without cantilever slabs	2
Interior beams	2
All other members not identified above including:	1
 Edge beams with cantilever slabs
 Cantilever beams
 One-way slabs
 Two-way slabs
 Members without provisions for continuous shear transfer normal to their span
1607.11.1.1 One-way slabs.

The tributary area, AT, for use in Equation 16-7 for one-way slabs shall not exceed an area defined by the slab span times a width normal to the span of 1.5 times the slab span.

1607.11.1.2 Heavy live loads.

Live loads that exceed 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2) shall not be reduced.

Exceptions:

1.	The live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall be not less than L as calculated in Section 1607.11.1.

2.	For uses other than storage, where approved, additional live load reductions shall be permitted where shown by the registered design professional that a rational approach has been used and that such reductions are warranted.

1607.11.1.3 Passenger vehicle garages.

The live loads shall not be reduced in passenger vehicle garages.

Exception: The live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall not be less than L as calculated in Section 1607.11.1.

1607.11.2 Alternative uniform live load reduction.

As an alternative to Section 1607.11.1 and subject to the limitations of Table 1607.1, uniformly distributed live loads are permitted to be reduced in accordance with the following provisions. Such reductions shall apply to slab systems, beams, girders, columns, piers, walls and foundations.

1.	A reduction shall not be permitted where the live load exceeds 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2) except that the design live load for members supporting two or more floors is permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.

Exception: For uses other than storage, where approved, additional live load reductions shall be permitted where shown by the registered design professional that a rational approach has been used and that such reductions are warranted.

2.	A reduction shall not be permitted in passenger vehicle parking garages except that the live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.

3.	For live loads not exceeding 100 psf (4.79 kN/m2), the design live load for any structural member supporting 150 square feet (13.94 m2) or more is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Equation 16-8.

4.	For one-way slabs, the area, A, for use in Equation 16-8 shall not exceed the product of the slab span and a width normal to the span of 0.5 times the slab span.

(Equation 16-8)

For SI: R = 0.861(A – 13.94)

Such reduction shall not exceed the smallest of:

1.	40 percent for members supporting one floor.

2.	60 percent for members supporting two or more floors.

3.	R as determined by the following equation:

(Equation 16-9)

where:

A = Area of floor supported by the member, square feet (m2).

D = Dead load per square foot (m2) of area supported.

Lo = Unreduced live load per square foot (m2) of area supported.

R = Reduction in percent.

1607.12 Distribution of floor loads.

Where uniform floor live loads are involved in the design of structural members arranged so as to create continuity, the minimum applied loads shall be the full dead loads on all spans in combination with the floor live loads on spans selected to produce the greatest load effect at each location under consideration. Floor live loads are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.11.

1607.13 Roof loads.

The structural supports of roofs and marquees shall be designed to resist wind and, where applicable, tornado loads, in addition to the dead load of construction and the appropriate live loads as prescribed in this section, or as set forth in Table 1607.1. The live loads acting on a sloping surface shall be assumed to act vertically on the horizontal projection of that surface.

1607.13.1 Distribution of roof loads.

Where uniform roof live loads are reduced to less than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m2) in accordance with Section 1607.13.2.1 and are applied to the design of structural members arranged so as to create continuity, the reduced roof live load shall be applied to adjacent spans or to alternate spans, whichever produces the most unfavorable load effect. See Section 1607.13.2 for reductions in minimum roof live loads.

1607.13.2 Reduction in uniform roof live loads.

The minimum uniformly distributed live loads of roofs and marquees, Lo, in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.13.2.1.

1607.13.2.1 Ordinary roofs, awnings and canopies.

Ordinary flat, pitched and curved roofs, and awnings and canopies other than of fabric construction supported by a skeleton structure, are permitted to be designed for a reduced uniformly distributed roof live load, Lr, as specified in the following equations or other controlling combinations of loads as specified in Section 1605, whichever produces the greater load effect.

In structures such as greenhouses, where special scaffolding is used as a work surface for workers and materials during maintenance and repair operations, a lower roof load than specified in the following equations shall not be used unless approved by the building official. Such structures shall be designed for a minimum roof live load of 12 psf (0.58 kN/m2).

(Equation 16-10)

where: 12 ≤ Lr ≤ 20

For SI: Lr = LoR1R2

where: 0.58 ≤ Lr ≤ 0.96

Lo = Unreduced roof live load per square foot (m2) of horizontal projection supported by the member (see Table 1607.1).

Lr = Reduced roof live load per square foot (m2) of horizontal projection supported by the member.

The reduction factors R1 and R2 shall be determined as follows:

(Equation 16-11)

(Equation 16-12)

For SI: 1.2 - 0.011At for 18.58 square meters < At < 55.74 square meters

(Equation 16-13)

where:

At = Tributary area (span length multiplied by effective width) in square feet (m2) supported by the member, and

(Equation 16-14)

(Equation 16-15)

(Equation 16-16)

where:

F = For a sloped roof, the number of inches of rise per foot (for SI: F = 0.12 × slope, with slope expressed as a percentage), or for an arch or dome, the rise-to-span ratio multiplied by 32.

1607.13.2.2 Occupiable roofs.

Areas of roofs that are occupiable, such as vegetative roofs, roof gardens or for assembly or other similar purposes, and marquees are permitted to have their uniformly distributed live loads reduced in accordance with Section 1607.11.

1607.13.3 Awnings and canopies.

Awnings and canopies shall be designed for uniform live loads as required in Table 1607.1 as well as for wind and tornado loads as specified in Section 1609.

1607.13.4 Photovoltaic panel systems.

Roof structures that provide support for photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1607.13.4.1 through 1607.13.4.4, as applicable.

1607.13.4.1 Roof live load.

Roof structures that support photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed to resist each of the following conditions:

1.	Applicable uniform and concentrated roof loads with the photovoltaic panel system dead loads.

Exception: Roof live loads need not be applied to the area covered by photovoltaic panels where the clear space between the panels and the roof surface is 24 inches (610 mm) or less.

2.	Applicable uniform and concentrated roof loads without the photovoltaic panel system present.

1607.13.4.2 Photovoltaic panels or modules.

The structure of a roof that supports solar photovoltaic panels or modules shall be designed to accommodate the full solar photovoltaic panels or modules and ballast dead load, including concentrated loads from support frames in combination with the loads from Section 1607.13.4.1 and other applicable loads.

1607.13.4.3 Photovoltaic panels installed on open-grid roof structures.

Structures with open-grid framing and no roof deck or sheathing supporting photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed to support the uniform and concentrated roof live loads specified in Section 1607.13.4.1, except that the uniform roof live load shall be permitted to be reduced to 12 psf (0.57 kN/m2).

1607.13.4.4 Ground-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems that are independent structures and do not have accessible/occupied space underneath are not required to accommodate a roof photovoltaic live load. Other loads and combinations in accordance with Section 1605 shall be accommodated.

1607.13.4.5 Ballasted photovoltaic panel systems.

Roof structures that provide support for ballasted photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed, or analyzed, in accordance with Section 1604.4; checked in accordance with Section 1604.3.6 for deflections; and checked in accordance with Section 1611 for ponding.

1607.14 Crane loads.

The crane live load shall be the rated capacity of the crane. Design loads for the runway beams, including connections and support brackets, of moving bridge cranes and monorail cranes shall include the maximum wheel loads of the crane and the vertical impact, lateral and longitudinal forces induced by the moving crane.

1607.14.1 Maximum wheel load.

The maximum wheel loads shall be the wheel loads produced by the weight of the bridge, as applicable, plus the sum of the rated capacity and the weight of the trolley with the trolley positioned on its runway at the location where the resulting load effect is maximum.

1607.14.2 Vertical impact force.

The maximum wheel loads of the crane shall be increased by the following percentages to account for the effects of vertical impact or vibration:

Monorail cranes (powered)	25 percent
Cab-operated or remotely operated bridge cranes (powered)	25 percent
Pendant-operated bridge cranes (powered)	10 percent
Bridge cranes or monorail cranes with hand-geared bridge, trolley and hoist	0 percent
1607.14.3 Lateral force.

The lateral force on crane runway beams with electrically powered trolleys shall be calculated as 20 percent of the sum of the rated capacity of the crane and the weight of the hoist and trolley. The lateral force shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a runway beam, in either direction perpendicular to the beam, and shall be distributed with due regard to the lateral stiffness of the runway beam and supporting structure.

1607.14.4 Longitudinal force.

The longitudinal force on crane runway beams, except for bridge cranes with hand-geared bridges, shall be calculated as 10 percent of the maximum wheel loads of the crane. The longitudinal force shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a runway beam, in either direction parallel to the beam.

1607.15 Interior walls and partitions.

Interior walls and partitions that exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, including their finish materials, shall have adequate strength and stiffness to resist the loads to which they are subjected but not less than a horizontal load of 5 psf (0.240 kN/m2).

1607.15.1 Fabric partitions.

Fabric partitions that exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, including their finish materials, shall have adequate strength and stiffness to resist the following load conditions:

1.	The horizontal distributed load need only be applied to the partition framing. The total area used to determine the distributed load shall be the area of the fabric face between the framing members to which the fabric is attached. The total distributed load shall be uniformly applied to such framing members in proportion to the length of each member.

2.	A concentrated load of 40 pounds (0.176 kN) applied to an 8-inch-diameter (203 mm) area [50.3 square inches (32 452 mm2)] of the fabric face at a height of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the floor.

1607.15.2 Fire walls.

In order to meet the structural stability requirements of Section 706.2 where the structure on either side of the wall has collapsed, fire walls and their supports shall be designed to withstand a minimum horizontal allowable stress load of 5 psf (0.240 kN/m2).

1607.16 Fixed ladders.

Fixed ladders with rungs shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 300 lb (1.33 kN) in accordance with Section 4.5.4 of ASCE 7. Where rails of fixed ladders extend above a floor or platform at the top of the ladder, each side rail extension shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 100 lb (0.445 kN) in accordance with Section 4.5.4 of ASCE 7. Ship’s ladders shall be designed to resist the stair loads given in Table 1607.1.

1607.17 Library stack rooms.

The live loading indicated in Table 1607.1 for library stack rooms applies to stack room floors that support nonmobile, double-faced library book stacks, subject to the following limitations:

1.	The nominal book stack unit height shall not exceed 90 inches (2,290 mm).

2.	The nominal shelf depth shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) for each face.

3.	Parallel rows of double-faced book stacks shall be separated by aisles not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide.

1607.18 Sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and yards subject to trucking.

The live loading indicated in Table 1607.1 for sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and yards subject to trucking shall comply with the requirements of this section.

1607.18.1 Uniform loads.

In addition to the loads indicated in Table 1607.1, other uniform loads in accordance with an approved method which contains provisions for truck loading shall be considered where appropriate.

1607.18.2 Concentrated loads.

The concentrated wheel load indicated in Table 1607.1 shall be applied on an area of 4.5 inches by 4.5 inches (114 mm by 114 mm).

1607.19 Stair treads.

The concentrated load indicated in Table 1607.1 for stair treads shall be applied on an area of 2 inches by 2 inches (51 mm by 51 mm). This load need not be assumed to act concurrently with the uniform load.

1607.20 Residential attics.

The live loads indicated in Table 1607.1 for attics in residential occupancies shall comply with the requirements of this section.

1607.20.1 Uninhabitable attics without storage.

In residential occupancies, uninhabitable attic areas without storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joists and rafters is less than 42 inches (1067 mm), or where there are not two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 42 inches (1067 mm) in height by 24 inches (610 mm) in width, or greater, within the plane of the trusses. The live load in Table 1607.1 need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirement.

1607.20.2 Uninhabitable attics with storage.

In residential occupancies, uninhabitable attic areas with storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joist and rafter is 42 inches (1067 mm) or greater, or where there are two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 42 inches (1067 mm) in height by 24 inches (610 mm) in width, or greater, within the plane of the trusses. The live load in Table 1607.1 need only be applied to those portions of the joists or truss bottom chords where both of the following conditions are met:

1.	The attic area is accessed from an opening not less than 20 inches (508 mm) in width by 30 inches (762 mm) in length that is located where the clear height in the attic is not less than 30 inches (762 mm).

2.	The slope of the joists or truss bottom chords is not greater than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal.

The remaining portions of the joists or truss bottom chords shall be designed for a uniformly distributed concurrent live load of not less than 10 pounds per square foot (0.48 kN/m2).

1607.20.3 Attics served by stairs.

Attic spaces served by stairways other than the pull-down type shall be designed to support the minimum live load specified for habitable attics and sleeping rooms.

1607.21 Seating for assembly uses.

Bleachers, folding and telescopic seating and grandstands shall be designed for the loads specified in ICC 300. Stadiums and arenas with fixed seats shall be designed for the horizontal sway loads in Section 1607.21.1.

1607.21.1 Horizontal sway loads.

The design of stadiums and arenas with fixed seats shall include horizontal swaying forces applied to each row of seats as follows:

1.	24 pounds per linear foot (0.35 kN/m) of seat applied in a direction parallel to each row of seats.

2.	10 pounds per linear foot (0.15 kN/m) of seat applied in a direction perpendicular to each row of seats.

The parallel and perpendicular horizontal swaying forces are not required to be applied simultaneously.

SECTION 1608
SNOW LOADS

RESERVED

SECTION 1609
WIND LOADS
1609.1 Applications.

Buildings, structures and parts thereof shall be designed to withstand the minimum wind loads prescribed herein. Decreases in wind loads shall not be made for the effect of shielding by other structures. All exterior wall coverings and soffits shall be capable of resisting the design pressures specified for walls for components and cladding loads in accordance with Section 1609.1.1. Manufactured soffits shall be labeled in accordance with Section 1709.10 of this code.

1609.1.1 Determination of wind loads.

Wind loads on every building or structure shall be determined in accordance with Chapters 26 to 30 of ASCE 7. Wind shall be assumed to come from any horizontal direction and wind pressures shall be assumed to act normal to the surface considered.

Exceptions:

1.	Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, the provisions of ICC 600 shall be permitted for applicable Group R-2 and R-3 buildings.

2.	Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, residential structures using the provisions of AWC WFCM.

3.	Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, residential structures using the provisions of AISI S230.

4.	Designs using NAAMM FP 1001, Guide Specifications for Design of Metal Flagpoles.

5.	Designs using TIA-222 for antenna-supporting structures and antennas. Design using this standard shall be permitted for communication tower and steel antenna support structures.

6.	Wind tunnel tests in accordance with ASCE 49 and Sections 31.4 and 31.5 of ASCE 7.

7.	Wind loads for screen enclosures shall be determined in accordance with Section 2002.4.

8.	Exposed mechanical equipment or appliances fastened to a roof or installed on the ground in compliance with the code using rated stands, platforms, curbs, slabs, walls, or other means are deemed to comply with the wind resistance requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, as amended. Further support or enclosure of such mechanical equipment or appliances is not required by a state or local official having authority to enforce the Florida Building Code.

The wind speeds in Figures 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) and 1609.3(4) are ultimate design wind speeds, Vult, and shall be converted in accordance with Section 1609.3.1 to nominal design wind speeds, Vasd, when the provisions of the standards referenced in Exceptions 4 and 5 are used.

1609.1.1.1 Applicability.

The provisions of ICC 600 are applicable only to buildings located within Exposure B or C as defined in Section 1609.4. The provisions of ICC 600, AWC WFCM and AISI S230 shall not apply to buildings sited on the upper half of an isolated hill, ridge or escarpment meeting the following conditions:

1.	The hill, ridge or escarpment is 60 feet (18 288 mm) or higher if located in Exposure B or 30 feet (9144 mm) or higher if located in Exposure C;

2.	The maximum average slope of the hill exceeds 10 percent; and

3.	The hill, ridge or escarpment is unobstructed upwind by other such topographic features for a distance from the high point of 50 times the height of the hill or 1 mile (1.61 km), whichever is greater.

1609.1.2 Protection of openings.

In wind-borne debris regions, glazed openings in buildings shall be impact resistant or protected with an impact-resistant covering meeting the requirements of ANSI/DASMA 115 (for garage doors and rolling doors) or TAS 201, 202 and 203, AAMA 506, ASTM E1996 and ASTM E1886 referenced herein, or an approved impact-resistant standard as follows:

1.	Glazed openings located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of grade shall meet the requirements of the large missile test of ASTM E1996.

2.	Glazed openings located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) above grade shall meet the provisions of the small missile test of ASTM E1996.

3.	Storage sheds that are not designed for human habitation and that have a floor area of 720 square feet (67 m2) or less are not required to comply with the mandatory windborne debris impact standards of this code.

4.	Openings in sunrooms, balconies or enclosed porches constructed under existing roofs or decks are not required to be protected provided the spaces are separated from the building interior by a wall and all openings in the separating wall are protected in accordance with Section 1609.1.2 above. Such spaces shall be permitted to be designed as either partially enclosed or enclosed structures.

Exceptions:

1.	Wood structural panels with a minimum thickness of 7/16 inch (11.1 mm) and maximum span between lines of fasteners of 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be permitted for opening protection in Group R-3 or R-4 occupancy buildings with a mean roof height of 33 feet (10 058 mm) or less where Vult is 180 mph (80 m/s) or less. Panels shall be precut to overlap the wall such that they extend a minimum of 2 inches (50.8 mm) beyond the lines of fasteners and are attached to the framing surrounding the opening containing the product with the glazed opening. Panels shall be predrilled as required for the attachment method and secured with corrosion-resistant attachment hardware permanently installed on the building.

a.	Attachments shall be designed to resist the components and cladding loads determined in accordance with the provisions of ASCE 7, with corrosion-resistant attachment hardware provided and anchors permanently installed on the building.

b.	As an alternative, panels shall be fastened at 16 inches (406.4 mm) on center along the edges of the opposing long sides of the panel.

i.	For wood frame construction, fasteners shall be located on the wall such that they are embedded into the wall framing members, nominally a minimum of 1 inch (25.4 mm) from the edge of the opening and 2 inches (50.8 mm) inward from the panel edge. Permanently installed anchors used for buildings with wood frame wall construction shall have the threaded portion that will be embedded into the wall framing based on 1/4-inch (6.35 mm) lagscrews and shall be long enough to penetrate through the exterior wall covering with sufficient embedment length to provide an allowable minimum 300 pounds ASD design withdrawal capacity.

ii.	For concrete or masonry wall construction, fasteners shall be located on the wall a minimum of 11/2 inches (37.9 mm) from the edge of the opening and 2 inches (50.8 mm) inward of the panel edge. Permanently installed anchors in concrete or masonry wall construction shall have an allowable minimum 300 pounds ASD design withdrawal capacity and an allowable minimum 525 pounds ASD design shear capacity with a 11/2 inch edge distance. Hex nuts, washered wing-nuts, or bolts used to attach the wood structural panels to the anchors shall be minimum 1/4 -inch (6.4 mm) hardware and shall be installed with or have integral washers with a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) outside diameter.

iii.	Vibration-resistant alternative attachments designed to resist the component and cladding loads determined in accordance with provisions of ASCE 7 shall be permitted.

2.	Glazing in Risk Category I buildings, including greenhouses that are occupied for growing plants on a production or research basis, without public access shall be permitted to be unprotected.

3.	Glazing in Risk Category II, III or IV buildings located over 60 feet (18 288 mm) above the ground and over 30 feet (9144 mm) above aggregate surface roofs located within 1,500 feet (458 m) of the building shall be permitted to be unprotected.

Table 1609.1.2 Wind-Borne Debris Protection Fastening Schedule for Wood Structural Panels. Reserved.

1609.1.2.1 Louvers.

Louvers protecting the exterior wall opening that are located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of grade shall meet the requirements of AMCA 540 or shall be protected by an impact-resistant cover complying with the large missile test of ASTM E1996 or an approved impact-resistance standard. Louvers required to be open for life safety purposes such as providing a breathable atmosphere shall meet the requirements of AMCA 540.

1609.1.2.2 Application of ASTM E1996.

The text of Section 6.2.2 of ASTM E1996 shall be substituted as follows:

6.2.2 Unless otherwise specified, select the wind zone based on the strength design wind speed, Vult, as follows:

6.2.2.1 Wind Zone 1—130 mph ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult < 140 mph.

6.2.2.2 Wind Zone 2—140 mph ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult < 150 mph at greater than one mile (1.6 km) from the coastline. The coastline shall be measured from the mean high water mark.

6.2.2.3 Wind Zone 3—150 mph (58 m/s) ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult ≤ 170 mph (63 m/s), or 140 mph (54 m/s) ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult ≤ 170 mph (63 m/s) and within one mile (1.6 km) of the coastline. The coastline shall be measured from the mean high water mark.

6.2.2.4 Wind Zone 4— ultimate design wind speed, Vult >170 mph (63 m/s).

1609.1.2.3 Garage doors.

Garage door glazed opening protection for wind-borne debris shall meet the requirements of an approved impact-resisting standard or ANSI/DASMA 115.

1609.1.2.4 Impact-resistant coverings.
1609.1.2.4.1

Impact-resistant coverings shall be tested at 1.5 times the design pressure (positive or negative) expressed in pounds per square feet as determined by the Florida Building Code, Building Section 1609 or ASCE 7, for which the specimen is to be tested. The design pressures, as determined from ASCE 7, are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6.

1609.1.2.4.2 Impact-resistant coverings.

Impact-resistant coverings shall be labeled in accordance with the provisions of Section 1709.9.

1609.1.3 Testing to allowable or nominal loads.

Where testing for wind load resistance is based on allowable or nominal wind loads, the design wind loads determined in accordance with ASCE 7 or Section 1609 are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6 for the purposes of the wind-load-resistance testing.

1609.2 Definitions.

For the purposes of Section 1609 and as used elsewhere in this code, the following terms are defined in Chapter 2.

HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS.

WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION.

WIND SPEED, Vult.

WIND SPEED, Vasd.

1609.3 Ultimate design wind speed.

The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, in mph, for the determination of the wind loads shall be determined by Figures 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) and 1609.3(4). The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for use in the design of Risk Category II buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(1). The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for use in the design of Risk Category III buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(2). The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for use in the design of Risk Category IV buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(3). The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for use in the design of Risk Category I buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(4). The ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for the special wind regions indicated near mountainous terrain and near gorges shall be in accordance with local jurisdiction requirements. The ultimate design wind speeds, Vult, determined by the local jurisdiction shall be in accordance with Chapter 26 of ASCE 7. The exact location of wind speed lines shall be established by local ordinance using recognized physical landmarks such as major roads, canals, rivers and lake shores wherever possible.

FIGURE 1609.3(1)

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS, VULT, FOR RISK CATEGORY II BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

FIGURE 1609.3(2)

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS, VULT, FOR RISK CATEGORY III BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

FIGURE 1609.3(3)

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS, VULT, FOR RISK CATEGORY IV BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

FIGURE 1609.3(4)

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS, VULT, FOR RISK CATEGORY I BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

1609.3.1 Wind speed conversion.

Where required, the ultimate design wind speeds of Figures 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) and 1609.3(4) shall be converted to nominal design wind speeds, Vasd, using Table 1609.3.1 or Equation 16-17.

(Equation 16-17)

where:

Vasd = Nominal design wind speed applicable to methods specified in Exceptions 4 and 5 of Section 1609.1.1.

Vult = Ultimate design wind speed determined from Figure 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) or 1609.3(4).

1609.4 Exposure category.

For each wind direction considered, an exposure category that adequately reflects the characteristics of ground surface irregularities shall be determined for the site at which the building or structure is to be constructed. Account shall be taken of variations in ground surface roughness that arise from natural topography and vegetation as well as from constructed features.

1609.4.1 Wind directions and sectors.

For each selected wind direction at which the wind loads are to be evaluated, the exposure of the building or structure shall be determined for the two upwind sectors extending 45 degrees (0.79 rad) either side of the selected wind direction. The exposures in these two sectors shall be determined in accordance with Sections 1609.4.2 and 1609.4.3 and the exposure resulting in the highest wind loads shall be used to represent winds from that direction.

1609.4.2 Surface roughness categories.

A ground surface roughness within each 45-degree (0.79 rad) sector shall be determined for a distance upwind of the site as defined in Section 1609.4.3 from the categories defined below, for the purpose of assigning an exposure category as defined in Section 1609.4.3.

Surface Roughness B. Urban and suburban areas, wooded areas or other terrain with numerous closely spaced obstructions having the size of single-family dwellings or larger.

Surface Roughness C. Open terrain with scattered obstructions having heights generally less than 30 feet (9144 mm). This category includes flat open country, and grasslands.

Surface Roughness D. Flat, unobstructed areas and water surfaces. This category includes smooth mud flats, salt flats and unbroken ice.

1609.4.3 Exposure categories.

An exposure category shall be determined in accordance with the following:

Exposure B. For buildings with a mean roof height of less than or equal to 30 feet (9144 mm), Exposure B shall apply where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness B, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 1,500 feet (457 m). For buildings with a mean roof height greater than 30 feet (9144 mm), Exposure B shall apply where Surface Roughness B prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 2,600 feet (792 m) or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater.

Exposure C. Exposure C shall apply for all cases where Exposure B or D does not apply.

Exposure D. Exposure D shall apply where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness D, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 5,000 feet (1524 m) or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater. Exposure D shall also apply where the ground surface roughness immediately upwind of the site is B or C, and the site is within a distance of 600 feet (183 m) or 20 times the building height, whichever is greater, from an Exposure D condition as defined in the previous sentence.

1609.5 Tornado loads.

The design and construction of Risk Category III and IV buildings and other structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 32 of ASCE 7, except as modified by this code.

1609.6 Roof systems.

Roof systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1609.6.1 through 1609.6.3, as applicable.

1609.6.1 Roof deck.

The roof deck shall be designed to withstand the wind pressures determined in accordance with ASCE 7. Where design for tornado loads is required, the roof deck shall be designed to withstand the greater of wind pressures or tornado pressures determined in accordance with ASCE 7.

1609.6.2 Roof coverings.

Roof coverings shall comply with Section 1609.6.1.

Exception: Rigid tile roof coverings that are air permeable and installed over a roof deck complying with Section 1609.6.1 are permitted to be designed in accordance with Section 1609.6.3.

1609.6.2.1 Asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles installed over a roof deck complying with Section 1609.6.1 shall comply with the wind-resistance requirements of Section 1504.1.1.

1609.6.3 Rigid tile.

Wind loads on rigid tile roof coverings shall be determined in accordance with the following equation:

(Equation 16-18)

where:

b = Exposed width, feet (mm) of the roof tile.

CL = Lift coefficient. The lift coefficient for concrete and clay tile shall be 0.2 or shall be determined by test in accordance with Section 1504.2.1.

GCp = Roof pressure coefficient for each applicable roof zone determined from Chapter 30 of ASCE 7. Roof coefficients shall not be adjusted for internal pressure.

Kd = Wind directionality factor determined from Chapter 26 of ASCE 7.

L = Length, feet (mm) of the roof tile.

La = Moment arm, feet (mm) from the axis of rotation to the point of uplift on the roof tile. The point of uplift shall be taken at 0.76L from the head of the tile and the middle of the exposed width. For roof tiles with nails or screws (with or without a tail clip), the axis of rotation shall be taken as the head of the tile for direct deck application or as the top edge of the batten for battened applications. For roof tiles fastened only by a nail or screw along the side of the tile, the axis of rotation shall be determined by testing. For roof tiles installed with battens and fastened only by a clip near the tail of the tile, the moment arm shall be determined about the top edge of the batten with consideration given for the point of rotation of the tiles based on straight bond or broken bond and the tile profile.

Ma = Aerodynamic uplift moment, feet-pounds (N-mm) acting to raise the tail of the tile.

qh = Wind velocity pressure, psf (kN/m2) determined from Section 26.10.2 of ASCE 7.

Concrete and clay roof tiles complying with the following limitations shall be designed to withstand the aerodynamic uplift moment as determined by this section.

1.	The roof tiles shall be either loose laid on battens, mechanically fastened, mortar set or adhesive set.

2.	The roof tiles shall be installed on solid sheathing that has been designed as components and cladding.

3.	An underlayment shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 15.

4.	The tile shall be single lapped interlocking with a minimum head lap of not less than 2 inches (51 mm).

5.	The length of the tile shall be between 1.0 and 1.75 feet (305 mm and 533 mm).

6.	The exposed width of the tile shall be between 0.67 and 1.25 feet (204 mm and 381 mm).

7.	The maximum thickness of the tail of the tile shall not exceed 1.3 inches (33 mm).

8.	Roof tiles using mortar set or adhesive set systems shall have at least two-thirds of the tile’s area free of mortar or adhesive contact.

1609.6.3.1 Tornado loads.

Where design for tornado loads is required, tornado loads on rigid tile roof coverings shall be determined in accordance with Section 1609.6.3, replacing qh with qhT and GCp with KvT(GCp) in Equation 16-18, where:

qhT = Tornado velocity pressure, psf (kN/m) determined in accordance with Section 32.10 of ASCE 7.

KvT = Tornado pressure coefficient adjustment factor for vertical winds, determined in accordance with Section 32.14 of ASCE 7.

1609.7 Garage doors and rolling doors.

Pressures from Table 1609.7(1) for wind loading actions on garage doors and rolling doors for buildings designed as enclosed shall be permitted.

TABLE 1609.7(1)

NOMINAL (ASD) GARAGE DOOR AND ROLLING DOOR WIND LOADS FOR A BUILDING WITH A MEAN ROOF HEIGHT OF 30 FEET LOCATED IN EXPOSURE B (PSF)1, 2, 3, 4, 5

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEED (Vult) DETERMINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 1609.3 (MPH - 3 SECOND GUST)
Width
(ft)
	Height
(ft)
	100 MPH	110 MPH	120 MPH	130 MPH	140 MPH	150 MPH	160 MPH	170 MPH	180 MPH	190 MPH	200 MPH
Roof Angle 0 – 10 degrees
8	8	+ 10.0	– 10.0	+ 10.5	– 11.9	+ 12.5	– 14.2	+ 14.7	– 16.6	+ 17.1	– 19.3	+ 19.6	– 22.2	+ 22.3	– 25.2	+ 25.1	– 28.5	+ 28.2	– 31.9	+ 31.4	– 35.5	+ 34.8	– 39.4
10	10	+ 10.0	– 10.0	+ 10.2	– 11.4	+ 12.1	– 13.6	+ 14.2	– 16.0	+ 16.5	– 18.5	+ 18.9	– 21.2	+ 21.5	– 24.2	+ 24.3	– 27.3	+ 27.3	– 30.6	+ 30.4	– 34.1	+ 33.7	– 37.8
14	14	+ 10.0	– 10.0	+ 10.0	– 10.8	+ 11.5	– 12.8	+ 13.5	– 15.0	+ 15.7	– 17.4	+ 18.0	– 20.0	+ 20.5	– 22.8	+ 23.1	– 25.7	+ 25.9	– 28.8	+ 28.9	– 32.1	+ 32.0	– 35.6
Roof Angle > 10 degrees
9	7	+10.0	–10.9	+ 11.4	– 12.9	+ 13.7	– 15.5	+ 16.1	– 18.2	+ 18.5	– 20.9	+ 21.3	– 24.1	+ 24.3	– 27.5	+ 27.6	– 31.2	+ 30.6	– 34.6	+ 34.2	– 38.6	+ 38.0	– 43.0
16	7	+10.0	–10.3	+ 10.9	– 12.2	+ 13.1	– 14.6	+ 15.5	– 17.2	+ 17.7	– 19.7	+ 20.4	– 22.7	+ 23.3	– 26.0	+ 26.4	– 29.4	+ 29.3	– 32.6	+ 32.7	– 36.5	+ 36.4	– 40.6
		78 MPH	85 MPH	93 MPH	101 MPH	108 MPH	116 MPH	124 MPH	132 MPH	139 MPH	147 MPH	155 MPH

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/h, 1 psf = 47.88 N/m2.

Nominal Design Wind Speed (Vasd) converted from Ultimate Design Wind Speed per Section 1609.3.1.

1.	For door sizes or wind speeds between those given above the load may be interpolated, otherwise use the load associated with the lower door size.

2.	Table values shall be adjusted for height and exposure by multiplying by the adjustment coefficient in Table 1609.7(2). Minimum positive wind load shall be 10 psf and minimum negative wind load shall be 10 psf.

3.	Plus and minus signs signify pressures acting toward and away from the building surfaces.

4.	Negative pressures assume door has 2 feet of width in building’s end zone.

5.	Table values include the 0.6 load reduction factor.

TABLE 1609.7(2) ADJUSTMENT FACTOR FOR BUILDING HEIGHT AND EXPOSURE, (λ)

MEAN ROOF HEIGHT (feet)	EXPOSURE
B	C	D
15	0.82	1.21	1.47
20	0.89	1.29	1.55
25	0.94	1.35	1.61
30	1.00	1.40	1.66
35	1.05	1.45	1.70
40	1.06	1.49	1.74
45	1.10	1.53	1.78
50	1.13	1.56	1.81
55	1.16	1.59	1.84
60	1.19	1.62	1.87
SECTION 1610
SOIL LOADS AND HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE
1610.1 Lateral pressures.

Foundation walls and retaining walls shall be designed to resist lateral soil loads from adjacent soil. Soil loads specified in Table 1610.1 shall be used as the minimum design lateral soil loads unless determined otherwise by a geotechnical investigation in accordance with Section 1803. Foundation walls and other walls in which horizontal movement is restricted at the top shall be designed for at-rest pressure. Retaining walls free to move and rotate at the top shall be permitted to be designed for active pressure. Lateral pressure from surcharge loads shall be added to the lateral soil load. Lateral pressure shall be increased if expansive soils are present at the site. Foundation walls shall be designed to support the weight of the full hydrostatic pressure of undrained backfill unless a drainage system is installed in accordance with Sections 1805.4.2 and 1805.4.3.

Exception: Foundation walls extending not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) below grade and laterally supported at the top by flexible diaphragms shall be permitted to be designed for active pressure.

TABLE 1610.1

LATERAL SOIL LOAD

DESCRIPTION OF BACKFILL MATERIALc	UNIFIED SOIL
CLASSIFICATION
	DESIGN LATERAL SOIL LOADa
(pound per square foot per foot of depth)

Active pressure	At-rest pressure
Well-graded, clean gravels; gravel-sand mixes	GW	30	60
Poorly graded clean gravels; gravel-sand mixes	GP	30	60
Silty gravels, poorly graded gravel-sand mixes	GM	40	60
Clayey gravels, poorly graded gravel-and-clay mixes	GC	45	60
Well-graded, clean sands; gravelly sand mixes	SW	30	60
Poorly graded clean sands; sand-gravel mixes	SP	30	60
Silty sands, poorly graded sand-silt mixes	SM	45	60
Sand-silt clay mix with plastic fines	SM-SC	45	100
Clayey sands, poorly graded sand-clay mixes	SC	60	100
Inorganic silts and clayey silts	ML	45	100
Mixture of inorganic silt and clay	ML-CL	60	100
Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticity	CL	60	100
Organic silts and silt clays, low plasticity	OL	Note b	Note b
Inorganic clayey silts, elastic silts	MH	Note b	Note b
Inorganic clays of high plasticity	CH	Note b	Note b
Organic clays and silty clays	OH	Note b	Note b

For SI: 1 pound per square foot per foot of depth = 0.157 kPa/m, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Design lateral soil loads are given for moist conditions for the specified soils at their optimum densities. Actual field conditions shall govern. Submerged or saturated soil pressures shall include the weight of the buoyant soil plus the hydrostatic loads.

b.	Unsuitable as backfill material.

c.	The definition and classification of soil materials shall be in accordance with ASTM D2487.

1610.2 Uplift loads on floor and foundations.

Basement floors, slabs on ground, foundations, and similar approximately horizontal elements below grade shall be designed to resist uplift loads where applicable. The upward pressure of water shall be taken as the full hydrostatic pressure applied over the entire area. The hydrostatic load shall be measured from the underside of the element being evaluated. The design for upward loads caused by expansive soils shall comply with Section 1808.6.

SECTION 1611
RAIN LOADS
1611.1 Design rain loads.

Each portion of a roof shall be designed to sustain the load of rainwater as per the requirements of Chapter 8 of ASCE 7. Rain loads shall be based on the summation of the static head, ds, hydraulic head, dh, and ponding head, dp using Equation 16-19. The hydraulic head shall be based on hydraulic test data or hydraulic calculations assuming a flow rate corresponding to a rainfall intensity equal to or greater than the 15-minute duration storm with return period given in Table 1611.1. The ponding head shall be based on structural analysis as the depth of water due to deflections of the roof subjected to unfactored rain load and unfactored dead load.

(Equation 16-19)

For SI: R = 0.0098(ds + dh + dp)

where:

dh = Hydraulic head equal to the depth of water on the undeflected roof above the inlet of the secondary drainage system for structural loading (SDSL) required to achieve the design flow in inches (mm).

dp = Ponding head equal to the depth of water due to deflections of the roof subjected to unfactored rain load and unfactored dead load in inches (mm).

ds = Static head equal to the depth of water on the undeflected roof up to the inlet of the secondary drainage system for structural loading (SDSL) in inches (mm).

R = Rain load in psf (kN/m2).

SDSL is the roof draining system through which water is drained from the roof when the drainage systems listed in ASCE 7, Section 8.2(a) through (d) are blocked or not working.

TABLE 1611.1

DESIGN STORM RETURN PERIOD BY RISK CATEGORY

RISK CATEGORY	DESIGN STORM RETURN PERIOD
I & II	100 years
III	200 years
IV	500 years
1611.2 Ponding instability.

Susceptible bays of roofs shall be evaluated for ponding instability in accordance with Section 8.4 of ASCE 7.

1611.3 Controlled drainage.

Roofs equipped with hardware to control the rate of drainage shall be equipped with a secondary drainage system at a higher elevation that limits accumulation of water on the roof above that elevation. Such roofs shall be designed to sustain the load of rainwater that will accumulate on them to the elevation of the secondary drainage system plus the uniform load caused by water that rises above the inlet of the secondary drainage system at its design flow determined from Section 1611.1. Such roofs shall also be checked for ponding instability in accordance with Section 1611.2.

SECTION 1612
FLOOD LOADS
1612.1 General.

Within flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, all new construction of buildings, structures and portions of buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and restoration of substantial damage to buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads. For buildings that are located in more than one flood hazard area, the provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area shall apply.

TABLE 1612.1

CROSS REFERENCES DEFINING FLOOD-RESISTANT PROVISIONS OF THE FLORIDA BUILDING CODE

Florida Building Code – Building
Section		Section	
Chapter 1	Scope and Administration	Chapter 14	Exterior Walls
102	Applicability	1403	Performance Requirements
105	Permits		
107	Submittal Documents	Chapter 16	Structural Design
110	Inspections	1601	General
111	Certificates of Occupancy	1603	Construction Documents
117	Variances in Flood Hazard Areas	1605	Load Combinations
		1612	Flood Loads
Chapter 2	Definitions		
202	Definitions	Chapter 18	Soils and Foundations
		1804	Excavation, Grading and Fill
Chapter 4	Special Detailed Requirements Based on Occupancy and Use	1805	Dampproofing and Waterproofing
449	Hospitals		
450	Nursing Homes	Chapter 27	Electrical
453	State Requirements for Educational Facilities	2702	Emergency and Standby Power Systems
454	Swimming Pools and Bathing Places (Public And Private)		
		Chapter 30	Elevators and Conveying Systems
Chapter 8	Interior Finishes and Decorative Materials	3001	General
801	General		
		Chapter 31	Special Construction
Chapter 12	Interior Environment	3102	Membrane Structures
1203	Ventilation	3109	Structures Seaward of a Coastal Construction Control Line
			
Florida Building Code – Residential
Section		Section	
Chapter 2	Definitions	Chapter 21	Hydronic Piping
R202	Definitions	M2101	Hydronic Piping Systems Installation
		M2105	Ground-Source Heat-Pump System Loop Piping
Chapter 3	Building Planning		
R301	Design Criteria	Chapter 22	Special Piping and Storage Systems
R309	Garages and Carports	M2201	Oil Tanks
R322	Flood-Resistant Construction		
		Chapter 24	Fuel Gas
Chapter 4	Foundations	G2404 (301)	General
R401	General		
R404	Foundation and Retaining Walls	Chapter 26	General Plumbing Requirements
R408	Under-Floor Space	P2601	General
		P2602	Individual Water Supply and Sewage Disposal
Chapter 13	General Mechanical System Requirements		
M1301	General	Chapter 27	Plumbing Fixtures
		P2705	Installation
Chapter 14	Heating and Cooling Equipment and Appliances		
M1401	General	Chapter 30	Sanitary Drainage
		P3001	General
Chapter 19	Special Appliances, Equipment and Systems		
M1905	Residential Permanently Installed Stand-By Generators		
Chapter 16	Duct Systems	Chapter 20	Boilers and Water Heaters
M1601	Duct Construction	M2001	Boilers
			
		Chapter 31	Vents
Chapter 17	Combustion Air	P3101	Vent Systems
M1701	General		
			
Chapter 19	Special Appliances, Equipment and Systems	Chapter 45	Private Swimming Pools
M1905	Residential Permanently Installed Stand-By Generators	R4501	General
			
Florida Building Code – Existing Building
Section		Section	
Chapter 2	Definitions	Chapter 7	Alterations — Level I
202	Definitions	701	General
			
Chapter 3	Provisions for All Compliance	Chapter 12	Historic Buildings
301	Administration	1201	General
			
Chapter 4	Repairs	Chapter 13	Relocated or Moved Buildings
401	General	1302	Requirements
406	Structural		
		Chapter 14	Performance Compliance Methods
Chapter 5	Prescriptive Compliance Method	1401	General
502	Additions		
503	Alterations		
			
Florida Building Code – Mechanical
Section		Section	
Chapter 3	General Regulations	Chapter 6	Duct Systems
301	General	602	Plenums
		603	Duct Construction and Installation
Chapter 4	Ventilation		
401	General	Chapter 12	Hydronic Piping
		1206	Piping Installation
Chapter 5	Exhaust Systems		
501	General	Chapter 13	Fuel Oil Piping and Storage
		1305	Fuel Oil System Installation
			
Florida Building Code – Plumbing
Section			
Chapter 3	General Regulations		
309	Flood Hazard Resistance		
			
Florida Building Code – Fuel Gas
Section			
Chapter 3	General Regulations		
301	General (IFGC)		
1612.1.1 Cross references.

See Table 1612.1.

1612.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

BASE FLOOD.

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.

BASEMENT.

COASTAL A ZONE.

COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA.

DESIGN FLOOD.

DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION.

DRY FLOODPROOFING.

EXISTING STRUCTURE.

FLOOD or FLOODING.

FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS.

FLOOD HAZARD AREA.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.

FLOODWAY.

LOWEST FLOOR.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.

START OF CONSTRUCTION.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.

1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas.

To establish flood hazard areas, the applicable governing authority shall, by local flood plain management ordinance, adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

1612.3.1 Design flood elevations.

Where design flood elevations are not included in the flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, or where floodways are not designated, the building official is authorized to require the applicant to:

1.	Obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source; or

2.	Determine the design flood elevation and/or floodway in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices used to define special flood hazard areas. Determinations shall be undertaken by a registered design professional who shall document that the technical methods used reflect currently accepted engineering practice.

1612.3.2 Determination of impacts.

In riverine flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall provide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed work will not increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction of the applicable governing authority.

1612.4 Design and construction.

The design and construction of buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas, including coastal high hazard areas and Coastal A Zones, shall be in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 7 and with ASCE 24.

ASCE 24 ." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
1612.4.1Modification of ASCE 24.

Table 6-1 and Section 6.2.1 in ASCE 24 shall be modified as follows:

1.	The title of Table 6.1 shall be “Minimum Elevation of Floodproofing, Relative to Base Flood Elevation (BFE) or Design Flood Elevation (DFE), in Coastal A Zones and in Other Flood Hazard Areas that are not High Risk Flood Hazard Areas.”

2.	Section 6.2.1 shall be modified to permit dry floodproofing in Coastal A Zones, as follows: “Dry floodproofing of nonresidential structures and nonresidential areas of mixed-use structures shall not be allowed unless such structures are located outside of High Risk Flood Hazard areas and Coastal High Hazard Areas. Dry floodproofing shall be permitted in Coastal A Zones provided wave loads and the potential for erosion and local scour are accounted for in the design. Dry floodproofing of residential structures or residential areas of mixed-use structures shall not be permitted.”

ASCE 24 9.6 Pools." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
1612.4.2Modification of ASCE 24 9.6 Pools.

Modify Section 9.6 in ASCE 24 by adding an exception as follows:

9.6 Pools. In-ground and above-ground pools shall be designed to withstand all flood-related loads and load combinations. Mechanical equipment for pools such as pumps, heating systems and filtering systems, and their associated electrical systems, shall comply with Chapter 7.

Exception: Equipment for pools, spas and water features shall be permitted below the elevation required in Table 7-1, provided it is elevated to the extent practical, is anchored to prevent flotation and resist flood forces, and is supplied by branch circuits that have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection.

1612.5 Flood hazard documentation.

The following documentation shall be prepared and sealed by a licensed professional surveyor and mapper or a registered design professional, as applicable, and submitted to the building official:

1.	For construction in flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas or coastal A zones:

1.1.	The elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, as required by the lowest floor elevation inspection in Section 110.3, Building, 1.1 and for the final inspection in Section 110.3, Building, 5.1.

1.2.	For fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation where provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet the minimum requirements in Section 2.7.2.1 of ASCE 24, construction documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with Section 2.7.2.2 of ASCE 24.

1.3.	For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings, construction documents shall include a statement that the dry floodproofing is designed in accordance with ASCE 24 and shall include the flood emergency plan specified in Chapter 6 of ASCE 24.

1.4.	For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings, the elevation to which the building is dry floodproofed as required for the final inspection in Section 110.3, Building, 6.1.

2.	For construction in coastal high hazard areas and coastal A zones:

2.1.	The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member as required by the lowest floor elevation inspection in Section 110.3, Building, 1.1 and for the final inspection in Section 110.3, Building, 5.1.

2.2.	Construction documents shall include a statement that the building is designed in accordance with ASCE 24, including that the pile or column foundation and building or structure to be attached thereto is designed to be anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building components, and other load requirements of Chapter 16.

2.3.	For breakaway walls designed to have a resistance of more than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m2) determined using allowable stress design, construction documents shall include a statement that the breakaway wall is designed in accordance with ASCE 24.

2.4.	For breakaway walls where provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not meet the minimum requirements in Section 2.7.2.1 of ASCE 24, construction documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with Section 2.7.2.2 of ASCE 24.

SECTION 1613
EARTHQUAKE LOADS

RESERVED

SECTION 1614
ATMOSPHERIC ICE LOADS
1614.1 General.

Ice-sensitive structures shall be designed for atmospheric ice loads in accordance with Chapter 10 of ASCE 7.

SECTION 1615
STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY
1615.1 General.

High-rise buildings that are assigned to Risk Category III or IV shall comply with the requirements of Section 1615.3 if they are frame structures, or Section 1615.4 if they are bearing wall structures.

1615.2 Definitions.

The following words and terms are defined in Chapter 2:

BEARING WALL STRUCTURE.

FRAME STRUCTURE.

1615.3 Frame structures.

Frame structures shall comply with the requirements of this section.

1615.3.1 Concrete frame structures.

Frame structures constructed primarily of reinforced or prestressed concrete, either cast-in-place or precast, or a combination of these, shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.10 of ACI 318. Where ACI 318 requires that nonprestressed reinforcing or prestressing steel pass through the region bounded by the longitudinal column reinforcement, that reinforcing or prestressing steel shall have a minimum nominal tensile strength equal to two-thirds of the required one-way vertical strength of the connection of the floor or roof system to the column in each direction of beam or slab reinforcement passing through the column.

Exception: Where concrete slabs with continuous reinforcement having an area not less than 0.0015 times the concrete area in each of two orthogonal directions are present and are either monolithic with or equivalently bonded to beams, girders or columns, the longitudinal reinforcing or prestressing steel passing through the column reinforcement shall have a nominal tensile strength of one-third of the required one-way vertical strength of the connection of the floor or roof system to the column in each direction of beam or slab reinforcement passing through the column.

1615.3.2 Structural steel, open web steel joist or joist girder, or composite steel and concrete frame structures.

Frame structures constructed with a structural steel frame or a frame composed of open web steel joists, joist girders with or without other structural steel elements or a frame composed of composite steel or composite steel joists and reinforced concrete elements shall conform to the requirements of this section.

1615.3.2.1 Columns.

Each column splice shall have the minimum design strength in tension to transfer the design dead and live load tributary to the column between the splice and the splice or base immediately below.

1615.3.2.2 Beams.

End connections of all beams and girders shall have a minimum nominal axial tensile strength equal to the required vertical shear strength for allowable stress design (ASD) or two-thirds of the required shear strength for load and resistance factor design (LRFD) but not less than 10 kips (45 kN). For the purpose of this section, the shear force and the axial tensile force need not be considered to act simultaneously.

Exception: Where beams, girders, open web joist and joist girders support a concrete slab or concrete slab on metal deck that is attached to the beam or girder with not less than 3/8-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) headed shear studs, at a spacing of not more than 12 inches (305 mm) on center, averaged over the length of the member, or other attachment having equivalent shear strength, and the slab contains continuous distributed reinforcement in each of two orthogonal directions with an area not less than 0.0015 times the concrete area, the nominal axial tension strength of the end connection shall be permitted to be taken as half the required vertical shear strength for ASD or one-third of the required shear strength for LRFD, but not less than 10 kips (45 kN).

1615.4 Bearing wall structures.

Bearing wall structures shall have vertical ties in all load-bearing walls and longitudinal ties, transverse ties and perimeter ties at each floor level in accordance with this section and as shown in Figure 1615.4.

FIGURE 1615.4

LONGITUDINAL, PERIMETER, TRANSVERSE AND VERTICAL TIES

1615.4.1 Concrete wall structures.

Precast bearing wall structures constructed solely of reinforced or prestressed concrete, or combinations of these shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.2.4 and 16.2.5 of ACI 318.

1615.4.2 Other bearing wall structures.

Ties in bearing wall structures other than those covered in Section 1615.4.1 shall conform to this section.

1615.4.2.1 Longitudinal ties.

Longitudinal ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Longitudinal ties shall extend across interior load-bearing walls and shall connect to exterior load-bearing walls and shall be spaced at not greater than 10 feet (3038 mm) on center. Ties shall have a minimum nominal tensile strength, TT, given by Equation 16-20. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

(Equation 16-20)

where:

L = The span of the horizontal element in the direction of the tie, between bearing walls, feet (m).

w = The weight per unit area of the floor or roof in the span being tied to or across the wall, psf (N/m2).

S = The spacing between ties, feet (m).

αT = A coefficient with a value of 1,500 pounds per foot (2.25 kN/m) for masonry bearing wall structures and a value of 375 pounds per foot (0.6 kN/m) for structures with bearing walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

1615.4.2.2 Transverse ties.

Transverse ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Transverse ties shall be placed no farther apart than the spacing of load-bearing walls. Transverse ties shall have minimum nominal tensile strength TT, given by Equation 16-20. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

1615.4.2.3 Perimeter ties.

Perimeter ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Ties around the perimeter of each floor and roof shall be located within 4 feet (1219 mm) of the edge and shall provide a nominal strength in tension not less than Tp, given by Equation 16-21. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

(Equation 16-21)

For SI: Tp= 90.7w βT

where:

w = As defined in Section 1615.4.2.1.

βT = A coefficient with a value of 16,000 pounds (7200 kN) for structures with masonry bearing walls and a value of 4,000 pounds (1300 kN) for structures with bearing walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

1615.4.2.4 Vertical ties.

Vertical ties shall consist of continuous or spliced reinforcing, continuous or spliced members, wall sheathing or other engineered systems. Vertical tension ties shall be provided in bearing walls and shall be continuous over the height of the building. The minimum nominal tensile strength for vertical ties within a bearing wall shall be equal to the weight of the wall within that story plus the weight of the diaphragm tributary to the wall in the story below. No fewer than two ties shall be provided for each wall. The strength of each tie need not exceed 3,000 pounds per foot (450 kN/m) of wall tributary to the tie for walls of masonry construction or 750 pounds per foot (140 kN/m) of wall tributary to the tie for walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

SECTION 1616
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GENERAL, DEFLECTION, VOLUME CHANGES AND
MINIMUM LOADS
1616.1 General design requirements.
1616.1.1

Any system, method of design or method of construction shall admit of a rational analysis in accordance with well-established principles of mechanics and sound engineering practices.

1616.1.2

Buildings, structures and all parts thereof shall be designed and constructed to be of sufficient strength to support the estimated or actual imposed dead, live, wind, and any other loads, both during construction and after completion of the structure, without exceeding the allowable materials stresses specified by this code.

1616.1.3

Reserved.

1616.1.4

Reserved.

1616.1.5

Reserved.

1616.1.6

Floor and roof systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer horizontal forces to such parts of the structural frame as are designed to carry these forces to the foundation. Where roofs or floors are constructed of individual prefabricated units and the transfer of forces to the building frame and foundation is totally or partially dependent on such units, the units and their attachments shall be capable of resisting applied loads in both vertical and both horizontal directions. Where roofs or floors are constructed of individual prefabricated units and the transfer of forces to the building frame and foundation is wholly independent of such units, the units and their attachments shall be capable of resisting applied loads normal to the surface, in and out.

1616.2 General design for specific occupancies and structures.
1616.2.1 Fences.

Fences not exceeding 6 feet (1829 mm) in height from grade may be designed for allowable wind speeds of 75 mph (33 m/s) fastest mile wind speed or 115 mph (40 m/s) 3-second gust.

1616.2.1.1 Wood fences.

Wood fence design shall be as specified by Section 2328.

1616.2.2 Sway forces in stadiums.

1.	The sway force applied to seats in stadiums, grand-stands, bleachers and reviewing stands shall be not less than 24 pounds per lineal foot (350 N/m), applied perpendicularly and along the seats.

2.	Sway forces shall be applied simultaneously with gravity loads.

3.	Sway forces need not be applied simultaneously with other lateral forces.

1616.3 Deflection.
1616.3.1 Allowable deflections.

The deflection of any structural member or component when subjected to live, wind and other superimposed loads set forth herein shall not exceed the following:

1.	Roof and ceiling or components supporting plaster	L/360
2.	Roof members or components not supporting plaster under	L/240
3.	Structural metal roof panels of cold-formed steel construction	L/180
4.	Floor members or components	L/360
5.	Vertical members and wall members or components consisting of or supporting material that hardens in place, is brittle or lacks resistance to cracking caused by bending strains	L/360
6.	Vertical members and wall members or components not required to meet the conditions of Section 1616.3, Item 5	L/180
7.	Roof and vertical members, wall members and panels of carports, canopies, marquees, the roof projection is greater than 12 feet (3.7 m) in the direction of the span, for free-standing roofs and roofs supported by existing structures. Existing structures supporting such roofs shall be capable of supporting the additional loading	L/180
8.	For Group R3 occupancies only, roof and vertical members, wall members and panels of carports, canopies, marquees, patio covers, utility sheds and similar minor structures not to be considered living areas, where the roof projection is 12 feet (3.7 m) or less in the direction of the span and for free-standing roofs and roofs supported by existing structures	L/80
9.	Members supporting screens only	L/80
10.	Storm shutters and fold-down awnings, which in the closed position shall provide a minimum clear separation from the glass of 1 inch (25 mm) but not to exceed 2 inches (51 mm) when the shutter or awning is at its maximum point of permissible deflection	L/30
11.	Roofs and exterior walls of utility sheds having maximum dimensions of 10 feet (3 m) length, 10 feet (3 m) width, and 7 feet (2.1 m) height	L/80
12.	Roofs and exterior walls of storage buildings larger than utility sheds	L/180
1616.4 Volume change.

In the design of any building, structure or portion thereof, consideration shall be given to the relief of stresses caused by expansion, contraction and other volume changes.

1616.5 Live loads.

Live loads for balconies and decks shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 7.

1616.6 Concentrated loads.

Reserved.

SECTION 1617
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROOF DRAINAGE

RESERVED

SECTION 1618
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SPECIAL LOAD CONSIDERATIONS
1618.1 Floors.

Reserved.

1618.2 Below grade structures.

Reserved.

1618.3 Helistops/heliports.

Reserved.

1618.4 Safeguards.

Reserved.

1618.4.1

Reserved.

1618.4.2

Reserved.

1618.4.3

Reserved.

1618.4.4

Reserved.

1618.4.5

Reserved.

1618.4.6 Railing.
1618.4.6.1

Reserved.

1618.4.6.2

Reserved.

1618.4.6.3

Laminated glazing will be permitted as an equal alternate to pickets, if tested by an accredited laboratory to satisfy the resistance requirements of this code for wind, live and kinetic energy impact loading conditions. The kinetic energy impact loading shall comply with ANSI Z97.1 using a 400 foot-pound (542 N) energy impact. The safety requirements of the impact test shall be judged to have been satisfactorily met if breakage does not occur or numerous cracks and fissures occur but no shear or opening through which a 3-inch (76 mm) diameter sphere may freely pass. The glass panel shall remain within the supporting frame.

1618.4.6.4

If the posts that support the top rail of exterior railings are substituted with glass, the assembly shall be tested to TAS 201, where the impacted glass continues to support the top rail and all applicable loads after impact.

1618.5 Vehicle safeguard barriers.

Reserved.

1618.6 Special requirements for cable safeguard barriers.

Reserved.

1618.7 Ornamental projections.

Reserved.

1618.8 Interior wall and partitions.

Reserved.

1618.9 Load combination.

Reserved.

SECTION 1619
HIGH VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
LIVE LOAD REDUCTIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1620
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WIND LOADS
1620.1

Buildings and structures, and every portion thereof, shall be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of Chapters 26 through 31 of ASCE 7.

Exception: Exposed mechanical equipment or appliances fastened to a roof or installed on the ground in compliance with the code using rated stands, platforms, curbs, slabs, walls, or other means are deemed to comply with the wind resistance requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, as amended. Further support or enclosure of such mechanical equipment or appliances is not required by a state or local official having authority to enforce the Florida Building Code.

1620.2

Wind velocity (3-second gust) used in structural calculations shall be as follows:

Miami-Dade County

Risk Category I Buildings and Structures: 165 mph

Risk Category II Buildings and Structures: 175 mph

Risk Category III Buildings and Structures: 186 mph

Risk Category IV Buildings and Structures: 195 mph

Broward County

Risk Category I Buildings and Structures: 156 mph

Risk Category II Buildings and Structures: 170 mph

Risk Category III Buildings and Structures: 180 mph

Risk Category IV Buildings and Structures: 185 mph

1620.3

All buildings and structures shall be considered to be in Exposure Category C, unless Exposure Category D applies, as defined in Section 26.7 of ASCE 7.

1620.4

For wind force calculations, roof live loads shall not be considered to act simultaneously with the wind load.

1620.5

Utility sheds shall be designed for a wind load of not less than 15 psf (718 Pa).

1620.6 Rooftop equipment and structures.

Wind loads on roottop equipment and other structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 29 of ASCE 7.

Exception: Exposed mechanical equipment or appliances fastened to a roof or installed on the ground in compliance with the code using rated stands, platforms, curbs, slabs, walls, or other means are deemed to comply with the wind-resistance requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, as amended. Further support or enclosure of such mechanical equipment or appliances is not required by a state or local official having authority to enforce the Florida Building Code.

1620.7 Tornado Loads.

The design and construction of Risk Category III and IV buildings and other structures shall be in accordance with Chapter 32 of ASCE 7.

SECTION 1621
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
OVERTURNING MOMENT AND UPLIFT
1621.1

Computations for overturning moment and uplift shall be based on ASCE 7.

1621.2

Overturning and uplift stability of any building, structure or part thereof taken as a whole shall be provided and shall be satisfied by conforming to the load combination requirements of ASCE 7.

SECTION 1622
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SCREEN ENCLOSURES
1622.1 Screen enclosures.
1622.1.1

The wind loads on screen surfaces shall be in accordance with ASCE 7 based on the ratio of solid to gross area.

1622.1.2

Design shall be based on such loads applied horizontally inward and outward to the walls with a shape factor of 1.3 and applied vertically upward and downward on the roof with a shape factor of 0.7.

Exception: Screen enclosures shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with the AAF Guide to Aluminum Construction in High Wind Areas. Construction documents based on the AAF Guide to Aluminum Construction in High Wind Areas shall be prepared and signed and sealed by a Florida registered architect or engineer.

1622.2 Windbreakers.
1622.2.1

Vinyl and acrylic glazed panels shall be removable. Removable panels shall be identified as removable by a decal. The identification decal shall essentially state “Removable panel SHALL be removed when wind speeds exceed 75 mph (34 m/s).” Decals shall be placed such that the decal is visible when the panel is installed.

1622.2.2

Permanent frame shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1620 and 1622.1.2.

SECTION 1623
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
LIVE LOADS POSTED AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS

RESERVED

SECTION 1624
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FOUNDATION DESIGN

RESERVED

SECTION 1625
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
LOAD TESTS
1625.1 Application.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the building official may require testing by an approved agency, at the expense of the owner or his agent, as proof of compliance. Testing methods shall be as specified by this code for the specific material.

1625.2 Testing method.

Such testing shall follow a nationally recognized standard test, or when there is no standard test procedure for the material or assembly in question, the building official shall require the material or assembly under dead plus live load shall deflect not more than as set forth in Section 1616.3, and that the material or assembly shall sustain dead load plus twice the live load for a period of 24 hours, with a recovery of at least 80 percent or a 100-percent recovery after one-half test load.

1625.3 Alternate test methods.

When elements, assemblies or details of structural members are such that their load-carrying capacity, deformation under load, or deflection cannot be calculated by rational analysis, their structural performance shall be established by test in accordance with test procedures as approved by the building official based on consideration of all probable conditions of loading.

1625.4 Fatigue load testing.

Where cladding assemblies (including cladding and connections) or roofing framing assemblies (including portions of roof structure and connections) are such that their load-carrying capacity or deformation under load cannot be calculated by rational analysis, the assemblies may be tested to resist the fatigue loading sequence given by Table 1625.4.

Assemblies shall be tested with no resultant failure or distress and shall have a recovery of at least 90 percent over maximum deflection.

Any cladding assembly not incorporated into the Florida Building Code, Building after successfully completing the impact test outlined in Section 1626, shall be subject to fatigue loading testing and shall obtain product approval by the building official.

TABLE 1625.4

FATIGUE LOADING SEQUENCE

RANGE OF TEST	NUMBER OF CYCLES1
0 to 0.5pmax2	600
0 to 0.6pmax	70
0 to 1.3pmax	1

1.	Each cycle shall have minimum duration of 1 second and a maximum duration of 3 seconds and must be performed in a continuous manner.

2.	pmax = 0.6 × ultimate design load in accordance with ASCE 7.

SECTION 1626
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
IMPACT TESTS FOR WIND-BORNE DEBRIS

TABLE 1626

CYCLIC WIND PRESSURE LOADING

INWARD ACTING PRESSURE	OUTWARD ACTING PRESSURE
RANGE	NUMBER OF CYCLES1	RANGE	NUMBER OF CYCLES1
0.2 PMAX to 0.5 PMAX2	3,500	0.3 PMAX to 1.0 PMAX	50
0.0 PMAX to 0.6 PMAX	300	0.5 PMAX to 0.8 PMAX	1,050
0.5 PMAX to 0.8 PMAX	600	0.0 PMAX to 0.6 PMAX	50
0.3 PMAX to 1.0 PMAX	100	0.2 PMAX to 0.5 PMAX	3,350

NOTES:

1.	Each cycle shall have minimum duration of 1 second and a maximum duration of 3 seconds and must be performed in a continuous manner.

2.	pmax = 0.6 × ultimate design load in accordance with ASCE 7. The pressure spectrum shall be applied to each test specimen beginning with inward acting pressures followed by the outward acting pressures in the order from the top of each column to the bottom of each column.

1626.1

All parts or systems of a building or structure envelope such as, but not limited, to exterior walls, roof, outside doors, skylights, glazing and glass block shall meet impact test criteria or be protected with an external protection device that meets the impact test criteria. Test procedures to determine resistance to wind-borne debris of wall cladding, outside doors, skylights, glazing, glass block, shutters and any other external protection devices shall be performed in accordance with this section.

Exception: The following structures or portion of structures shall not be required to meet the provisions of this section:

a.	Roof assemblies for screen rooms, porches, canopies, etc., attached to a building that do not breach the exterior wall or building envelope and have no enclosed sides other than screen.

b.	Soffits, soffit vents and ridge vents. Size and location of such vents shall be detailed by the designer and shall not compromise the integrity of the diaphragm boundary.

c.	Vents in a garage with four or fewer cars. Size and location of such vents shall be detailed by the designer and shall not exceed the minimum required area by more than 25 percent.

d.	Exterior wall or roof openings for wall- or roofmounted HVAC equipment.

e.	Openings for roof-mounted personnel access roof hatches.

f.	Storage sheds that are not designed for human habitation and that have a floor area of 720 square feet (67 m2) or less are not required to comply with the mandatory windborne debris impact standards of this code.

g.	Louvers as long as they properly considered ASCE 7 in the design of the building and meet the requirements of Section 1626.5.3.

h.	Buildings and structures for marinas, cabanas, swimming pools and greenhouses.

i.	Exterior balconies or porches under existing roofs or decks enclosed with screen or removable vinyl and acrylic panels complying with Section 1622.1 or 1622.2 shall not be required to be protected and openings in the wall separating the unit from the balcony or porch shall not be required to be protected unless required by other provisions of this code.

1626.2 Large missile impact tests.
1626.2.1

This test shall be conducted on three test specimens in accordance with test protocols TAS 201 and TAS 203. This test shall be applicable to the construction units, assemblies and materials to be used up to and including 30 feet (9.1 m) in height in any and all structures.

1626.2.2

The test specimens shall consist of the entire assembled unit, including frame and anchorage as supplied by the manufacturer for installation in the building, or as set forth in a referenced specification, if applicable. Fasteners used in mounting the test specimen shall be identical in size and spacing to what is used in field installations.

1626.2.3

The large missile shall be comprised of a piece of timber having nominal dimensions of 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 m) weighing 9 pounds (4.1 kg).

1626.2.4

The large missile shall impact the surface of each test specimen at a speed of 50 feet per second (15.2 m/s); 80 feet per second (24.38 m/s) for Risk Category IV–Essential Facility buildings or structures.

1626.2.5

Each test specimen shall receive two impacts except as noted in Sections 1626.2.5.1 and 1626.2.5.2, the first within a 5-inch (127 mm) radius circle having its center on the midpoint of the test specimen and the second within a 5-inch (127 mm) radius circle in a corner having its center in a location 6 inches (152 mm) away from any supporting members.

1626.2.5.1

For window, glass block, fixed glass and skylight assemblies, both impacts shall be to glass or other glazing infill. For test specimens with more than one light of glass, a single light closest to the center of the assembly shall be selected and impacted twice in accordance with Section 1626.2.5. If a light of glass is sufficiently small to cause the 5-inch (127 mm) radius circle to overlap, two separate lights shall be impacted one time each.

1626.2.5.1.1

For window, fixed glass and skylight assemblies comprised of different glass thickness, types of glass or different types of glazing infill, each separate thickness or type shall be impacted twice in accordance with Section 1626.2.5.

1626.2.5.2

For doors, wall cladding and external protection devices, both impacts shall be to the thinnest section through the assembly. For doors, wall cladding and external protection devices with horizontal and/or vertical bracing, both impacts shall be within a single area that is not reinforced and shall be in accordance with Section 1626.2.5.

1626.2.5.2.1

For doors with glass, the glass shall be impacted twice and the thinnest section through the assembly that is not glass shall be impacted twice in accordance with Section 1626.2.5.

1626.2.6

In the case of glazing, if the three test specimens that comprise a test successfully reject the two missile impacts, they shall then be subjected to the cyclic pressure loading defined in Table 1626.

1626.2.6.1

If external protection devices are employed to protect windows, fixed doors or skylights, they must resist the large missile impacts specified in Sections 1626.2.3 and 1626.2.4 without deformations which result in contact with the windows, fixed glass, glass block, and doors or skylights they are intended to protect.

1626.2.6.2

If external protection devices are not designed to be airtight, following the large missile impact test, they must resist an application of force corresponding to those listed in Table 1625.4 (fatigue load testing) without detaching from their mountings. The acting pressure cycles shall be simulated with loads applied through a mechanical system attached to the shutter specimen to apply uniformly around the shutter perimeter a force equal to the product of the required pressure and the area of the shutter specimen.

1626.2.7

If air leakage through the test specimen is excessive, tape may be used to cover any cracks and joints through which leakage is occurring. Tape shall not be used when there is a probability that it may significantly restrict differential movement between adjoining members. It is also permissible to cover both sides of the entire specimen and mounting panel with a single thickness of polyethylene film no thicker than 0.050 mm (2 mils). The technique of application is important in order that the full load is transferred to the specimen and that the membrane does not prevent movement or failure of the specimen. Apply the film loosely with extra folds of material at each corner and at all offsets and recesses. When the load is applied, there shall be no fillet caused by tightness of plastic film.

1626.2.8

A particular system of construction shall be deemed to comply with this recommended practice if three test specimens reject the two missile impacts without penetration and resist the cyclic pressure loading with no crack forming longer than 5 inches (127 mm) and 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) wide through which air can pass.

1626.2.9

If only one of the three test specimens in a test fails to meet the above listed criteria, one retest of this system of construction (another test sequence with three specimens) shall be permitted.

1626.3 Small missile impact test.
1626.3.1

This test shall be conducted on three test specimens in accordance with test protocols TAS 201 and TAS 203. This test shall be applicable to the construction units, assemblies, and materials to be used above 30 feet (9.1 m) in height in any and all structures; Risk Category IV–Essential Facility buildings or structures shall follow the large missile impact testing in Section 1626.2.4 at 50 feet per second (15.2 m/s).

1626.3.2

Each test specimen shall consist of the entire assembled unit, including frame and anchorage as supplied by the manufacturer for installation in the building, or as set forth in a referenced specification, if applicable. The fasteners used in mounting the test specimen shall be identical in size and spacing to those to be used in field installations.

1626.3.3

The missiles shall consist of solid steel balls each having a mass of 2 grams (0.07 oz) (+/-5 percent) with a 5/16-inch (7.9 mm) nominal diameter.

1626.3.4

Each missile shall impact the surface of each test specimen at a speed of 130 feet per second (40 m/s).

1626.3.5

Each test specimen shall receive 30 small missile impacts except as noted in Sections 1626.3.5.1 and 1626.3.5.2 delivered in groups of 10 at a time: the first 10 distributed uniformly over a 2 square foot (0.19 m2) area located at the center of the test specimen, the second 10 distributed uniformly over a 2 square foot area (0.19 m2) located at the center of the long dimension of the specimen near the edge, and the third 10 distributed uniformly over a 2 square foot (0.19 m2) area located at a corner of the specimen.

1626.3.5.1

For window and skylight assemblies, all impacts shall be to glass or other glazing infill. For test specimens with more than one light of glass, a single light closest to the center of the assembly shall be selected and impacted in accordance with Section 1626.3.5. If a light of glass is sufficiently small to cause the 5-inch (127 mm) radius circles to overlap, separate lights may be impacted; however, there must be a total of 30 impacts within the assembly.

1626.3.5.1.1

For window, fixed glass and skylight assemblies comprised of glass with different thickness, types of glass or different types of glazing infill, each separate thickness or type shall be impacted in accordance with Section 1626.3.5.

1626.3.5.2

For doors, wall cladding and external protection devices, all impacts shall be to the thinnest section through the assembly. For doors, wall cladding and external protection devices with horizontal and/or vertical bracing, all impacts shall be within a single area that is not reinforced and shall be impacted in accordance with Section 1626.3.5.

1626.3.5.2.1

For doors with glass, the glass shall be impacted in accordance with Section 1626.3.5 and the thinnest section through the assembly that is not glass shall be impacted in accordance with Section 1626.3.5.

1626.3.6

In the case of glazing, after completion of the small missile impacts, each test specimen shall then be subjected to the cyclic pressure loading defined in Table 1626.

1626.3.6.1

If external protection devices are employed to protect windows, doors or skylights, they must resist the small missile impacts specified in Sections 1626.3.3 and 1626.3.4 without deformations that result in contact with the windows, glass, doors or skylights they are intended to protect.

1626.3.6.2

If external protection devices are not designed to be airtight, following the small missile impact test, they must resist an application of force corresponding to those listed in Table 1625.4 (fatigue load testing) without detaching from their mountings. The acting pressure cycles shall be simulated with loads applied through a mechanical system attached to the shutter specimen to apply uniformly around the shutter perimeter a force equal to the product of the required pressure and the area of the shutter specimen.

1626.3.7

If air leakage through the test specimen is excessive, tape may be used to cover any cracks and joints through which leakage is occurring. Tape shall not be used when there is a probability that it may significantly restrict differential movement between adjoining members. It is also permissible to cover both sides of the entire specimen and mounting panel with a single thickness of polyethylene film no thicker than 0.050 mm (2 mils). The technique of application is important for the full load to be transferred to the specimen and to insure the membrane does not prevent movement or failure of the specimen. Apply the film loosely with extra folds of material at each corner and at all offsets and recesses. When the load is applied, there shall be no fillet caused by tightness of plastic film.

1626.3.8

A particular system of construction shall be deemed to comply with this test if three test specimens reject the small missile impacts without penetration and resist the cyclic pressure loading with no crack forming longer than 5 inches (127 mm) and 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in width through which air can pass.

1626.3.9

If only one of the three test specimens in a test fails to meet the previously listed criteria, one retest of the system (another test sequence with three specimens) of construction shall be permitted.

1626.4 Construction assemblies deemed to comply with Section 1626.

1.	Exterior concrete masonry walls of minimum nominal 8-inch (203 mm) thickness, constructed in accordance with Chapter 21 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code.

2.	Exterior frame walls or gable ends constructed in accordance with Chapters 22 and 23 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code, sheathed with a minimum 19/32-inch (15 mm) CD exposure 1 plywood and clad with wire lath and stucco installed in accordance with Chapter 25 of this code.

3.	Exterior frame walls and roofs constructed in accordance with Chapter 22 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code sheathed with a minimum 24-gage rib-deck-type material and clad with an approved wall finish.

4.	Exterior reinforced concrete elements constructed of solid normal weight concrete (no voids), designed in accordance with Chapter 19 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code and having a minimum 2 inches (51 mm) thickness.

5.	Roof systems constructed in accordance with Chapter 22 or Chapter 23 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) of this code, sheathed with a minimum 19/32-inch (15 mm) CD exposure 1 plywood or minimum nominal 1-inch (25 mm) wood decking and surfaced with an approved roof system installed in accordance with Chapter 15 of this code.

All connectors shall be specified by the building designer of record for all loads except impact.

1626.5 Louvers.
1626.5.1

Louvers protecting the exterior wall envelope and are within 30 feet (9144 mm) of grade shall meet the requirements of AMCA 540 or TAS 201 (large missile test) or shall be protected by an impact-resistant cover complying with TAS 201 (large missile test), TAS 202 and TAS 203.

1626.5.2

Louvers required to be open for life safety purposes, such as providing a breathable atmosphere, that areprotecting the exterior wall envelope and are within 30 feet (9144 mm) of grade shall meet the impact requirements of AMCA 540 or TAS 201 (large missile test).

1626.5.3

Open and closed louvers protecting the exterior wall envelope, regardless of their function or location from grade, shall also comply with uniform air pressure testing per TAS 202 protocol and either the cyclical wind pressure loading per TAS 203 protocol or by complying with both the impact and cyclical pressure testing of AMCA 540.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-17]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 17
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
SECTION 1701
GENERAL
1701.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the quality, workmanship and requirements for materials covered. Materials of construction and tests shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this code.

1701.2 New materials.

New building materials, equipment, appliances, systems or methods of construction not provided for in this code, and any material of questioned suitability proposed for use in the construction of a building or structure, shall be subjected to the tests prescribed in this chapter and in the approved rules to determine character, quality and limitations of use.

SECTION 1702
DEFINITIONS
1702.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

APPROVED AGENCY.

APPROVED FABRICATOR.

CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.

FABRICATED ITEM.

GARAGE DOOR MANUFACTURER.

INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS.

MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM.

MASTIC FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS.

SPECIAL INSPECTION. Reserved.

Continuous special inspection. Reserved.

Periodic special inspection. Reserved.

SPECIAL INSPECTOR. Reserved.

SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS.

STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. Reserved.

SECTION 1703
APPROVALS
1703.1 Approved agency.

An approved agency shall provide all information as necessary for the building official to determine that the agency meets the applicable requirements specified in Sections 1703.1.1 through 1703.1.3.

1703.1.1 Independence.

An approved agency shall be objective, competent and independent from the contractor responsible for the work being inspected. The agency shall also disclose to the building official and the registered design professional in responsible charge possible conflicts of interest so that objectivity can be confirmed.

1703.1.2 Equipment.

An approved agency shall have adequate equipment to perform required tests. The equipment shall be periodically calibrated.

1703.1.3 Personnel.

An approved agency shall employ experienced personnel educated in conducting, supervising and evaluating tests and special inspections.

1703.2 Written approval.

Any material, appliance, equipment, system or method of construction meeting the requirements of this code shall be approved in writing after satisfactory completion of the required tests and submission of required test reports.

1703.3 Record of approval.

For any material, appliance, equipment, system or method of construction that has been approved, a record of such approval, including the conditions and limitations of the approval, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office and shall be available for public review at appropriate times.

1703.4 Performance.

Specific information consisting of test reports conducted by an approved agency in accordance with the appropriate referenced standards, or other such information as necessary, shall be provided for the building official to determine that the product, material or assembly meets the applicable code requirements.

1703.4.1 Research and investigation.

Sufficient technical data shall be submitted to the building official to substantiate the proposed use of any product, material or assembly. If it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory proof of performance for the use intended, the building official shall approve the use of the product, material or assembly subject to the requirements of this code. The costs, reports and investigations required under these provisions shall be paid by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

1703.4.2 Research reports.

Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of products, materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.

1703.5 Labeling.

Products, materials or assemblies required to be labeled shall be labeled in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 1703.5.1 through 1703.5.4.

1703.5.1 Testing.

An approved agency shall test a representative sample of the product, material or assembly being labeled to the relevant standard or standards. The approved agency shall maintain a record of the tests performed. The record shall provide sufficient detail to verify compliance with the test standard.

1703.5.2 Inspection and identification.

The approved agency shall periodically perform an inspection, which shall be in-plant if necessary, of the product or material that is to be labeled. The inspection shall verify that the labeled product, material or assembly is representative of the product, material or assembly tested.

1703.5.3 Label information.

The label shall contain the manufacturer’s identification, model number, serial number or definitive information describing the performance characteristics of the product, material or assembly and the approved agency’s identification.

1703.5.4 Method of labeling.

Information required to be permanently identified on the product, material or assembly shall be acid etched, sand blasted, ceramic fired, laser etched, embossed or of a type that, once applied, cannot be removed without being destroyed.

1703.6 Evaluation and follow-up inspection services.

Where structural components or other items regulated by this code are not visible for inspection after completion of a prefabricated assembly, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall submit a report of each prefabricated assembly. The report shall indicate the complete details of the assembly, including a description of the assembly and its components, the basis upon which the assembly is being evaluated, test results and similar information and other data as necessary for the building official to determine conformance to this code. Such a report shall be approved by the building official.

1703.6.1 Follow-up inspection.

Reserved.

1703.6.2 Test and inspection records.

Copies of necessary test and special inspection records shall be filed with the building official.

1703.6.2.1 Concrete testing reports.

Where this code, a referenced standard, a building official or inspection agency requires testing of concrete on a project, test reports shall be provided to the building official or inspection agency, the registered design professional of record, and the material supplier concurrent when reporting results to the client.

SECTION 1704
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS,
CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY AND
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION

RESERVED

SECTION 1705
REQUIRED SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

RESERVED

SECTION 1706
DESIGN STRENGTHS OF MATERIALS
1706.1 Conformance to standards.

The design strengths and permissible stresses of any structural material that are identified by a manufacturer’s designation as to manufacture and grade by mill tests, or the strength and stress grade is otherwise confirmed to the satisfaction of the building official, shall conform to the specifications and methods of design of accepted engineering practice or the approved rules in the absence of applicable standards.

1706.2 New materials.

For materials that are not specifically provided for in this code, the design strengths and permissible stresses shall be established by tests as provided for in Section 1707.

SECTION 1707
ALTERNATIVE TEST PROCEDURE
1707.1 General.

In the absence of approved rules or other approved standards, the building official shall make, or cause to be made, the necessary tests and investigations; or the building official shall accept duly authenticated reports from approved agencies in respect to the quality and manner of use of new materials or assemblies as provided for in Section 104.11. The cost of all tests and other investigations required under the provisions of this code shall be borne by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent.

SECTION 1708
IN-SITU LOAD TESTS
1708.1 General.

Whenever there is a reasonable doubt as to the stability or load-bearing capacity of a completed building, structure or portion thereof for the expected loads, an engineering assessment shall be required. The engineering assessment shall involve either a structural analysis or an in-situ load test, or both. The structural analysis shall be based on actual material properties and other as-built conditions that affect stability or load-bearing capacity, and shall be conducted in accordance with the applicable design standard. If the structural assessment determines that the load-bearing capacity is less than that required by the code, load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Section 1708.2. If the building, structure or portion thereof is found to have inadequate stability or load-bearing capacity for the expected loads, modifications to ensure structural adequacy or the removal of the inadequate construction shall be required.

1708.2 Test standards.

Structural components and assemblies shall be tested in accordance with the appropriate referenced standards. In the absence of a standard that contains an applicable load test procedure, the test procedure shall be developed by a registered design professional and approved. The test procedure shall simulate loads and conditions of application that the completed structure or portion thereof will be subjected to in normal use.

1708.3 In-situ load tests.

In-situ load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Section 1708.3.1 or 1708.3.2 and shall be supervised by a registered design professional. The test shall simulate the applicable loading conditions specified in Chapter 16 as necessary to address the concerns regarding structural stability of the building, structure or portion thereof.

1708.3.1 Load test procedure specified.

Where a referenced standard contains an applicable load test procedure and acceptance criteria, the test procedure and acceptance criteria in the standard shall apply. In the absence of specific load factors or acceptance criteria, the load factors and acceptance criteria in Section 1708.3.2 shall apply.

1708.3.2 Load test procedure not specified.

In the absence of applicable load test procedures contained within a standard referenced by this code or acceptance criteria for a specific material or method of construction, such existing structure shall be subjected to a test procedure developed by a registered design professional that simulates applicable loading and deformation conditions. At a minimum, the test load shall be equal to the specified factored design loads. For materials such as wood that have strengths that are dependent on load duration, the test load shall be adjusted to account for the difference in load duration of the test compared to the expected duration of the design loads being considered. For statically loaded components, the test load shall be left in place for a period of 24 hours. For components that carry dynamic loads (e.g., machine supports or fall arrest anchors), the load shall be left in place for a period consistent with the component’s actual function. The structure shall be considered to have successfully met the test requirements where the following criteria are satisfied:

1.	Under the design load, the deflection shall not exceed the limitations specified in Section 1604.3.

2.	Within 24 hours after removal of the test load, the structure shall have recovered not less than 75 percent of the maximum deflection.

3.	During and immediately after the test, the structure shall not show evidence of failure.

SECTION 1709
PRECONSTRUCTION LOAD TESTS
1709.1 General.

Where proposed construction is not capable of being designed by approved engineering analysis, or where proposed construction design method does not comply with the applicable material design standard, the system of construction or the structural unit and the connections shall be subjected to the tests prescribed in Section 1709. The building official shall accept certified reports of such tests conducted by an approved testing agency, provided that such tests meet the requirements of this code and approved procedures.

1709.2 Load test procedures specified.

Where specific load test procedures, load factors and acceptance criteria are included in the applicable referenced standards, such test procedures, load factors and acceptance criteria shall apply. In the absence of specific test procedures, load factors or acceptance criteria, the corresponding provisions in Section 1709.3 shall apply.

1709.3 Load test procedures not specified.

Where load test procedures are not specified in the applicable referenced standards, the load-bearing and deformation capacity of structural components and assemblies shall be determined on the basis of a test procedure developed by a registered design professional that simulates applicable loading and deformation conditions. The test shall be as specified in Section 1709.3.1. Load tests shall simulate the applicable loading conditions specified in Chapter 16.

1709.3.1 Test procedure.

The test assembly shall be subjected to an increasing superimposed load equal to not less than two times the superimposed design load. The test load shall be left in place for a period of 24 hours. The tested assembly shall be considered to have successfully met the test requirements if the assembly recovers not less than 75 percent of the maximum deflection within 24 hours after the removal of the test load. The test assembly shall then be reloaded and subjected to an increasing superimposed load until either structural failure occurs or the superimposed load is equal to two and one-half times the load at which the deflection limitations specified in Section 1709.3.2 were reached, or the load is equal to two and one-half times the superimposed design load. In the case of structural components and assemblies for which deflection limitations are not specified in Section 1709.3.2, the test specimen shall be subjected to an increasing superimposed load until structural failure occurs or the load is equal to two and one-half times the desired superimposed design load. The allowable superimposed design load shall be taken as the lesser of:

1.	The load at the deflection limitation given in Section 1709.3.2.

2.	The failure load divided by 2.5.

3.	The maximum load applied divided by 2.5.

1709.3.2 Deflection.

The deflection of structural members under the design load shall not exceed the limitations in Section 1604.3. The HVHZ shall comply with Section 1616.3.1.

1709.4 Wall and partition assemblies.

Load-bearing wall and partition assemblies shall sustain the test load both with and without window framing. The test load shall include all design load components. Wall and partition assemblies shall be tested both with and without door and window framing.

1709.5 Exterior window and door assemblies.

The design pressure rating of exterior windows and doors in buildings shall be determined in accordance with Section 1709.5.1 or 1709.5.2. For the purposes of this section, the required design pressure shall be determined using the allowable stress design load combinations of Section 1605.1.

Exception: Custom doors. Custom (one-of-a-kind) exterior door assemblies shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory or be designed and engineered in accordance with accepted engineering practices by a Florida registered design professional. Signed and sealed copies of the rational analysis and calculations shall be provided to the building official upon permit application.

1709.5.1 Exterior windows and doors.

Exterior windows and sliding doors shall be tested and labeled as conforming to AAMA/WDMA/CSA101/I.S.2/A440 or TAS 202 (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202 and ASTM E1300 or Section 2404). Exterior side-hinged doors shall be tested and labeled as conforming to AAMA/WDMA/CSA101/I.S.2/A440 or comply with Section 1709.5.2. Products tested and labeled as conforming to AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 or TAS 202 shall not be subject to the requirements of Sections 2403.2 and 2403.3. Exterior windows and doors shall be labeled with a permanent label, marking, or etching providing traceability to the manufacturer and product. The following shall also be required either on a permanent label or on a temporary supplemental label applied by the manufacturer: information identifying the manufacturer, the product model/series number, positive and negative design pressure rating, product maximum size tested, impact-resistant rating if applicable, Florida product approval number or Miami-Dade product approval number, applicable test standard(s), and approved product certification agency, testing laboratory, evaluation entity or Miami-Dade product approval.

The labels are limited to one design pressure rating per referenced standard. The temporary supplemental label shall remain on the window or door until final approval by the building official.

Exceptions:

1.	Door assemblies installed in nonhabitable areas where the door assembly and area are designed to accept water infiltration need not be tested for water infiltration.

2.	Door assemblies installed where the overhang (OH) ratio is equal to or more than 1 need not be tested for water infiltration. The overhang ratio shall be calculated by the following equation:

OH ratio = OH Length/OH Height

where:

OH length = The horizontal measure of how far an overhang over a door projects out from door surface.

OH height = The vertical measure of the distance from the door sill to the bottom of the overhang over a door.

3.	Structural wind load design pressures for window and door assemblies other than the size tested in accordance with Section 1709.5.1 shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested assembly provided such different pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis such as AAMA 2502 or WDMA I.S.11. All components of the alternate size assembly shall be the same as the tested or labeled assembly; however, lineal components shall be permitted to vary in length compared to the tested or labeled assembly.

i.	Operable windows and doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

1.	For windows and doors (other than sliding or bi-fold), the frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

2.	For sliding or bi-fold doors, the panel area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the panel area of the tested approved unit.

3.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

4.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the proportional deflection and fiber stress of the intermediate members of the approved unit.

5.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the concentrated load at the juncture of the intermediate members and the frame of the approved unit.

6.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

7.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested in accordance with TAS 201 and TAS 203 or ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 where applicable.

ii.	Nonoperable windows and doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

1.	The frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

2.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

3.	The maximum uniform load distribution (ULD) of any side shall be equal to the uniform load carried by the side divided by the length of the side.

4.	The ULD of any member shall not exceed the ULD of the corresponding member of the tested approved unit.

5.	The ULD of each member shall be calculated in accordance with standard engineering analysis.

6.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

7.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested in accordance with TAS 201 and TAS 203 or ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 where applicable.

4.	Pass-through windows for serving from a single-family kitchen, where protected by a roof overhang of 5 feet (1.5 m) or more shall be exempted from the requirements of the water infiltration test.

1709.5.2 Exterior windows and door assemblies not provided for in Section 1709.5.1.

Exterior window and door assemblies shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E330 or TAS 202 (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202). Exterior window and door assemblies containing glass shall comply with Section 2403. The design pressure for testing shall be calculated in accordance with Chapter 16. Each assembly shall be tested for 10 seconds at a load equal to 1.5 times the design pressure.

Exceptions:

1.	Door assemblies installed in nonhabitable areas where the door assembly and area are designed to accept water infiltration need not be tested for water infiltration.

2.	Door assemblies installed where the overhang (OH) ratio is equal to or more than 1 need not be tested for water infiltration. The overhang ratio shall be calculated by the following equation:

OH ratio = OH Length/OH Height

where:

OH Length = The horizontal measure of how far an overhang over a door projects out from the door’s surface.

OH Height = The vertical measure of the distance from the door’s sill to the bottom of the overhang over a door.

3.	For window and door assemblies tested in accordance with this section, structural wind load design pressures for window and door assemblies other than the size tested in accordance with this section shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested assembly provided such different pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis. All components of the alternate size assembly shall be the same as the tested assembly except for length. Where engineering analysis is used, the glass shall comply with Section 2403.

1709.5.2.1 Sectional garage doors and rolling doors.

Sectional garage doors and rolling doors shall be tested for determination of structural performance under uniform static air pressure difference in accordance with ANSI/DASMA 108, ASTM E330 Procedure A, or TAS 202. For sectional garage doors and rolling doors tested in accordance with ASTM E330, acceptance criteria shall be in accordance with ANSI/DASMA 108. (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202.) Design pressures shall be determined from Table 1609.7(1) or ASCE 7. The design pressures, as determined from ASCE 7, are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6.

1709.5.2.1.1 Garage door labeling.

Garage doors shall be labeled with a permanent label provided by the garage door manufacturer. The label shall identify the garage door manufacturer, the garage door model/series number, the positive and negative design pressure rating, indicate impact rated if applicable, the installation instruction drawing reference number, the Florida product approval or MiamiDade product approval number if applicable, and the applicable test standards. The required garage door components for an approved garage door assembly may be indicated using a checklist form on the label. If a checklist format is used on the label, the door installer or the garage door manufacturer shall mark the selected components on the checklist that are required to assemble an approved garage door system. The installation instructions shall be provided and available on the job site.

1709.5.3

Door components evaluated by an approved product evaluation entity, certification agency, testing laboratory or engineer may be interchangeable in exterior door assemblies provided that the door components provide equal or greater structural performance as demonstrated by accepted engineering practices.

1709.6 Skylights and sloped glazing.

Skylights and sloped glazing shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 24.

1709.7 Test specimens.

Test specimens and construction shall be representative of the materials, workmanship and details normally used in practice. The properties of the materials used to construct the test assembly shall be determined on the basis of tests on samples taken from the load assembly or on representative samples of the materials used to construct the load test assembly. Required tests shall be conducted or witnessed by an approved agency.

1709.8 Mullions.

Mullions or mulled fenestration assemblies shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory in accordance with either ASTM E330, or TAS 202 (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202), or shall be engineered using accepted engineering practice such as AAMA 450. Mullions tested as stand-alone units or qualified by engineering shall use performance criteria cited in Sections 1709.8.1, 1709.8.2 and 1709.8.3.

1709.8.1 Load transfer.

Mullions shall be designed to transfer the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to the rough opening substrate.

1709.8.2 Deflection.

Mullions shall be capable of resisting the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to be supported without deflecting more than L/175, for spans up to and including 13 feet 6 inches, and L/240 + 1/4 inch for spans over 13 feet 6 inches, where L is the span of the mullion in inches.

1709.8.3 Structural safety factor.

Mullions that are tested by an approved testing laboratory shall be capable of resisting a load of 1.5 times the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to be supported. The design pressures, as determined from ASCE 7, are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6. Mullions that are qualified by engineering shall be capable of resisting the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to be supported without exceeding the allowable stress of the mullion elements.

1709.8.4

Glazed curtain wall, window wall and storefront systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of this section and the laboratory test requirements of the American Architectural Manufacturers Association (AAMA) Standard 501, HVHZ shall comply with Section 2411.3.2.1.1.

1709.9 Impact-resistant coverings.
1709.9.1 Labels.

A permanent label shall be provided by the product approval holder on all impact-resistant coverings.

1709.9.2

The following information shall be included on the labels on impact-resistant coverings:

1.	Product approval holder name and address.

2.	All applicable methods of approval. Methods of approval include, but are not limited to Miami-Dade NOA; Florida Building Commission, TDI Product Evaluation; ICC-ES.

3.	The test standard or standards specified in Section 1609.1.2, including standards referenced within the test standards specified in Section 1609.1.2 used to demonstrate code compliance.

4.	For products with a Florida product approval number or a Miami-Dade County Building and Neighborhood Compliance Department Notice of Acceptance Number (NOA), such numbers shall be included on the label.

1709.9.3 Location of label.

The location of the label on the impact-resistant covering shall be as follows:

1.	Accordions: Bottom of the locking bar or center mate facing the exterior or outside.

2.	Rollup: On the bottom of the hood facing the exterior or outside or on the bottom slat facing the exterior or outside.

3.	Bahama Awning or Colonial Hinged: On the bottom, placed on the back of the shutter.

4.	Panels: For metal and plastic panels, the label may be embossed or printed spaced not more than every 3 lineal feet on each panel. The label shall be applied by the holder of the product approval and shall face the exterior or outside.

5.	Framed products: The label shall be on the side or bottom facing the exterior or outside.

6.	Labels on all other products shall face the exterior or outside.

1709.9.4 Installation.

All impact-resistant coverings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and in accordance with the product approval. Installation instructions shall be provided and shall be available to inspection personnel on the job site. Opening protection components, fasteners, and other parts evaluated by an approved product evaluation entity, certification agency, testing laboratory, architect, or engineer and approved by the holder of the product approval may be interchangeable in opening protection assemblies provided that the opening protection component(s) provide equal or greater structural performance and durability as demonstrated by testing in accordance with approved test standards.

1709.10 Soffit.
1709.10.1 Product approval.

Manufactured soffit materials and systems shall be subject to statewide or local product approval as specified in Florida Administrative Code Rule 61G-20. The net free area of the manufactured soffit material or system shall be included in the product approval submittal documents.

1709.10.2 Labels.

Individual manufactured soffit pieces shall be marked at not more than 4 feet (1.2 m) on center with a number or marking that ties the product back to the manufacturer.

1709.10.3

The following information shall be included on the manufactured soffit material packaging or on the individual manufactured soffit material or system pieces:

1.	Product approval holder and/or manufacturer name and city and state of manufacturing plant.

2.	Product model number or name.

3.	Method of approval and approval numbers as applicable. Methods of approval include, but are not limited to: Florida Building Commission FL #; MiamiDade NOA; TDI Product Evaluation; and ICC-ES.

4.	The test standard or standards specified in Chapter 14 used to demonstrate code compliance.

5.	The net free area shall be included on the packaging or label.

SECTION 1710
ANCHORAGE
1710.1 Anchorage methods.

The methods cited in this section apply only to anchorage of window and door assemblies to the main windforce-resisting system.

1710.2 Anchoring requirements.

Window and door assemblies shall be anchored in accordance with the published manufacturer’s recommendations to achieve the design pressure specified. Substitute anchoring systems used for substrates not specified by the fenestration manufacturer shall provide equal or greater anchoring performance as demonstrated by accepted engineering practice.

1710.3 Masonry, concrete or other structural substrate.

Where the wood shim or buck thickness is less than 11/2 inches (38 mm), window and door assemblies shall be anchored through the main frame or by jamb clip or subframe system, in accordance with the manufacturer’s published installation instructions. Anchors shall be securely fastened directly into the masonry, concrete or other structural substrate material. Unless otherwise tested, bucks shall fully support the window or door frame. Shims shall be made from materials capable of sustaining applicable loads, located and applied in a thickness capable of sustaining applicable loads. Anchors shall be provided to transfer load from the window or door frame to the rough opening substrate.

Where the wood buck thickness is 11/2 inches (38 mm) or greater, the buck shall be securely fastened to transfer load to the masonry, concrete or other structural substrate and the buck shall fully support the window or door frame. Window and door assemblies shall be anchored through the main frame or by jamb clip or subframe system or through the flange to the secured wood buck in accordance with the manufacturer’s published installation instructions. Unless otherwise tested, bucks shall fully support the window or door. Shims shall be made from materials capable of sustaining applicable loads, located and applied in a thickness capable of sustaining applicable loads. Anchors shall be provided to transfer load from the window or door frame assembly to the secured wood buck.

1710.4 Wood or other approved framing materials.

Where the framing material is wood or other approved framing material, window and door assemblies shall be anchored through the main frame or by jamb clip or subframe system or through the flange in accordance with the manufacturer’s published installation instructions. Shims shall be made from materials capable of sustaining applicable loads, located and applied in a thickness capable of sustaining applicable loads. Anchors shall be provided to transfer load from the window or door frame to the rough opening substrate.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-18]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 18
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
SECTION 1801
GENERAL
1801.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to building and foundation systems.

1801.2 Design basis.

Allowable bearing pressures, allowable stresses and design formulas provided in this chapter shall be used with the allowable stress design load combinations specified in Section 1605.1. The quality and design of materials used structurally in excavations and foundations shall comply with the requirements specified in Chapters 16, 19, 21, 22 and 23 of this code. Excavations and fills shall also comply with Chapter 33.

SECTION 1802
DEFINITIONS
1802.1 Definitions.

The following words and terms are defined in Chapter 2:

COMBINED PILE RAFT.

DEEP FOUNDATION.

DRILLED SHAFT.

Socketed drilled shaft.

HELICAL PILE.

MICROPILE.

SHALLOW FOUNDATION.

SECTION 1803
GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
1803.1 General.

Geotechnical investigations shall be conducted in accordance with Section 1803.2 and reported in accordance with Section 1803.6. Where required by the building official or where geotechnical investigations involve in-situ testing, laboratory testing or engineering calculations, such investigations shall be conducted by a registered design professional.

1803.2 Investigations required.

Geotechnical investigations shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 1803.3 through 1803.5.

Exception: The building official shall be permitted to waive the requirement for a geotechnical investigation where satisfactory data from adjacent areas is available that demonstrates an investigation is not necessary for any of the conditions in Sections 1803.5.1 through 1803.5.6 and Section 1803.5.10.

1803.3 Basis of investigation.

Soil classification shall be based on observation and any necessary tests of the materials disclosed by borings, test pits or other subsurface exploration made in appropriate locations. Additional studies shall be made as necessary to evaluate slope stability, soil strength, position and adequacy of load-bearing soils, the effect of moisture variation on soil-bearing capacity, compressibility, liquefaction and expansiveness.

1803.3.1 Scope of investigation.

The scope of the geotechnical investigation including the number and types of borings or soundings, the equipment used to drill or sample, the in-situ testing equipment and the laboratory testing program shall be determined by a registered design professional.

1803.4 Qualified representative.

The investigation procedure and apparatus shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering practice. The registered design professional shall have a fully qualified representative on site during all boring or sampling operations.

1803.5 Investigated conditions.

Geotechnical investigations shall be conducted as indicated in Sections 1803.5.1 through 1803.5.10.

1803.5.1 Classification.

Soil materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM D2487.

1803.5.2 Questionable soil.

Where the classification, strength or compressibility of the soil is in doubt or where a load-bearing value superior to that specified in this code is claimed, the building official shall be permitted to require that a geotechnical investigation be conducted.

1803.5.3 Expansive soil.

In areas likely to have expansive soil, the building official shall require soil tests to determine where such soils do exist.

Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be considered expansive, except that tests to show compliance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the test prescribed in Item 4 is conducted:

1.	Plasticity index (PI) of 15 or greater, determined in accordance with ASTM D4318.

2.	More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No. 200 sieve (75 µm), determined in accordance with ASTM D422.

3.	More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less than 5 micrometers in size, determined in accordance with ASTM D422.

4.	Expansion index greater than 20, determined in accordance with ASTM D4829.

1803.5.4 Ground-water table.

A subsurface soil investigation shall be performed to determine whether the existing ground-water table is above or within 5 feet (1524 mm) below the elevation of the lowest floor level where such floor is located below the finished ground level adjacent to the foundation.

Exception: A subsurface soil investigation to determine the location of the ground-water table shall not be required where waterproofing is provided in accordance with Section 1805.

1803.5.5 Deep foundations.

Where deep foundations will be used, a geotechnical investigation shall be conducted and shall include all of the following, unless sufficient data upon which to base the design and installation is otherwise available:

1.	Recommended deep foundation types and installed capacities.

2.	Recommended center-to-center spacing of deep foundation elements.

3.	Driving criteria.

4.	Installation procedures.

5.	Field inspection and reporting procedures (to include procedures for verification of the installed bearing capacity where required).

6.	Load test requirements.

7.	Suitability of deep foundation materials for the intended environment.

8.	Designation of bearing stratum or strata.

9.	Reductions for group action, where necessary.

1803.5.6 Rock strata.

Where subsurface explorations at the project site indicate variations in the structure of rock upon which foundations are to be constructed, a sufficient number of borings shall be drilled to sufficient depths to assess the competency of the rock and its load-bearing capacity.

1803.5.7 Excavation near foundations.

Where excavation will reduce support from any foundation, a registered design professional shall prepare an assessment of the structure as determined from examination of the structure, available design documents, available subsurfacing data, and, if necessary, excavation of test pits. The registered design professional shall determine the requirements for support and protection of any existing foundation and prepare site-specific plans, details and sequence of work for submission. Such support shall be provided by underpinning, bracing, excavation retention systems, or by other means acceptable to the building official.

1803.5.8 Compacted fill material.

Where shallow foundations will bear on compacted fill material more than 12 inches (305 mm) in depth, a geotechnical investigation shall be conducted and shall include all of the following:

1.	Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to placement of compacted fill material.

2.	Specifications for material to be used as compacted fill.

3.	Test methods to be used to determine the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content of the material to be used as compacted fill.

4.	Maximum allowable thickness of each lift of compacted fill material.

5.	Field test method for determining the in-place dry density of the compacted fill.

6.	Minimum acceptable in-place dry density expressed as a percentage of the maximum dry density determined in accordance with Item 3.

7.	Number and frequency of field tests required to determine compliance with Item 6.

1803.5.9 Controlled low-strength material (CLSM).

Where shallow foundations will bear on controlled low-strength material (CLSM), a geotechnical investigation shall be conducted and shall include all of the following:

1.	Specifications for the preparation of the site prior to placement of the CLSM.

2.	Specifications for the CLSM.

3.	Laboratory or field test method(s) to be used to determine the compressive strength or bearing capacity of the CLSM.

4.	Test methods for determining the acceptance of the CLSM in the field.

5.	Number and frequency of field tests required to determine compliance with Item 4.

1803.5.10 Alternate setback and clearance.

Where setbacks or clearances other than those required in Section 1808.7 are desired, the building official shall be permitted to require a geotechnical investigation by a registered design professional to demonstrate that the intent of Section 1808.7 would be satisfied. Such an investigation shall include consideration of material, height of slope, slope gradient, load intensity and erosion characteristics of slope material.

1803.6 Reporting.

Where geotechnical investigations are required, a written report of the investigations shall be submitted to the building official by the permit applicant at the time of permit application. This geotechnical report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information:

1.	A plot showing the location of the soil investigations.

2.	A complete record of the soil boring and penetration test logs and soil samples.

3.	A record of the soil profile.

4.	Elevation of the water table, if encountered.

5.	Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria, including but not limited to: bearing capacity of natural or compacted soil; provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive soils; mitigation of the effects of liquefaction, differential settlement and varying soil strength; and the effects of adjacent loads.

6.	Expected total and differential settlement.

7.	Deep foundation information in accordance with Section 1803.5.5.

8.	Special design and construction provisions for foundations of structures founded on expansive soils, as necessary.

9.	Compacted fill material properties and testing in accordance with Section 1803.5.8.

10.	Controlled low-strength material properties and testing in accordance with Section 1803.5.9.

SECTION 1804
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL
1804.1 Excavation near foundations.

Excavation for any purpose shall not reduce vertical or lateral support for any foundation or adjacent foundation without first underpinning or protecting the foundation against detrimental lateral or vertical movement, or both, in accordance with Section 1803.5.7.

1804.2 Underpinning.

Where underpinning is chosen to provide the protection or support of adjacent structures, the underpinning system shall be designed and installed in accordance with provisions of this chapter and Chapter 33.

1804.2.1 Underpinning sequencing.

Underpinning shall be installed in a sequential manner that protects the neighboring structure and the working construction site. The sequence of installation shall be identified in the approved construction documents.

1804.3 Placement of backfill.

The excavation outside the foundation shall be backfilled with soil that is free of organic material, construction debris, cobbles and boulders or with a controlled low-strength material (CLSM). The backfill shall be placed in lifts and compacted in a manner that does not damage the foundation or the waterproofing or dampproofing material.

Exception: CLSM need not be compacted.

1804.4 Site grading.

The ground immediately adjacent to the foundation shall be sloped away from the building at a slope of not less than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) measured perpendicular to the face of the wall. If physical obstructions or lot lines prohibit 10 feet (3048 mm) of horizontal distance, a 5-percent slope shall be provided to an approved alternative method of diverting water away from the foundation. Swales used for this purpose shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent where located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building, except as otherwise permitted in Section 1010.1.4, 1012.3 or 1012.6.1.

Exception: Where climatic or soil conditions warrant, the slope of the ground away from the building foundation shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

The procedure used to establish the final ground level adjacent to the foundation shall account for additional settlement of the backfill.

1804.5 Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.

In flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, grading, fill, or both, shall not be approved:

1.	Unless such fill is placed, compacted and sloped to minimize shifting, slumping and erosion during the rise and fall of flood water and, as applicable, wave action.

2.	In floodways, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed by a registered design professional in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed grading or fill, or both, will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the design flood.

3.	In coastal high hazard areas, unless such fill is conducted and/or placed to avoid diversion of water and waves toward any building or structure.

4.	Where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed flood hazard area encroachment, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachment, will not increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point.

1804.6 Compacted fill material.

Where shallow foundations will bear on compacted fill material, the compacted fill shall comply with the provisions of an approved geotechnical report, as set forth in Section 1803.

Exception: Compacted fill material 12 inches (305 mm) in depth or less need not comply with an approved report, provided the in-place dry density is not less than 90 percent of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content determined in accordance with ASTM D1557.

1804.7 Controlled low-strength material (CLSM).

Where shallow foundations will bear on controlled low-strength material (CLSM), the CLSM shall comply with the provisions of an approved geotechnical report, as set forth in Section 1803.

SECTION 1805
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
1805.1 General.

Walls or portions thereof that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be waterproofed and dampproofed in accordance with this section, with the exception of those spaces containing groups other than residential and institutional where such omission is not detrimental to the building or occupancy.

Ventilation for crawl spaces shall comply with Section 1203.4.

1805.1.1 Story above grade plane.

Where a basement is considered a story above grade plane and the finished ground level adjacent to the basement wall is below the basement floor elevation for 25 percent or more of the perimeter, the floor and walls shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section 1805.2 and a foundation drain shall be installed in accordance with Section 1805.4.2. The foundation drain shall be installed around the portion of the perimeter where the basement floor is below ground level. The provisions of Sections 1803.5.4, 1805.3 and 1805.4.1 shall not apply in this case.

1805.1.2 Under-floor space.

The finished ground level of an under-floor space such as a crawl space shall not be located below the bottom of the footings. Where there is evidence that the ground-water table rises to within 6 inches (152 mm) of the ground level at the outside building perimeter, or that the surface water does not readily drain from the building site, the ground level of the under-floor space shall be as high as the outside finished ground level, unless an approved drainage system is provided. The provisions of Sections 1803.5.4, 1805.2, 1805.3 and 1805.4 shall not apply in this case.

1805.1.2.1 Flood hazard areas.

For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, the finished ground level of an under-floor space such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one side.

Exception: Under-floor spaces of Group R-3 buildings that meet the requirements of FEMA TB 11.

1805.1.3 Ground-water control.

Where the ground-water table is lowered and maintained at an elevation not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the bottom of the lowest floor, the floor and walls shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section 1805.2. The design of the system to lower the ground-water table shall be based on accepted principles of engineering that shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to, permeability of the soil, rate at which water enters the drainage system, rated capacity of pumps, head against which pumps are to operate and the rated capacity of the disposal area of the system.

1805.2 Dampproofing.

Where hydrostatic pressure will not occur as determined by Section 1803.5.4, floors and walls for other than wood foundation systems shall be dampproofed in accordance with this section. Wood foundation systems shall be constructed in accordance with AWC PWF.

1805.2.1 Floors.

Dampproofing materials for floors shall be installed between the floor and the base course required by Section 1805.4.1, except where a separate floor is provided above a concrete slab.

Where installed beneath the slab, dampproofing shall consist of not less than 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) polyethylene with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm), or other approved methods or materials. Where permitted to be installed on top of the slab, dampproofing shall consist of mopped-on bitumen, not less than 4-mil (0.004 inch; 0.102 mm) polyethylene, or other approved methods or materials. Joints in the membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1805.2.2 Walls.

Dampproofing materials for walls shall be installed on the exterior surface of the wall, and shall extend from the top of the footing to above ground level.

Dampproofing shall consist of a bituminous material, 3 pounds per square yard (16 N/m2) of acrylic modified cement, 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) coat of surface-bonding mortar complying with ASTM C887, any of the materials permitted for waterproofing by Section 1805.3.2 or other approved methods or materials.

1805.2.2.1 Surface preparation of walls.

Prior to application of dampproofing materials on concrete walls, holes and recesses resulting from the removal of form ties shall be sealed with a bituminous material or other approved methods or materials. Unit masonry walls shall be parged on the exterior surface below ground level with not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of Portland cement mortar. The parging shall be coved at the footing.

Exception: Parging of unit masonry walls is not required where a material is approved for direct application to the masonry.

1805.3 Waterproofing.

Where the ground-water investigation required by Section 1803.5.4 indicates that a hydrostatic pressure condition exists, and the design does not include a ground-water control system as described in Section 1805.1.3, walls and floors shall be waterproofed in accordance with this section.

1805.3.1 Floors.

Floors required to be waterproofed shall be of concrete and designed and constructed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures to which the floors will be subjected.

Waterproofing shall be accomplished by placing a membrane of rubberized asphalt, butyl rubber, fully adhered/fully bonded HDPE or polyolefin composite membrane or not less than 6-mil [0.006 inch (0.152 mm)] polyvinyl chloride with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) or other approved materials under the slab. Joints in the membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1805.3.2 Walls.

Walls required to be waterproofed shall be of concrete or masonry and shall be designed and constructed to withstand the hydrostatic pressures and other lateral loads to which the walls will be subjected.

Waterproofing shall be applied from the bottom of the wall to not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the maximum elevation of the ground-water table. The remainder of the wall shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section 1805.2.2. Waterproofing shall consist of two-ply hot-mopped felts, not less than 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) polyvinyl chloride, 40-mil (0.040 inch; 1.02 mm) polymer-modified asphalt, 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.152 mm) polyethylene or other approved methods or materials capable of bridging nonstructural cracks. Joints in the membrane shall be lapped and sealed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

1805.3.2.1 Surface preparation of walls.

Prior to the application of waterproofing materials on concrete or masonry walls, the walls shall be prepared in accordance with Section 1805.2.2.1.

1805.3.3 Joints and penetrations.

Joints in walls and floors, joints between the wall and floor and penetrations of the wall and floor shall be made water tight utilizing approved methods and materials.

1805.4 Subsoil drainage system.

Where a hydrostatic pressure condition does not exist, dampproofing shall be provided and a base shall be installed under the floor and a drain installed around the foundation perimeter. A subsoil drainage system designed and constructed in accordance with Section 1805.1.3 shall be deemed adequate for lowering the ground-water table.

1805.4.1 Floor base course.

Floors of basements, except as provided for in Section 1805.1.1, shall be placed over a floor base course not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness that consists of gravel or crushed stone containing not more than 10 percent of material that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve.

Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel or sand/gravel mixture soils, a floor base course is not required.

1805.4.2 Foundation drain.

A drain shall be placed around the perimeter of a foundation that consists of gravel or crushed stone containing not more than 10-percent material that passes through a No. 4 (4.75 mm) sieve. The drain shall extend a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing. The thickness shall be such that the bottom of the drain is not higher than the bottom of the base under the floor, and that the top of the drain is not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing. The top of the drain shall be covered with an approved filter membrane material. Where a drain tile or perforated pipe is used, the invert of the pipe or tile shall not be higher than the floor elevation. The top of joints or the top of perforations shall be protected with an approved filter membrane material. The pipe or tile shall be placed on not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of gravel or crushed stone complying with Section 1805.4.1, and shall be covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of the same material.

1805.4.3 Drainage discharge.

The floor base and foundation perimeter drain shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system that complies with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel or sand/gravel mixture soils, a dedicated drainage system is not required.

SECTION 1806
PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING
VALUES OF SOILS
1806.1 Load combinations.

The presumptive load-bearing values provided in Table 1806.2 shall be used with the allowable stress design load combinations specified in Section 1605.1. The values of vertical foundation pressure and lateral bearing pressure given in Table 1806.2 shall be permitted to be increased by one-third where used with the alternative basic load combinations of Section 1605.2 that include wind loads.

1806.2 Presumptive load-bearing values.

The load-bearing values used in design for supporting soils near the surface shall not exceed the values specified in Table 1806.2 unless data to substantiate the use of higher values are submitted and approved. Where the building official has reason to doubt the classification, strength or compressibility of the soil, the requirements of Section 1803.5.2 shall be satisfied.

Presumptive load-bearing values shall apply to materials with similar physical characteristics and dispositions. Mud, organic silt, organic clays, peat or unprepared fill shall not be assumed to have a presumptive load-bearing capacity unless data to substantiate the use of such a value are submitted.

Exception: A presumptive load-bearing capacity shall be permitted to be used where the building official deems the load-bearing capacity of mud, organic silt or unprepared fill is adequate for the support of lightweight or temporary structures.

TABLE 1806.2

PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES

CLASS OF MATERIALS	VERTICAL FOUNDATION
PRESSURE (psf)
	LATERAL BEARING
PRESSURE
(psf/ft below natural grade)	LATERAL SLIDING RESISTANCE
Coefficient of frictiona	Cohesion (psf)b
1. Crystalline bedrock	12,000	1,200	0.70	—
2. Sedimentary and foliated rock	4,000	400	0.35	—
3. Sandy gravel and/or gravel (GW and GP)	3,000	200	0.35	—
4. Sand, silty sand, clayey sand, silty gravel
and clayey gravel (SW, SP, SM, SC, GM
and GC)	2,000	150	0.25	—
5. Clay, sandy clay, silty clay, clayey silt, silt
and sandy silt (CL, ML, MH and CH)
	1,500	100	—	130

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.

a.	Coefficient to be multiplied by the dead load.

b.	Cohesion value to be multiplied by the contact area, as limited by Section 1806.3.2.

1806.3 Lateral load resistance.

Where the presumptive values of Table 1806.2 are used to determine resistance to lateral loads, the calculations shall be in accordance with Sections 1806.3.1 through 1806.3.4.

1806.3.1 Combined resistance.

The total resistance to lateral loads shall be permitted to be determined by combining the values derived from the lateral bearing pressure and the lateral sliding resistance specified in Table 1806.2.

1806.3.2 Lateral sliding resistance limit.

For clay, sandy clay, silty clay, clayey silt, silt and sandy silt, in no case shall the lateral sliding resistance exceed one-half the dead load.

1806.3.3 Increase for depth.

The lateral bearing pressures specified in Table 1806.2 shall be permitted to be increased by the tabular value for each additional foot (305 mm) of depth to a maximum of 15 times the tabular value.

1806.3.4 Increase for poles.

Isolated poles for uses such as flagpoles or signs and poles used to support buildings that are not adversely affected by a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) motion at the ground surface due to short-term lateral loads shall be permitted to be designed using lateral bearing pressures equal to two times the tabular values.

SECTION 1807
FOUNDATION WALLS, RETAINING
WALLS AND EMBEDDED POSTS AND POLES
1807.1 Foundation walls.

Foundation walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1807.1.1 through 1807.1.6. Foundation walls shall be supported by foundations designed in accordance with Section 1808.

1807.1.1 Design lateral soil loads.

Foundation walls shall be designed for the lateral soil loads set forth in Section 1610.

1807.1.2 Unbalanced backfill height.

Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab on grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, the unbalanced backfill height shall be permitted to be measured from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab.

1807.1.3 Rubble stone foundation walls.

Foundation walls of rough or random rubble stone shall not be less than 16 inches (406 mm) thick.

1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems.

Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Special Requirement 4.2) and shall be identified in accordance with Section 2303.1.9.1.

1807.1.5 Concrete and masonry foundation walls.

Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 19 or 21, as applicable.

Exception: Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 1807.1.6.

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls.

Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section.

1807.1.6.1 Foundation wall thickness.

The thickness of prescriptively designed foundation walls shall not be less than the thickness of the wall supported, except that foundation walls of at least 8-inch (203 mm) nominal width shall be permitted to support brick-veneered frame walls and 10-inch-wide (254 mm) cavity walls provided the requirements of Section 1807.1.6.2 or 1807.1.6.3 are met.

1807.1.6.2 Concrete foundation walls.

Concrete foundation walls shall comply with the following:

1.	The thickness shall comply with the requirements of Table 1807.1.6.2.

2.	The size and spacing of vertical reinforcement shown in Table 1807.1.6.2 are based on the use of reinforcement with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 pounds per square inch (psi) (414 MPa).Vertical reinforcement with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi (276 MPa) or 50,000 psi (345 MPa) shall be permitted, provided the same size bar is used and the spacing shown in the table is reduced by multiplying the spacing by 0.67 or 0.83, respectively.

3.	Vertical reinforcement, when required, shall be placed nearest the inside face of the wall a distance, d, from the outside face (soil face) of the wall. The distance, d, is equal to the wall thickness, t, minus 1.25 inches (32 mm) plus one-half the bar diameter, db, [ d = t - (1.25 + db / 2) ]. The reinforcement shall be placed within a tolerance of ± 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) where d is less than or equal to 8 inches (203 mm) or ± 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) where d is greater than 8 inches (203 mm).

4.	In lieu of the reinforcement shown in Table 1807.1.6.2, smaller reinforcing bar sizes with closer spacings that provide an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per unit length shall be permitted.

5.	Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the inside face of the wall shall not be less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the outside face of the wall shall not be less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars and smaller, and not less than 2 inches (51 mm) for larger bars.

6.	Concrete shall have a specified compressive strength, f′c, of not less than 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa).

7.	The unfactored axial load per linear foot of wall shall not exceed 1.2 t f′c, where t is the specified wall thickness in inches.

TABLE 1807.1.6.2

CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALLSb, c

MAXIMUM
WALL
HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM
UNBALANCED
BACKFILL
HEIGHTe (feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)
30d	45d	60
Minimum wall thickness (inches)
7.5	9.5	11.5	7.5	9.5	11.5	7.5	9.5	11.5
5	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
7	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 48	PC	PC
7	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 46	PC	PC	#6 at 48	PC	PC
8	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 43	PC	PC
7	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 41	PC	PC	#6 at 43	PC	PC
8	#5 at 47	PC	PC	#6 at 43	PC	PC	#6 at 32	#6 at 44	PC
9	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 39	PC	PC
7	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 37	PC	PC	#6 at 38	#5 at 37	PC
8	#5 at 41	PC	PC	#6 at 38	#5 at 37	PC	#7 at 39	#6 at 39	#4 at 48
9d	#6 at 46	PC	PC	#7 at 41	#6 at 41	PC	#7 at 31	#7 at 41	#6 at 39
10	4	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
5	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC
6	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	PC	#5 at 37	PC	PC
7	PC	PC	PC	#6 at 48	PC	PC	#6 at 35	#6 at 48	PC
8	#5 at 38	PC	PC	#7 at 47	#6 at 47	PC	#7 at 35	#7 at 47	#6 at 45
9d	#6 at 41	#4 at 48	PC	#7 at 37	#7 at 48	#4 at 48	#6 at 22	#7 at 37	#7 at 47
10d	#7 at 45	#6 at 45	PC	#7 at 31	#7 at 40	#6 at 38	#6 at 22	#7 at 30	#7 at 38

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.

a.	For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.

b.	Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.2.

c.	“PC” means plain concrete.

d.	Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are not applicable (see Section 1610).

e.	For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

1807.1.6.2.1 Minimum requirements.

Concrete foundation walls designed using Table 1807.1.6.2 shall have not less than one No. 5 bar provided around window, door and similar sized openings. The bar shall be anchored to develop fy in tension at the corners of openings.

1807.1.6.3 Masonry foundation walls.

Masonry foundation walls shall comply with the following:

1.	The thickness shall comply with the requirements of Table 1807.1.6.3(1) for plain masonry walls or Table 1807.1.6.3(2), 1807.1.6.3(3) or 1807.1.6.3(4) for masonry walls with reinforcement.

2.	Vertical reinforcement shall have a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi (414 MPa).

3.	The specified location of the reinforcement shall equal or exceed the effective depth distance, d, noted in Tables 1807.1.6.3(2), 1807.1.6.3(3) and 1807.1.6.3(4) and shall be measured from the face of the exterior (soil) side of the wall to the center of the vertical reinforcement. The reinforcement shall be placed within the tolerances specified in TMS 602, Article 3.4.B.11, of the specified location.

4.	Grout shall comply with Section 2103.3.

5.	Concrete masonry units shall comply with ASTM C90.

6.	Clay masonry units shall comply with ASTM C652 for hollow brick, except compliance with ASTM C62 or ASTM C216 shall be permitted where solid masonry units are installed in accordance with Table 1807.1.6.3(1) for plain masonry.

7.	Masonry units shall be laid in running bond and installed with Type M or S mortar in accordance with Section 2103.2.1.

8.	The unfactored axial load per linear foot of wall shall not exceed 1.2 t f′m where t is the specified wall thickness in inches and f′m is the specified compressive strength of masonry in pounds per square inch.

9.	At least 4 inches (102 mm) of solid masonry shall be provided at girder supports at the top of hollow masonry unit foundation walls.

10.	Corbeling of masonry shall be in accordance with Section 2104.1. Where an 8-inch (203 mm) wall is corbeled, the top corbel shall not extend higher than the bottom of the floor framing and shall be a full course of headers at least 6 inches (152 mm) in length or the top course bed joint shall be tied to the vertical wall projection. The tie shall be W2.8 (4.8 mm) and spaced at a maximum horizontal distance of 36 inches (914 mm). The hollow space behind the corbelled masonry shall be filled with mortar or grout.

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(1)

PLAIN MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLSa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet)
	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTe (feet)
	MINIMUM NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (inches)
Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)
30f	45f	60
7	4 (or less)	8	8	8
5	8	10	10
6	10	12	10 (solidc)
7	12	10 (solidc)	10 (solidc)
8	4 (or less)	8	8	8
5	8	10	12
6	10	12	12 (solidc)
7	12	12 (solidc)	Note d
8	10 (solidc)	12 (solidc)	Note d
9	4 (or less)	8	8	8
5	8	10	12
6	12	12	12 (solidc)
7	12 (solidc)	12 (solidc)	Note d
8	12 (solidc)	Note d	Note d
9f	Note d	Note d	Note d

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.

a.	For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.

b.	Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.

c.	Solid grouted hollow units or solid masonry units.

d.	A design in compliance with Chapter 21 or reinforcement in accordance with Table 1807.1.6.3(2) is required.

e.	For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

f.	Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are not applicable (see Section 1610).

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(2)

8-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ≥ 5 INCHESa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)
	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Design lateral soil loada
(psf per foot of depth)

30e	45e	60
7-4	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5-0	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
6-0	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#5 at 48
7-4	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-0	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5-0	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
6-0	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#5 at 48
7-0	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-0	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-8	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5-0	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6-0	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7-0	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-8e	#6 at 48	#7 at 48	#8 at 48
9-4	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5-0	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6-0	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7-0	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-0	#6 at 48	#7 at 48	#8 at 48
9-4e	#7 at 48	#8 at 48	#9 at 48
10-0	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5-0	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6-0	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7-0	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#7 at 48
8-0	#6 at 48	#7 at 48	#8 at 48
9-0e	#7 at 48	#8 at 48	#9 at 48
10-0e	#7 at 48	#9 at 48	#9 at 48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.

a.	For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.

b.	Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.

c.	For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.

d.	For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

e.	Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are not applicable. See Section 1610.

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(3)

10-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ≥ 6.75 INCHESa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)
	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)
30e	45e	60
	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	5-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
7-4	6-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
	7-4	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	5-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
8-0	6-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
	7-0	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
	8-0	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#7 at 56
	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	5-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
8-8	6-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
	7-0	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
	8-8e	#5 at 56	#7 at 56	#8 at 56
	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	5-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
9-4	6-0	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#5 at 56
	7-0	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
	8-0	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#7 at 56
	9-4e	#6 at 56	#7 at 56	#7 at 56
	4-0 (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	5-0	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
	6-0	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#5 at 56
10-0	7-0	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#7 at 56
	8-0	#5 at 56	#7 at 56	#8 at 56
	9-0e	#6 at 56	#7 at 56	#9 at 56
	10-0e	#7 at 56	#8 at 56	#9 at 56

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 1.157 kPa/m.

a.	For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.

b.	Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.

c.	For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.

d.	For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

e.	Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are not applicable. See Section 1610.

TABLE 1807.1.6.3(4)

12-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCEMENT WHERE d ≥ 8.75 INCHESa, b, c

MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
(feet-inches)
	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTd
(feet-inches)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Design lateral soil loada (psf per foot of depth)
30e	45e	60
7-4	4 (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7-4	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8-0	4 (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7-0	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8-0	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#8 at 72
8-8	4 (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7-0	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8-8e	#5 at 72	#7 at 72	#8 at 72
9-4	4 (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6-0	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#5 at 72
7-0	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8-0	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#7 at 72
9-4e	#6 at 72	#7 at 72	#8 at 72
10-0	4 (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5-0	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6-0	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#5 at 72
7-0	#4 at 72	#6 at 72	#6 at 72
8-0	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#7 at 72
9-0e	#6 at 72	#7 at 72	#8 at 72
10-0e	#7 at 72	#8 at 72	#9 at 72

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/m.

a.	For design lateral soil loads, see Section 1610.

b.	Provisions for this table are based on design and construction requirements specified in Section 1807.1.6.3.

c.	For alternative reinforcement, see Section 1807.1.6.3.1.

d.	For height of unbalanced backfill, see Section 1807.1.2.

e	Where unbalanced backfill height exceeds 8 feet and design lateral soil loads from Table 1610.1 are used, the requirements for 30 and 45 psf per foot of depth are not applicable. See Section 1610.

1807.1.6.3.1 Alternative foundation wall reinforcement.

In lieu of the reinforcement provisions for masonry foundation walls in Table 1807.1.6.3(2), 1807.1.6.3(3) or 1807.1.6.3(4), alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per linear foot (mm) of wall shall be permitted to be used, provided the spacing of reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches (1829 mm) and reinforcing bar sizes do not exceed No. 11.

1807.2 Retaining walls.

Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1807.2.1 through 1807.2.3.

1807.2.1 General.

Retaining walls shall be designed to ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure and water uplift. Where a keyway is extended below the wall base with the intent to engage passive pressure and enhance sliding stability, lateral soil pressures on both sides of the keyway shall be considered in the sliding analysis.

1807.2.2 Design lateral soil loads.

Retaining walls shall be designed for the lateral soil loads set forth in Section 1610.

1807.2.3 Safety factor.

Retaining walls shall be designed to resist the lateral action of soil to produce sliding and overturning with a minimum safety factor of 1.5 in each case. The load combinations of Section 1605 shall not apply to this requirement. Instead, design shall be based on 1.0 times all applicable nominal loads, and investigation with one or more of the variable loads set to zero. The safety factor against lateral sliding shall be taken as the available soil resistance at the base of the retaining wall foundation divided by the net lateral force applied to the retaining wall.

1807.2.4 Segmental retaining walls.

Dry-cast concrete units used in the construction of segmental retaining walls shall comply with ASTM C1372.

1807.3 Embedded posts and poles.

Designs to resist both axial and lateral loads employing posts or poles as columns embedded in earth or in concrete footings in earth shall be in accordance with Sections 1807.3.1 through 1807.3.3.

1807.3.1 Limitations.

The design procedures outlined in this section are subject to the following limitations:

1.	The frictional resistance for structural walls and slabs on silts and clays shall be limited to one-half of the normal force imposed on the soil by the weight of the footing or slab.

2.	Posts embedded in earth shall not be used to provide lateral support for structural or nonstructural materials such as plaster, masonry or concrete unless bracing is provided that develops the limited deflection required.

Wood poles shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for sawn timber posts (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B) and for round timber posts (Commodity Specification B, Use Category 4B).

1807.3.2 Design criteria.

The depth to resist lateral loads shall be determined using the design criteria established in Sections 1807.3.2.1 through 1807.3.2.3, or by other methods approved by the building official.

1807.3.2.1 Nonconstrained.

The following formula shall be used in determining the depth of embedment required to resist lateral loads where no lateral constraint is provided at the ground surface, such as by a rigid floor or rigid ground surface pavement, and where no lateral constraint is provided above the ground surface, such as by a structural diaphragm.

(Equation 18-1)

where:

A = 2.34P/(S1b).

b = Diameter of round post or footing or diagonal dimension of square post or footing, feet (m).

d = Depth of embedment in earth in feet (m) but not over 12 feet (3658 mm) for purpose of computing lateral pressure.

h = Distance in feet (m) from ground surface to point of application of “P.”

P = Applied lateral force in pounds (kN).

S1 = Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set forth in Section 1806.2 based on a depth of onethird the depth of embedment in pounds per square foot (psf) (kPa).

1807.3.2.2 Constrained.

The following formula shall be used to determine the depth of embedment required to resist lateral loads where lateral constraint is provided at the ground surface, such as by a rigid floor or pavement.

(Equation 18-2)

or alternatively

(Equation 18-3)

where:

Mg = Moment in the post at grade, in foot-pounds (kN-m).

S3 = Allowable lateral soil-bearing pressure as set forth in Section 1806.2 based on a depth equal to the depth of embedment in pounds per square foot (kPa).

1807.3.2.3 Vertical load.

The resistance to vertical loads shall be determined using the vertical foundation pressure set forth in Table 1806.2.

1807.3.3 Backfill.

The backfill in the annular space around columns not embedded in poured footings shall be by one of the following methods:

1.	Backfill shall be of concrete with a specified compressive strength of not less than 2,000 psi (13.8 MPa). The hole shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) larger than the diameter of the column at its bottom or 4 inches (102 mm) larger than the diagonal dimension of a square or rectangular column.

2.	Backfill shall be of clean sand. The sand shall be thoroughly compacted by tamping in layers not more than 8 inches (203 mm) in depth.

3.	Backfill shall be of controlled low-strength material (CLSM).

SECTION 1808
FOUNDATIONS
1808.1 General.

Foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1808.2 through 1808.9. Shallow foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of Section 1809. Deep foundations shall also satisfy the requirements of Section 1810.

1808.2 Design for capacity and settlement.

Foundations shall be so designed that the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is not exceeded, and that differential settlement is minimized. Foundations in areas with expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 1808.6.

1808.3 Design loads.

Foundations shall be designed for the most unfavorable effects due to the combinations of loads specified in Section 1605.1 or 1605.2. The dead load is permitted to include the weight of foundations and overlying fill. Reduced live loads, as specified in Sections 1607.11 and 1607.13, shall be permitted to be used in the design of foundations.

1808.3.1 Seismic overturning.

Reserved.

1808.3.2 Surcharge.

No fill or other surcharge loads shall be placed adjacent to any building or structure unless such building or structure is capable of withstanding the additional loads caused by the fill or the surcharge. Existing footings or foundations that will be affected by any excavation shall be underpinned or otherwise protected against settlement and shall be protected against detrimental lateral or vertical movement or both.

Exception: Minor grading for landscaping purposes shall be permitted where done with walk-behind equipment, where the grade is not increased more than 1 foot (305 mm) from original design grade or where approved by the building official.

1808.4 Vibratory loads.

Where machinery operations or other vibrations are transmitted through the foundation, consideration shall be given in the foundation design to prevent detrimental disturbances of the soil.

1808.5 Shifting or moving soils.

Where it is known that the shallow subsoils are of a shifting or moving character, foundations shall be carried to a sufficient depth to ensure stability.

1808.6 Design for expansive soils.

Foundations for buildings and structures founded on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2.

Exception: Foundation design need not comply with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2 where one of the following conditions is satisfied:

1.	The soil is removed in accordance with Section 1808.6.3.

2.	The building official approves stabilization of the soil in accordance with Section 1808.6.4.

1808.6.1 Foundations.

Foundations placed on or within the active zone of expansive soils shall be designed to resist differential volume changes and to prevent structural damage to the supported structure. Deflection and racking of the supported structure shall be limited to that which will not interfere with the usability and serviceability of the structure.

Foundations placed below where volume change occurs or below expansive soil shall comply with the following provisions:

1.	Foundations extending into or penetrating expansive soils shall be designed to prevent uplift of the supported structure.

2.	Foundations penetrating expansive soils shall be designed to resist forces exerted on the foundation due to soil volume changes or shall be isolated from the expansive soil.

1808.6.2 Slab-on-ground foundations.

Moments, shears and deflections for use in designing slab-on-ground, mat or raft foundations on expansive soils shall be determined in accordance with WRI/CRSI Design of Slab-on-Ground Foundations or PTI DC 10.5. Using the moments, shears and deflections determined above, nonprestressed slabs-on-ground, mat or raft foundations on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with WRI/CRSI Design of Slab-on-Ground Foundations and post-tensioned slab-on-ground, mat or raft foundations on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with PTI DC 10.5. It shall be permitted to analyze and design such slabs by other methods that account for soil-structure interaction, the deformed shape of the soil support, the plate or stiffened plate action of the slab as well as both center lift and edge lift conditions. Such alternative methods shall be rational and the basis for all aspects and parameters of the method shall be available for peer review.

1808.6.3 Removal of expansive soil.

Where expansive soil is removed in lieu of designing foundations in accordance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2, the soil shall be removed to a depth sufficient to ensure a constant moisture content in the remaining soil. Fill material shall not contain expansive soils and shall comply with Section 1804.5 or 1804.6.

Exception: Expansive soil need not be removed to the depth of constant moisture, provided the confining pressure in the expansive soil created by the fill and supported structure exceeds the swell pressure.

1808.6.4 Stabilization.

Where the active zone of expansive soils is stabilized in lieu of designing foundations in accordance with Section 1808.6.1 or 1808.6.2, the soil shall be stabilized by chemical, dewatering, presaturation or equivalent techniques.

1808.7 Foundations on or adjacent to slopes.

The placement of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3-percent slope) shall comply with Sections 1808.7.1 through 1808.7.5.

1808.7.1 Building clearance from ascending slopes.

In general, buildings below slopes shall be set a sufficient distance from the slope to provide protection from slope drainage, erosion and shallow failures. Except as provided in Section 1808.7.5 and Figure 1808.7.1, the following criteria will be assumed to provide this protection. Where the existing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100-percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be assumed to be at the intersection of a horizontal plane drawn from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn tangent to the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal. Where a retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the slope, the height of the slope shall be measured from the top of the wall to the top of the slope.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 1808.7.1

FOUNDATION CLEARANCES FROM SLOPES

1808.7.2 Foundation setback from descending slope surface.

Foundations on or adjacent to slope surfaces shall be founded in firm material with an embedment and set back from the slope surface sufficient to provide vertical and lateral support for the foundation without detrimental settlement. Except as provided for in Section 1808.7.5 and Figure 1808.7.1, the following setback is deemed adequate to meet the criteria. Where the slope is steeper than 1 unit vertical in 1 unit horizontal (100-percent slope), the required setback shall be measured from an imaginary plane 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal, projected upward from the toe of the slope.

1808.7.3 Pools.

The setback between pools regulated by this code and slopes shall be equal to one-half the building footing setback distance required by this section. That portion of the pool wall within a horizontal distance of 7 feet (2134 mm) from the top of the slope shall be capable of supporting the water in the pool without soil support.

1808.7.4 Foundation elevation.

On graded sites, the top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 2 percent. Alternate elevations are permitted subject to the approval of the building official, provided it can be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on the site.

1808.7.5 Alternate setback and clearance.

Alternate setbacks and clearances are permitted, subject to the approval of the building official. The building official shall be permitted to require a geotechnical investigation as set forth in Section 1803.5.10.

1808.8 Concrete foundations.

The design, materials and construction of concrete foundations shall comply with Sections 1808.8.1 through 1808.8.5 and the provisions of Chapter 19.

Exception: Where concrete footings supporting walls of light-frame construction are designed in accordance with Table 1809.7, a specific design in accordance with Chapter 19 is not required.

1808.8.1 Concrete or grout strength and mix proportioning.

Concrete or grout in foundations shall have a specified compressive strength (f′c) not less than the largest applicable value indicated in Table 1808.8.1.

Where concrete or grout is to be pumped, the mix design including slump shall be adjusted to produce a pumpable mixture.

TABLE 1808.8.1

MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH f′ C OF CONCRETE OR GROUT

FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION	SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH, f′c
1. Foundations	2,500 psi
2. Precast nonprestressed driven piles	4,000 psi
3. Socketed drilled shafts	4,000 psi
4. Micropiles	4,000 psi
5. Precast prestressed driven piles	5,000 psi

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.

1808.8.2 Concrete cover.

The concrete cover provided for prestressed and nonprestressed reinforcement in foundations shall be no less than the largest applicable value specified in Table 1808.8.2. Longitudinal bars spaced less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) clear distance apart shall be considered bundled bars for which the concrete cover provided shall also be no less than that required by Section 20.5.1.3.5 of ACI 318. Concrete cover shall be measured from the concrete surface to the outermost surface of the steel to which the cover requirement applies. Where concrete is placed in a temporary or permanent casing or a mandrel, the inside face of the casing or mandrel shall be considered the concrete surface.

TABLE 1808.8.2

MINIMUM CONCRETE COVER

FOUNDATION ELEMENT OR CONDITION	MINIMUM COVER
1. Shallow foundations	In accordance with Section 20.5 of ACI 318
2. Precast nonprestressed deep foundation elements	
 Exposed to seawater	3 inches
 Not manufactured under plant conditions	2 inches
 Manufactured under plant control conditions	In accordance with Section 20.5.1.3.3 of ACI 318
3. Precast prestressed deep foundation elements	
 Exposed to seawater	2.5 inches
 Other	In accordance with Section 20.5.1.3.3 of ACI 318
4. Cast-in-place deep foundation elements not enclosed by a steel pipe, tube or permanent casing	2.5 inches
5. Cast-in-place deep foundation elements enclosed by a steel pipe, tube or permanent casing	1 inch
6. Structural steel core within a steel pipe, tube or permanent casing	2 inches
7. Cast-in-place drilled shafts enclosed by a stable rock socket	1.5 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1808.8.3 Placement of concrete.

Concrete shall be placed in such a manner as to ensure the exclusion of any foreign matter and to secure a full-size foundation. Concrete shall not be placed through water unless a tremie or other method approved by the building official is used. Where placed under or in the presence of water, the concrete shall be deposited by approved means to ensure minimum segregation of the mix and negligible turbulence of the water. Where depositing concrete from the top of a deep foundation element, the concrete shall be chuted directly into smooth-sided pipes or tubes or placed in a rapid and continuous operation through a funnel hopper centered at the top of the element.

1808.8.4 Protection of concrete.

Concrete foundations shall be protected from freezing during depositing and for a period of not less than five days thereafter. Water shall not be allowed to flow through the deposited concrete.

1808.8.5 Forming of concrete.

Concrete foundations are permitted to be cast against the earth where, in the opinion of the building official, soil conditions do not require formwork. Where formwork is required, it shall be in accordance with Section 26.11 of ACI 318.

1808.9 Vertical masonry foundation elements.

Vertical masonry foundation elements that are not foundation piers as defined in Section 202 shall be designed as piers, walls or columns, as applicable, in accordance with TMS 402.

SECTION 1809
SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS
1809.1 General.

Shallow foundations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1809.2 through 1809.12.

1809.2 Supporting soils.

Shallow foundations shall be built on undisturbed soil, compacted fill material or controlled low-strength material (CLSM). Compacted fill material shall be placed in accordance with Section 1804.5. CLSM shall be placed in accordance with Section 1804.6.

1809.3 Stepped footings.

The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).

1809.4 Depth and width of footings.

The minimum depth of footings below the undisturbed ground surface shall be 12 inches (305 mm). Where applicable, the requirements of Section 1809.5 shall also be satisfied. The minimum width of footings shall be 12 inches (305 mm).

1809.5 Frost protection.

Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundations and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:

1.	Extending below the frost line of the locality.

2.	Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32.

3.	Erecting on solid rock.

Exception: Free-standing buildings meeting all of the following conditions shall not be required to be protected:

1.	Assigned to Risk Category I.

2.	Area of 600 square feet (56 m2) or less for light-frame construction or 400 square feet (37 m2) or less for other than light-frame construction.

3.	Eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less.

Shallow foundations shall not bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a permanent character.

1809.5.1 Frost protection at required exits.

Frost protection shall be provided at exterior landings for all required exits with outward swinging doors. Frost protection shall only be required to the extent necessary to ensure the unobstructed opening of the required exit doors.

1809.6 Location of footings.

Footings on granular soil shall be so located that the line drawn between the lower edges of adjoining footings shall not have a slope steeper than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) with the horizontal, unless the material supporting the higher footing is braced or retained or otherwise laterally supported in an approved manner or a greater slope has been properly established by engineering analysis.

1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction.

Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table 1809.7.

TABLE 1809.7

PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTIONa, b, c, e

NUMBER OF FLOORS
SUPPORTED BY THE FOOTINGf
	WIDTH OF
FOOTING (inches)
	THICKNESS OF
FOOTING (inches)

1	12	6
2	15	6
3	18	8g

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.

b.	The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.

c.	Interior stud-bearing walls shall be permitted to be supported by isolated footings. The footing width and length shall be twice the width shown in this table, and footings shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center.

d.	Reserved.

e.	For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.

f.	Footings shall be permitted to support a roof in addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for supporting one floor.

g.	Plain concrete footings for Group R-3 occupancies shall be permitted to be 6 inches thick.

1809.8 Plain concrete footings.

The edge thickness of plain concrete footings supporting walls of other than light-frame construction shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) where placed on soil or rock.

Exception: For plain concrete footings supporting Group R-3 occupancies, the edge thickness is permitted to be 6 inches (152 mm), provided that the footing does not extend beyond a distance greater than the thickness of the footing on either side of the supported wall.

1809.9 Masonry-unit footings.

The design, materials and construction of masonry-unit footings shall comply with Sections 1809.9.1 and 1809.9.2, and the provisions of Chapter 21.

Exception: Where a specific design is not provided, masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table 1809.7.

1809.9.1 Dimensions.

Masonry-unit footings shall be laid in Type M or S mortar complying with Section 2103.2.1 and the depth shall not be less than twice the projection beyond the wall, pier or column. The width shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) wider than the wall supported thereon.

1809.9.2 Offsets.

The maximum offset of each course in brick foundation walls stepped up from the footings shall be 11/2 inches (38 mm) where laid in single courses, and 3 inches (76 mm) where laid in double courses.

1809.10 Pier and curtain wall foundations.

Pier and curtain wall foundations shall be permitted to be used to support light-frame construction not more than two stories above grade plane, provided the following requirements are met:

1.	All load-bearing walls shall be placed on continuous concrete footings bonded integrally with the exterior wall footings.

2.	The minimum actual thickness of a load-bearing masonry wall shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal or 35/8 inches (92 mm) actual thickness, and shall be bonded integrally with piers spaced 6 feet (1829 mm) on center (o.c.).

3.	Piers shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 21 and the following:

3.1.	The unsupported height of the masonry piers shall not exceed 10 times their least dimension.

3.2.	Where structural clay tile or hollow concrete masonry units are used for piers supporting beams and girders, the cellular spaces shall be filled solidly with concrete or Type M or S mortar.

Exception: Unfilled hollow piers shall be permitted where the unsupported height of the pier is not more than four times its least dimension.

3.3.	Hollow piers shall be capped with 4 inches (102 mm) of solid masonry or concrete or the cavities of the top course shall be filled with concrete or grout.

4.	The maximum height of a 4-inch (102 mm) load-bearing masonry foundation wall supporting wood frame walls and floors shall not be more than 4 feet (1219 mm) in height.

5.	The unbalanced fill for 4-inch (102 mm) foundation walls shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for solid masonry, nor 12 inches (305 mm) for hollow masonry.

1809.11 Steel grillage footings.

Grillage footings of structural steel elements shall be separated with approved steel spacers and be entirely encased in concrete with at least 6 inches (152 mm) on the bottom and at least 4 inches (102 mm) at all other points. The spaces between the shapes shall be completely filled with concrete or cement grout.

1809.12 Timber footings.

Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of Type V construction and as otherwise approved by the building official. Such footings shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B). Treated timbers are not required where placed entirely below permanent water level, or where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water level over submerged or marsh lands. The compressive stresses perpendicular to grain in untreated timber footings supported upon treated piles shall not exceed 70 percent of the allowable stresses for the species and grade of timber as specified in the ANSI/AWC NDS.

SECTION 1810
DEEP FOUNDATIONS
1810.1 General.

Deep foundations shall be analyzed, designed, detailed and installed in accordance with Sections 1810.1 through 1810.4.

1810.1.1 Geotechnical investigation.

Deep foundations shall be designed and installed on the basis of a geotechnical investigation as set forth in Section 1803.

1810.1.2 Use of existing deep foundation elements.

Deep foundation elements left in place where a structure has been demolished shall not be used for the support of new construction unless satisfactory evidence is submitted to the building official, which indicates that the elements are sound and meet the requirements of this code. Such elements shall be load tested or redriven to verify their capacities. The design load applied to such elements shall be the lowest allowable load as determined by tests or redriving data.

1810.1.3 Deep foundation elements classified as columns.

Deep foundation elements standing unbraced in air, water or fluid soils shall be classified as columns and designed as such in accordance with the provisions of this code from their top down to the point where adequate lateral support is provided in accordance with Section 1810.2.1.

Exception: Where the unsupported height to least horizontal dimension of a cast-in-place deep foundation element does not exceed three, it shall be permitted to design and construct such an element as a pedestal in accordance with ACI 318.

1810.1.4 Special types of deep foundations.

The use of types of deep foundation elements not specifically mentioned herein is permitted, subject to the approval of the building official, upon the submission of acceptable test data, calculations and other information relating to the structural properties and load capacity of such elements. The allowable stresses for materials shall not in any case exceed the limitations specified herein.

1810.2 Analysis.

The analysis of deep foundations for design shall be in accordance with Sections 1810.2.1 through 1810.2.5.

1810.2.1 Lateral support.

Any soil other than fluid soil shall be deemed to afford sufficient lateral support to prevent buckling of deep foundation elements and to permit the design of the elements in accordance with accepted engineering practice and the applicable provisions of this code.

Where deep foundation elements stand unbraced in air, water or fluid soils, it shall be permitted to consider them laterally supported at a point 5 feet (1524 mm) into stiff soil or 10 feet (3048 mm) into soft soil unless otherwise approved by the building official on the basis of a geotechnical investigation by a registered design professional.

1810.2.2 Stability.

Deep foundation elements shall be braced to provide lateral stability in all directions. Three or more elements connected by a rigid cap shall be considered braced, provided that the elements are located in radial directions from the centroid of the group not less than 60 degrees (1 rad) apart. A two-element group in a rigid cap shall be considered to be braced along the axis connecting the two elements. Methods used to brace deep foundation elements shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

Deep foundation elements supporting walls shall be placed alternately in lines spaced at least 1 foot (305 mm) apart and located symmetrically under the center of gravity of the wall load carried, unless effective measures are taken to provide for eccentricity and lateral forces, or the foundation elements are adequately braced to provide for lateral stability.

Exceptions:

1.	Isolated cast-in-place deep foundation elements without lateral bracing shall be permitted where the least horizontal dimension is no less than 2 feet (610 mm), adequate lateral support in accordance with Section 1810.2.1 is provided for the entire height and the height does not exceed 12 times the least horizontal dimension.

2.	A single row of deep foundation elements without lateral bracing is permitted for one- and two-family dwellings and lightweight construction not exceeding two stories above grade plane or 35 feet (10 668 mm) in building height, provided the centers of the elements are located within the width of the supported wall.

1810.2.3 Settlement.

The settlement of a single deep foundation element or group thereof shall be estimated based on approved methods of analysis. The predicted settlement shall cause neither harmful distortion of, nor instability in, the structure, nor cause any element to be loaded beyond its capacity.

1810.2.4 Lateral loads.

The moments, shears and lateral deflections used for design of deep foundation elements shall be established considering the nonlinear interaction of the shaft and soil, as determined by a registered design professional. Where the ratio of the depth of embedment of the element to its least horizontal dimension is less than or equal to six, it shall be permitted to assume the element is rigid.

1810.2.5 Group effects.

The analysis shall include group effects on lateral behavior where the center-to-center spacing of deep foundation elements in the direction of lateral force is less than eight times the least horizontal dimension of an element. The analysis shall include group effects on axial behavior where the center-to-center spacing of deep foundation elements is less than three times the least horizontal dimension of an element. Group effects shall be evaluated using a generally accepted method of analysis; the analysis for uplift of grouped elements with center-to-center spacing less than three times the least horizontal dimension of an element shall be evaluated in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.6.

1810.3 Design and detailing.

Deep foundations shall be designed and detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.1 through 1810.3.11.

1810.3.1 Design conditions.

Design of deep foundations shall include the design conditions specified in Sections 1810.3.1.1 through 1810.3.1.6, as applicable.

1810.3.1.1 Design methods for concrete elements.

Where concrete deep foundations are laterally supported in accordance with Section 1810.2.1 for the entire height and applied forces cause bending moments no greater than those resulting from accidental eccentricities, structural design of the element using the allowable stress design load combinations of Section 1605.1 and the allowable stresses specified in this chapter shall be permitted. Otherwise, the structural design of concrete deep foundation elements shall use the strength design load combinations of Section 1605.1 and approved strength design methods.

1810.3.1.2 Composite elements.

Where a single deep foundation element comprises two or more sections of different materials or different types spliced together, each section of the composite assembly shall satisfy the applicable requirements of this code, and the maximum allowable load in each section shall be limited by the structural capacity of that section.

1810.3.1.3 Mislocation.

The foundation or superstructure shall be designed to resist the effects of the mislocation of any deep foundation element by no less than 3 inches (76 mm). To resist the effects of mislocation, compressive overload of deep foundation elements to 110 percent of the allowable design load shall be permitted.

1810.3.1.4 Driven piles.

Driven piles shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with accepted engineering practice to resist all stresses induced by handling, driving and service loads.

1810.3.1.5 Helical piles.

Helical piles shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with accepted engineering practice to resist all stresses induced by installation into the ground and service loads.

1810.3.1.6 Casings.

Temporary and permanent casings shall be of steel and shall be sufficiently strong to resist collapse and sufficiently water tight to exclude any foreign materials during the placing of concrete. Where a permanent casing is considered reinforcing steel, the steel shall be protected under the conditions specified in Section 1810.3.2.5. Horizontal joints in the casing shall be spliced in accordance with Section 1810.3.6.

1810.3.2 Materials.

The materials used in deep foundation elements shall satisfy the requirements of Sections 1810.3.2.1 through 1810.3.2.8, as applicable.

1810.3.2.1 Concrete.

Where concrete is cast in a steel pipe or where an enlarged base is formed by compacting concrete, the maximum size for coarse aggregate shall be 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Concrete to be compacted shall have a zero slump.

1810.3.2.1.1 Seismic hooks.

Reserved.

1810.3.2.1.2 ACI 318 Equation (25.7.3.3).

Where this chapter requires detailing of concrete deep foundation elements in accordance with Section 18.7.5.4 of ACI 318, compliance with Equation (25.7.3.3) of ACI 318 shall not be required.

1810.3.2.2 Prestressing steel.

Prestressing steel shall conform to ASTM A416.

1810.3.2.3 Steel.

Structural steel H-piles and structural steel sheet piling shall conform to the material requirements in ASTM A6. Steel pipe piles shall conform to the material requirements in ASTM A252. Fully welded steel piles shall be fabricated from plates that conform to the material requirements in ASTM A36, ASTM A283, ASTM A572, ASTM A588 or ASTM A690.

1810.3.2.4 Timber.

Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber elements shall conform to ASTM D25. Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20.

1810.3.2.4.1 Preservative treatment.

Timber deep foundation elements used to support permanent structures shall be treated in accordance with this section unless it is established that the tops of the untreated timber elements will be below the lowest ground-water level assumed to exist during the life of the structure. Preservative and minimum final retention shall be in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification E, Use Category 4C) for round timber elements and AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Use Category 4B) for sawn timber elements. Preservative-treated timber elements shall be subject to a quality control program administered by an approved agency. Element cutoffs shall be treated in accordance with AWPA M4.

1810.3.2.5 Protection of materials.

Where boring records or site conditions indicate possible deleterious action on the materials used in deep foundation elements because of soil constituents, changing water levels or other factors, the elements shall be adequately protected by materials, methods or processes approved by the building official. Protective materials shall be applied to the elements so as not to be rendered ineffective by installation. The effectiveness of such protective measures for the particular purpose shall have been thoroughly established by satisfactory service records or other evidence.

1810.3.2.6 Allowable stresses.

The allowable stresses for materials used in deep foundation elements shall not exceed those specified in Table 1810.3.2.6.

TABLE 1810.3.2.6

ALLOWABLE STRESSES FOR MATERIALS USED IN DEEP FOUNDATION ELEMENTS

MATERIAL TYPE AND CONDITION	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESSa
1. Concrete or grout in compressionb	
 Cast-in-place with a permanent casing in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.7 or Section 1810.3.5.3.4	0.4 f′c
 Cast-in-place in other permanent casing or rock	0.33f′c
 Cast-in-place without a permanent casing	0.3 f′c
 Precast nonprestressed	0.33 f′c
 Precast prestressed	0.33 f′c - 0.27 fpc
2. Nonprestressed reinforcement in compression	0.4 fy ≤ 30,000 psi
3. Steel in compression	
 Cores within concrete-filled pipes or tubes	0.5 Fy ≤ 32,000 psi
 Pipes, tubes or H-piles, where justified in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.8	0.5 Fy ≤ 32,000 psi
 Pipes or tubes for micropiles	0.4 Fy ≤ 32,000 psi
 Other pipes, tubes or H-piles	0.35 Fy ≤ 24,000 psi
 Helical piles	0.6 Fy ≤ 0.5 Fu
4. Nonprestressed reinforcement in tension	
 Within micropiles	
 Other conditions	0.6 fy
  For load combinations that do not include wind loads	0.5 fy ≤ 30,000 psi
  For load combinations that include wind loads	0.5 fy ≤ 40,000 psi
5. Steel in tension	
 Pipes, tubes or H-piles, where justified in accordance with Section 1810.3.2.8	0.5 Fy ≤ 32,000 psi
 Other pipes, tubes or H-piles	0.35 Fy ≤ 24,000 psi
 Helical piles	0.6 Fy ≤ 0.5 Fu
6. Timber	In accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS

a.	f ′c is the specified compressive strength of the concrete or grout; fpc is the compressive stress on the gross concrete section due to effective prestress forces only; fy is the specified yield strength of reinforcement; Fy is the specified minimum yield stress of steel; Fu is the specified minimum tensile stress of structural steel.

b.	The stresses specified apply to the gross cross-sectional area of the concrete for precast prestressed piles and to the net cross-sectional area for all other piles. Where a temporary or permanent casing is used, the inside face of the casing shall be considered the outer edge of the concrete cross-section.

1810.3.2.7 Increased allowable compressive stress for cased cast-in-place elements.

The allowable compressive stress in the concrete shall be permitted to be increased as specified in Table 1810.3.2.6 for those portions of permanently cased cast-in-place elements that satisfy all of the following conditions:

1.	The design shall not use the casing to resist any portion of the axial load imposed.

2.	The casing shall have a sealed tip and be mandrel driven.

3.	The thickness of the casing shall not be less than manufacturer’s standard gage No. 14 (0.068 inch) (1.75 mm).

4.	The casing shall be seamless or provided with seams of strength equal to the basic material and be of a configuration that will provide confinement to the cast-in-place concrete.

5.	The ratio of steel yield strength (Fy) to specified compressive strength (f′c) shall not be less than six.

6.	The nominal diameter of the element shall not be greater than 16 inches (406 mm).

1810.3.2.8 Justification of higher allowable stresses.

Use of allowable stresses greater than those specified in Section 1810.3.2.6 shall be permitted where supporting data justifying such higher stresses is filed with the building official. Such substantiating data shall include the following:

1.	A geotechnical investigation in accordance with Section 1803.

2.	Load tests in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2, regardless of the load supported by the element.

The design and installation of the deep foundation elements shall be under the direct supervision of a registered design professional knowledgeable in the field of soil mechanics and deep foundations who shall submit a report to the building official stating that the elements as installed satisfy the design criteria.

1810.3.3 Determination of allowable loads.

The allowable axial and lateral loads on deep foundation elements shall be determined by an approved formula, load tests or method of analysis.

1810.3.3.1 Allowable axial load.

The allowable axial load on a deep foundation element shall be determined in accordance with Sections 1810.3.3.1.1 through 1810.3.3.1.9.

Exception: Where approved by the building official, load testing is not required.

1810.3.3.1.1 Driving criteria.

The allowable compressive load on any driven deep foundation element where determined by the application of an approved driving formula shall not exceed 40 tons (356 kN). For allowable loads above 40 tons (356 kN), the wave equation method of analysis shall be used to estimate driveability for both driving stresses and net displacement per blow at the ultimate load. Allowable loads shall be verified by load tests in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2. The formula or wave equation load shall be determined for gravity-drop or power-actuated hammers and the hammer energy used shall be the maximum consistent with the size, strength and weight of the driven elements. The use of a follower is permitted only with the approval of the building official. The introduction of fresh hammer cushion or pile cushion material just prior to final penetration is not permitted.

1810.3.3.1.2 Load tests.

Where design compressive loads are greater than those determined using the allowable stresses specified in Section 1810.3.2.6, where the design load for any deep foundation element is in doubt, or where cast-in-place deep foundation elements have an enlarged base formed either by compacting concrete or by driving a precast base, control test elements shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D1143 or ASTM D4945. At least one element shall be load tested in each area of uniform subsoil conditions. Where required by the building official, additional elements shall be load tested where necessary to establish the safe design capacity. The resulting allowable loads shall not be more than one-half of the ultimate axial load capacity of the test element as assessed by one of the published methods listed in Section 1810.3.3.1.3 with consideration for the test type, duration and subsoil. The ultimate axial load capacity shall be determined by a registered design professional with consideration given to tolerable total and differential settlements at design load in accordance with Section 1810.2.3. In subsequent installation of the balance of deep foundation elements, all elements shall be deemed to have a supporting capacity equal to that of the control element where such elements are of the same type, size and relative length as the test element; are installed using the same or comparable methods and equipment as the test element; are installed in similar subsoil conditions as the test element; and, for driven elements, where the rate of penetration (e.g., net displacement per blow) of such elements is equal to or less than that of the test element driven with the same hammer through a comparable driving distance.

1810.3.3.1.3 Load test evaluation methods.

It shall be permitted to evaluate load tests of deep foundation elements using any of the following methods:

1.	Davisson Offset Limit.

2.	Brinch-Hansen 90-percent Criterion.

3.	Butler-Hoy Criterion.

4.	Other methods approved by the building official.

1810.3.3.1.4 Allowable frictional resistance.

The assumed frictional resistance developed by any uncased cast-in-place deep foundation element shall not exceed one-sixth of the bearing value of the soil material at minimum depth as set forth in Table 1806.2, up to a maximum of 500 psf (24 kPa), unless a greater value is allowed by the building official on the basis of a geotechnical investigation as specified in Section 1803 or a greater value is substantiated by a load test in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2. Frictional resistance and bearing resistance shall not be assumed to act simultaneously unless determined by a geotechnical investigation in accordance with Section 1803.

1810.3.3.1.5 Uplift capacity of a single deep foundation element.

Where required by the design, the uplift capacity of a single deep foundation element shall be determined by an approved method of analysis based on a minimum factor of safety of three or by load tests conducted in accordance with ASTM D3689. The maximum allowable uplift load shall not exceed the ultimate load capacity as determined in Section 1810.3.3.1.2, using the results of load tests conducted in accordance with ASTM D3689, divided by a factor of safety of two.

Exception: Where uplift is due to wind loading, the minimum factor of safety shall be two where capacity is determined by an analysis and one and one-half where capacity is determined by load tests.

1810.3.3.1.6 Allowable uplift load of grouped deep foundation elements.

For grouped deep foundation elements subjected to uplift, the allowable uplift load for the group shall be calculated by a generally accepted method of analysis. Where the deep foundation elements in the group are placed at a center-to-center spacing less than three times the least horizontal dimension of the largest single element, the allowable uplift load for the group is permitted to be calculated as the lesser of:

1.	The proposed individual allowable uplift load times the number of elements in the group.

2.	Two-thirds of the effective weight of the group and the soil contained within a block defined by the perimeter of the group and the length of the element, plus two-thirds of the ultimate shear resistance along the soil block.

1810.3.3.1.7 Load-bearing capacity.

Deep foundation elements shall develop ultimate load capacities of at least twice the design working loads in the designated load-bearing layers. Analysis shall show that no soil layer underlying the designated load-bearing layers causes the load-bearing capacity safety factor to be less than two.

1810.3.3.1.8 Bent deep foundation elements.

The load-bearing capacity of deep foundation elements discovered to have a sharp or sweeping bend shall be determined by an approved method of analysis or by load testing a representative element.

1810.3.3.1.9 Helical piles.

The allowable axial design load, Pa, of helical piles shall be determined as follows:

(Equation 18-4)

where Pu is the least value of:

1.	Base capacity plus shaft resistance of the helical pile. The base capacity is equal to the sum of the areas of the helical bearing plates times the ultimate bearing capacity of the soil or rock comprising the bearing stratum. The shaft resistance is equal to the area of the shaft above the uppermost helical bearing plate times the ultimate skin resistance.

2.	Ultimate capacity determined from well-documented correlations with installation torque.

3.	Ultimate capacity determined from load tests when required by Section 1810.3.3.1.2.

4.	Ultimate axial capacity of pile shaft.

5.	Ultimate axial capacity of pile shaft couplings.

6.	Sum of the ultimate axial capacity of helical bearing plates affixed to pile.

1810.3.3.2 Allowable lateral load.

Where required by the design, the lateral load capacity of a single deep foundation element or a group thereof shall be determined by an approved method of analysis or by lateral load tests to at least twice the proposed design working load. The resulting allowable load shall not be more than one-half of the load that produces a gross lateral movement of 1 inch (25 mm) at the lower of the top of foundation element and the ground surface, unless it can be shown that the predicted lateral movement shall cause neither harmful distortion of, nor instability in, the structure, nor cause any element to be loaded beyond its capacity.

1810.3.4 Subsiding soils or strata.

Where deep foundation elements are installed through subsiding soils or other subsiding strata and derive support from underlying firmer materials, consideration shall be given to the downward frictional forces that may be imposed on the elements by the subsiding upper strata.

Where the influence of subsiding soils or strata is considered as imposing loads on the element, the allowable stresses specified in this chapter shall be permitted to be increased where satisfactory substantiating data are submitted.

1810.3.5 Dimensions of deep foundation elements.

The dimensions of deep foundation elements shall be in accordance with Sections 1810.3.5.1 through 1810.3.5.3, as applicable.

1810.3.5.1 Precast.

The minimum lateral dimension of precast concrete deep foundation elements shall be 8 inches (203 mm). Corners of square elements shall be chamfered.

1810.3.5.2 Cast-in-place or grouted-in-place.

Cast-in-place and grouted-in-place deep foundation elements shall satisfy the requirements of this section.

1810.3.5.2.1 Cased.

Cast-in-place or grouted-in-place deep foundation elements with a permanent casing shall have a nominal outside diameter of not less than 8 inches (203 mm).

1810.3.5.2.2 Uncased.

Cast-in-place or grouted-in-place deep foundation elements without a permanent casing shall have a specified diameter of not less than 12 inches (305 mm). The element length shall not exceed 30 times the specified diameter.

Exception: The length of the element is permitted to exceed 30 times the specified diameter, provided the design and installation of the deep foundations are under the direct supervision of a registered design professional knowledgeable in the field of soil mechanics and deep foundations. The registered design professional shall submit a report to the building official stating that the elements were installed in compliance with the approved construction documents.

1810.3.5.2.3 Micropiles.

Micropiles shall have a nominal diameter of 12 inches (305 mm) or less. The minimum diameter set forth elsewhere in Section 1810.3.5 shall not apply to micropiles.

1810.3.5.3 Steel.

Steel deep foundation elements shall satisfy the requirements of this section.

1810.3.5.3.1 Structural steel H-piles.

Sections of structural steel H-piles shall comply with the requirements for HP shapes in ASTM A6, or the following:

1.	The flange projections shall not exceed 14 times the minimum thickness of metal in either the flange or the web and the flange widths shall not be less than 80 percent of the depth of the section.

2.	The nominal depth in the direction of the web shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm).

3.	Flanges and web shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

1810.3.5.3.2 Fully welded steel piles fabricated from plates.

Sections of fully welded steel piles fabricated from plates shall comply with the following:

1.	The flange projections shall not exceed 14 times the minimum thickness of metal in either the flange or the web, and the flange widths shall not be less than 80 percent of the depth of the section.

2.	The nominal depth in the direction of the web shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm).

3.	Flanges and web shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

1810.3.5.3.3 Structural steel sheet piling.

Individual sections of structural steel sheet piling shall conform to the profile indicated by the manufacturer, and shall conform to the general requirements specified by ASTM A6.

1810.3.5.3.4 Steel pipes and tubes.

Steel pipes and tubes used as deep foundation elements shall have a nominal outside diameter of not less than 8 inches (203 mm). Where steel pipes or tubes are driven open ended, they shall have a minimum of 0.34 square inch (219 mm2) of steel in cross section to resist each 1,000 foot-pounds (1356 Nm) of pile hammer energy, or shall have the equivalent strength for steels having a yield strength greater than 35,000 psi (241 MPa) or the wave equation analysis shall be permitted to be used to assess compression stresses induced by driving to evaluate if the pile section is appropriate for the selected hammer. Where a pipe or tube with wall thickness less than 0.179 inch (4.6 mm) is driven open ended, a suitable cutting shoe shall be provided. The pipe or tube casing for socketed drilled shafts shall have a nominal outside diameter of not less than 18 inches (457 mm), a wall thickness of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) and a suitable steel driving shoe welded to the bottom; the diameter of the rock socket shall be approximately equal to the inside diameter of the casing.

Exceptions:

1.	There is no minimum diameter for steel pipes or tubes used in micropiles.

2.	For mandrel-driven pipes or tubes, the minimum wall thickness shall be 1/10 inch (2.5 mm).

1810.3.5.3.5 Helical piles.

Dimensions of the central shaft and the number, size and thickness of helical bearing plates shall be sufficient to support the design loads.

1810.3.6 Splices.

Splices shall be constructed so as to provide and maintain true alignment and position of the component parts of the deep foundation element during installation and subsequent thereto and shall be designed to resist the axial and shear forces and moments occurring at the location of the splice during driving and for design load combinations. Where deep foundation elements of the same type are being spliced, splices shall develop not less than 50 percent of the bending strength of the weaker section. Where deep foundation elements of different materials or different types are being spliced, splices shall develop the full compressive strength and not less than 50 percent of the tension and bending strength of the weaker section. Where structural steel cores are to be spliced, the ends shall be milled or ground to provide full contact and shall be full-depth welded.

Splices occurring in the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of the embedded portion of an element shall be designed to resist at allowable stresses the moment and shear that would result from an assumed eccentricity of the axial load of 3 inches (76 mm), or the element shall be braced in accordance with Section 1810.2.2 to other deep foundation elements that do not have splices in the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of embedment.

1810.3.7 Top of element detailing at cutoffs.

Where a minimum length for reinforcement or the extent of closely spaced confinement reinforcement is specified at the top of a deep foundation element, provisions shall be made so that those specified lengths or extents are maintained after cutoff.

1810.3.8 Precast concrete piles.

Precast concrete piles shall be designed and detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.8.1 through 1810.3.8.3.

1810.3.8.1 Reinforcement.

Longitudinal steel shall be arranged in a symmetrical pattern and be laterally tied with steel ties or wire spiral spaced center to center as follows:

1.	At not more than 1 inch (25 mm) for the first five ties or spirals at each end; then

2.	At not more than 4 inches (102 mm), for the remainder of the first 2 feet (610 mm) from each end; and then

3.	At not more than 6 inches (152 mm) elsewhere.

The size of ties and spirals shall be as follows:

1.	For piles having a least horizontal dimension of 16 inches (406 mm) or less, wire shall not be smaller than 0.22 inch (5.6 mm) (No. 5 gage).

2.	For piles having a least horizontal dimension of more than 16 inches (406 mm) and less than 20 inches (508 mm), wire shall not be smaller than 0.238 inch (6 mm) (No. 4 gage).

3.	For piles having a least horizontal dimension of 20 inches (508 mm) and larger, wire shall not be smaller than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) round or 0.259 inch (6.6 mm) (No. 3 gage).

1810.3.8.2 Precast nonprestressed piles.

Precast non-prestressed concrete piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 1810.3.8.2.1.

1810.3.8.2.1 Minimum reinforcement.

Longitudinal reinforcement shall consist of at least four bars with a minimum longitudinal reinforcement ratio of 0.008.

1810.3.8.3 Precast prestressed piles.

Precast prestressed concrete piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 1810.3.8.3.1.

1810.3.8.3.1 Effective prestress.

The effective prestress in the pile shall not be less than 400 psi (2.76 MPa) for piles up to 30 feet (9144 mm) in length, 550 psi (3.79 MPa) for piles up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) in length and 700 psi (4.83 MPa) for piles greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in length.

Effective prestress shall be based on an assumed loss of 30,000 psi (207 MPa) in the prestressing steel. The tensile stress in the prestressing steel shall not exceed the values specified in ACI 318.

1810.3.9 Cast-in-place deep foundations.

Cast-in-place deep foundation elements shall be designed and detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.9.1 through 1810.3.9.6.

1810.3.9.1 Design cracking moment.

The design cracking moment (ϕMn) for a cast-in-place deep foundation element not enclosed by a structural steel pipe or tube shall be determined using the following equation:

(Equation 18-5)

where:

f′c = Specified compressive strength of concrete or grout, psi (MPa).

Sm = Elastic section modulus, neglecting reinforcement and casing, cubic inches (mm3).

1810.3.9.2 Required reinforcement.

Where subject to uplift or where the required moment strength determined using the strength design load combinations of Section 1605.1 exceeds the design cracking moment determined in accordance with Section 1810.3.9.1, cast-in-place deep foundations not enclosed by a structural steel pipe or tube shall be reinforced.

1810.3.9.3 Placement of reinforcement.

Reinforcement where required shall be assembled and tied together and shall be placed in the deep foundation element as a unit before the reinforced portion of the element is filled with concrete.

Exceptions:

1.	Steel dowels embedded 5 feet (1524 mm) or less shall be permitted to be placed after concreting, while the concrete is still in a semifluid state.

2.	For deep foundation elements installed with a hollow-stem auger, tied reinforcement shall be placed after elements are concreted, while the concrete is still in a semifluid state. Longitudinal reinforcement without lateral ties shall be placed either through the hollow stem of the auger prior to concreting or after concreting, while the concrete is still in a semifluid state.

3.	For Group R-3 and U occupancies not exceeding two stories of light-frame construction, reinforcement is permitted to be placed after concreting, while the concrete is still in a semifluid state, and the concrete cover requirement is permitted to be reduced to 2 inches (51 mm), provided the construction method can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the building official.

1810.3.9.4.

Reserved.

1810.3.9.5 Belled drilled shafts.

Where drilled shafts are belled at the bottom, the edge thickness of the bell shall not be less than that required for the edge of footings. Where the sides of the bell slope at an angle less than 60 degrees (1 rad) from the horizontal, the effects of vertical shear shall be considered.

1810.3.9.6 Socketed drilled shafts.

Socketed drilled shafts shall have a permanent pipe or tube casing that extends down to bedrock and an uncased socket drilled into the bedrock, both filled with concrete. Socketed drilled shafts shall have reinforcement or a structural steel core for the length as indicated by an approved method of analysis.

The depth of the rock socket shall be sufficient to develop the full load-bearing capacity of the element with a minimum safety factor of two, but the depth shall not be less than the outside diameter of the pipe or tube casing. The design of the rock socket is permitted to be predicated on the sum of the allowable load-bearing pressure on the bottom of the socket plus bond along the sides of the socket.

Where a structural steel core is used, the gross cross-sectional area of the core shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross area of the drilled shaft.

1810.3.10 Micropiles.

Micropiles shall be designed and detailed in accordance with Sections 1810.3.10.1 through 1810.3.10.3.

1810.3.10.1 Construction.

Micropiles shall develop their load-carrying capacity by means of a bond zone in soil, bedrock or a combination of soil and bedrock. Micropiles shall be grouted and have either a steel pipe or tube or steel reinforcement at every section along the length. It shall be permitted to transition from deformed reinforcing bars to steel pipe or tube reinforcement by extending the bars into the pipe or tube section by at least their development length in tension in accordance with ACI 318.

1810.3.10.2 Materials.

Reinforcement shall consist of deformed reinforcing bars in accordance with ASTM A615 Grade 60 or 75 or ASTM A722 Grade 150.

The steel pipe or tube shall have a minimum wall thickness of 3/16 inch (4.8 mm). Splices shall comply with Section 1810.3.6. The steel pipe or tube shall have a minimum yield strength of 45,000 psi (310 MPa) and a minimum elongation of 15 percent as shown by mill certifications or two coupon test samples per 40,000 pounds (18 160 kg) of pipe or tube.

1810.3.10.3 Reinforcement.

For micropiles or portions thereof grouted inside a temporary or permanent casing or inside a hole drilled into bedrock or a hole drilled with grout, the steel pipe or tube or steel reinforcement shall be designed to carry at least 40 percent of the design compression load. Micropiles or portions thereof grouted in an open hole in soil without temporary or permanent casing and without suitable means of verifying the hole diameter during grouting shall be designed to carry the entire compression load in the reinforcing steel. Where a steel pipe or tube is used for reinforcement, the portion of the grout enclosed within the pipe is permitted to be included in the determination of the allowable stress in the grout.

1810.3.11 Pile caps.

Pile caps shall conform with ACI 318 and this section. Pile caps shall be of reinforced concrete, and shall include all elements to which vertical deep foundation elements are connected, including grade beams and mats. The soil immediately below the pile cap or grade beam shall not be considered as carrying any vertical load, with the exception of a combined pile raft. The tops of vertical deep foundation elements shall be embedded not less than 3 inches (76 mm) into pile caps or grade beam and the caps shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) beyond the edges of the elements. The tops of elements shall be cut or chipped back to sound material before capping.

1810.4 Installation.

Deep foundations shall be installed in accordance with Section 1810.4. Where a single deep foundation element comprises two or more sections of different materials or different types spliced together, each section shall satisfy the applicable conditions of installation.

1810.4.1 Structural integrity.

Deep foundation elements shall be installed in such a manner and sequence as to prevent distortion or damage that may adversely affect the structural integrity of adjacent structures or of foundation elements being installed or already in place and as to avoid compacting the surrounding soil to the extent that other foundation elements cannot be installed properly.

1810.4.1.1 Compressive strength of precast concrete piles.

A precast concrete pile shall not be driven before the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least 75 percent of the specified compressive strength (f′c), but not less than the strength sufficient to withstand handling and driving forces.

1810.4.1.2 Shafts in unstable soils.

Where cast-in-place deep foundation elements are formed through unstable soils, the open hole shall be stabilized by a casing, slurry, or other approved method prior to placing the concrete. Where the casing is withdrawn during concreting, the level of concrete shall be maintained above the bottom of the casing at a sufficient height to offset any hydrostatic or lateral soil pressure. Driven casings shall be mandrel driven their full length in contact with the surrounding soil.

1810.4.1.3 Driving near uncased concrete.

Deep foundation elements shall not be driven within six element diameters center to center in granular soils or within one-half the element length in cohesive soils of an uncased element filled with concrete less than 48 hours old unless approved by the building official. If driving near uncased concrete elements causes the concrete surface in any completed element to rise or drop significantly or bleed additional water, the previously completed element shall be replaced.

1810.4.1.4 Driving near cased concrete.

Deep foundation elements shall not be driven within four and one-half average diameters of a cased element filled with concrete less than 24 hours old unless approved by the building official. Concrete shall not be placed in casings within heave range of driving.

1810.4.1.5 Defective timber piles.

Any substantial sudden increase in rate of penetration of a timber pile shall be investigated for possible damage. If the sudden increase in rate of penetration cannot be correlated to soil strata, the pile shall be removed for inspection or rejected.

1810.4.2 Identification.

Deep foundation materials shall be identified for conformity to the specified grade with this identity maintained continuously from the point of manufacture to the point of installation or shall be tested by an approved agency to determine conformity to the specified grade. The approved agency shall furnish an affidavit of compliance to the building official.

1810.4.3 Location plan.

A plan showing the location and designation of deep foundation elements by an identification system shall be filed with the building official prior to installation of such elements. Detailed records for elements shall bear an identification corresponding to that shown on the plan.

1810.4.4 Preexcavation.

The use of jetting, augering or other methods of preexcavation shall be subject to the approval of the building official. Where permitted, preexcavation shall be carried out in the same manner as used for deep foundation elements subject to load tests and in such a manner that will not impair the carrying capacity of the elements already in place or damage adjacent structures. Element tips shall be advanced below the preexcavated depth until the required resistance or penetration is obtained.

1810.4.5 Vibratory driving.

Vibratory drivers shall only be used to install deep foundation elements where the element load capacity is verified by load tests in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2. The installation of production elements shall be controlled according to power consumption, rate of penetration or other approved means that ensure element capacities equal or exceed those of the test elements.

Exceptions:

1.	The pile installation is completed by driving with an impact hammer in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.1.

2.	The pile is to be used only for lateral resistance.

1810.4.6 Heaved elements.

Deep foundation elements that have heaved during the driving of adjacent elements shall be redriven as necessary to develop the required capacity and penetration, or the capacity of the element shall be verified by load tests in accordance with Section 1810.3.3.1.2.

1810.4.7 Enlarged base cast-in-place elements.

Enlarged bases for cast-in-place deep foundation elements formed by compacting concrete or by driving a precast base shall be formed in or driven into granular soils. Such elements shall be constructed in the same manner as successful prototype test elements driven for the project. Shafts extending through peat or other organic soil shall be encased in a permanent steel casing. Where a cased shaft is used, the shaft shall be adequately reinforced to resist column action or the annular space around the shaft shall be filled sufficiently to reestablish lateral support by the soil. Where heave occurs, the element shall be replaced unless it is demonstrated that the element is undamaged and capable of carrying twice its design load.

1810.4.8 Hollow-stem augered, cast-in-place elements.

Where concrete or grout is placed by pumping through a hollow-stem auger, the auger shall be permitted to rotate in a clockwise direction during withdrawal. As the auger is withdrawn at a steady rate or in increments not to exceed 1 foot (305 mm), concreting or grouting pumping pressures shall be measured and maintained high enough at all times to offset hydrostatic and lateral earth pressures. Concrete or grout volumes shall be measured to ensure that the volume of concrete or grout placed in each element is equal to or greater than the theoretical volume of the hole created by the auger. Where the installation process of any element is interrupted or a loss of concreting or grouting pressure occurs, the element shall be redrilled to 5 feet (1524 mm) below the elevation of the tip of the auger when the installation was interrupted or concrete or grout pressure was lost and reformed. Augered cast-in-place elements shall not be installed within six diameters center to center of an element filled with concrete or grout less than 12 hours old, unless approved by the building official. If the concrete or grout level in any completed element drops due to installation of an adjacent element, the element shall be replaced.

1810.4.9 Socketed drilled shafts.

The rock socket and pipe or tube casing of socketed drilled shafts shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign materials before filling with concrete. Steel cores shall be bedded in cement grout at the base of the rock socket.

1810.4.10 Micropiles.

Micropile deep foundation elements shall be permitted to be formed in holes advanced by rotary or percussive drilling methods, with or without casing. The elements shall be grouted with a fluid cement grout. The grout shall be pumped through a tremie pipe extending to the bottom of the element until grout of suitable quality returns at the top of the element. The following requirements apply to specific installation methods:

1.	For micropiles grouted inside a temporary casing, the reinforcing bars shall be inserted prior to withdrawal of the casing. The casing shall be withdrawn in a controlled manner with the grout level maintained at the top of the element to ensure that the grout completely fills the drill hole. During withdrawal of the casing, the grout level inside the casing shall be monitored to verify that the flow of grout inside the casing is not obstructed.

2.	For a micropile or portion thereof grouted in an open drill hole in soil without temporary casing, the minimum design diameter of the drill hole shall be verified by a suitable device during grouting.

3.	For micropiles designed for end bearing, a suitable means shall be employed to verify that the bearing surface is properly cleaned prior to grouting.

4.	Subsequent micropiles shall not be drilled near elements that have been grouted until the grout has had sufficient time to harden.

5.	Micropiles shall be grouted as soon as possible after drilling is completed.

6.	For micropiles designed with a full-length casing, the casing shall be pulled back to the top of the bond zone and reinserted or some other suitable means employed to assure grout coverage outside the casing.

1810.4.11 Helical piles.

Helical piles shall be installed to specified embedment depth and torsional resistance criteria as determined by a registered design professional. The torque applied during installation shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated maximum installation torque resistance of the helical pile.

1810.4.12 Special inspection.

Reserved.

SECTIONS 1811 through 1815

RESERVED

SECTION 1816
TERMITE PROTECTION
1816.1 Termite protection.

Termite protection shall be provided by registered termiticides, including soil applied pesticides, baiting systems, and pesticides applied to wood, or other approved methods of termite protection labeled for use as a preventative treatment to new construction. See Section 202, “Registered termiticide.” Upon completion of the application of the termite protective treatment, a certificate of compliance shall be issued to the building department by the licensed pest control company that contains the following statement: “The building has received a complete treatment for the prevention of subterranean termites. Treatment is in accordance with rules and laws established by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.”

1816.1.1

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, the initial chemical soil treatment inside the foundation perimeter shall be done after all excavation, backfilling and compaction is complete.

1816.1.2

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, soil area disturbed after initial chemical soil treatment shall be retreated with a chemical soil treatment, including spaces boxed or formed.

1816.1.3

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, space in concrete floors boxed out or formed for the subsequent installation of plumbing traps, drains or any other purpose shall be created by using plastic or metal permanently placed forms of sufficient depth to eliminate any planned soil disturbance after initial chemical soil treatment.

1816.1.4

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, chemically treated soil shall be protected with a minimum 6 millimeter vapor retarder to protect against rainfall dilution. If rainfall occurs before vapor retarder placement, retreatment is required. Any work, including placement of reinforcing steel, done after chemical treatment until the concrete floor is poured, shall be done in such manner as to avoid penetrating or disturbing treated soil.

1816.1.5

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, concrete overpour or mortar accumulated along the exterior foundation perimeter shall be removed prior to exterior chemical soil treatment, to enhance vertical penetration of the chemicals.

1816.1.6

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, chemical soil treatments shall also be applied under all exterior concrete or grade within 1 foot (305 mm) of the primary structure sidewalls. Also, a vertical chemical barrier shall be applied promptly after construction is completed, including initial landscaping and irrigation/sprinkler installation. Any soil disturbed after the chemical vertical barrier is applied shall be promptly retreated.

1816.1.7

If a registered termiticide formulated and registered as a bait system is used for subterranean termite prevention, Sections 1816.1.1 through 1816.1.6 do not apply; however, a signed contract assuring the installation, maintenance and monitoring of the baiting system that is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 482, Florida Statutes shall be provided to the building official prior to the pouring of the slab, and the system must be installed prior to final building approval. If the baiting system directions for use require a monitoring phase prior to installation of the pesticide active ingredient, the installation of the monitoring phase components shall be deemed to constitute installation of the system.

1816.1.8

If a registered termiticide formulated and registered as a wood treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, Sections 1816.1.1 through 1816.1.6 do not apply. Application of a wood treatment termiticide shall be as required by label directions for use, and must be completed prior to final building approval. Changes in framing or additions to framing in areas of the structure requiring treatment that occur after the initial wood treatment must be treated prior to final building approval.

1816.2 Penetration.

Protective sleeves around piping penetrating concrete slab-on-grade floors shall not be of cellulose-containing materials. If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite protection, the sleeve shall have a maximum wall thickness of 0.010 inch, and be sealed within the slab using a noncorrosive clamping device to eliminate the annular space between the pipe and the sleeve. No termiticides shall be applied inside the sleeve.

SECTION 1817
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
EXCAVATIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1818
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
BEARING CAPACITY OF SOIL

RESERVED

SECTION 1819
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SOIL BEARING FOUNDATIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1820
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CONCRETE SLABS ON FILL

RESERVED

SECTION 1821
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
MONOLITHIC FOOTINGS

RESERVED

SECTION 1822
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PILE FOUNDATIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1823
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WOOD PILES

RESERVED

SECTION 1824
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PRECAST CONCRETE PILES

RESERVED

SECTION 1825
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PRESTRESSED PRECAST CONCRETE PILES

RESERVED

SECTION 1826
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CAST-IN-PLACE

RESERVED

SECTION 1827
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ROLLED STRUCTURAL SHAPES

RESERVED

SECTION 1828
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SPECIAL PILES OR SPECIAL CONDITIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1829
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
LOAD TESTS ON PILES

RESERVED

SECTION 1830
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FOUNDATION WALLS AND GRADE BEAMS

RESERVED

SECTION 1831
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GRADES UNDER BUILDINGS

RESERVED

SECTION 1832
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
RETAINING WALLS

RESERVED

SECTION 1833
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SEAWALLS AND BULKHEADS

RESERVED

SECTION 1834
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SOIL IMPROVEMENT

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-19]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 19
CONCRETE

Italics are used for text within Sections 1903 through 1905 of this code to indicate provisions that differ from ACI 318.

SECTION 1901
GENERAL
1901.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, quality control, design and construction of concrete used in structures.

1901.2 Plain and reinforced concrete.

Structural concrete shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and ACI 318 as amended in Section 1905 of this code. Except for the provisions of Sections 1904 and 1907, the design and construction of slabs on grade shall not be governed by this chapter unless they transmit vertical loads or lateral forces from other parts of the structure to the soil.

1901.3 Anchoring to concrete.

Anchoring to concrete shall be in accordance with ACI 318 as amended in Section 1905, and applies to cast-in (headed bolts, headed studs and hooked J- or L-bolts), post-installed expansion (torque-controlled and displacement-controlled), undercut, screw, and adhesive anchors.

1901.4 Composite structural steel and concrete structures.

Systems of structural steel acting compositely with reinforced concrete shall be designed in accordance with Section 2206 of this code.

1901.5 Construction documents.

The construction documents for structural concrete construction shall include:

1.	The specified compressive strength of concrete at the stated ages or stages of construction for which each concrete element is designed.

2.	The specified strength or grade of reinforcement.

3.	The size and location of structural elements, reinforcement and anchors.

4.	Provision for dimensional changes resulting from creep, shrinkage and temperature.

5.	The magnitude and location of prestressing forces.

6.	Anchorage length of reinforcement and location and length of lap splices.

7.	Type and location of mechanical and welded splices of reinforcement.

8.	Details and location of contraction or isolation joints specified for plain concrete.

9.	Minimum concrete compressive strength at time of posttensioning.

10.	Stressing sequence for posttensioning tendons.

11.	Reserved.

1901.6 Special inspections and tests.

Reserved.

1901.7 Tolerances for structural concrete.

Where not indicated in construction documents, structural tolerances for concrete structural elements shall be in accordance with this section.

1901.7.1 Cast-in-place concrete tolerances.

Structural tolerances for cast-in-place concrete structural elements shall be in accordance with ACI 117.

Exceptions:

1.	Group R-3 detached one- or two-family dwellings are not required to comply with this section

2.	Shotcrete is not required to comply with this section

1901.7.2 Precast concrete tolerances.

Structural tolerances for precast concrete structural elements shall be in accordance with ACI ITG-7.

Exception: Group R-3 detached one- or two-family dwellings are not required to comply with this section.

SECTION 1902
COORDINATION OF TERMS
1902.1 General.

Coordination of terminology used in ACI 318 and ASCE 7 shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code for concrete construction, have the meanings shown in ACI 318 as modified by Section 1905.1.

SECTION 1903
SPECIFICATIONS FOR TESTS AND MATERIALS
1903.1 General.

Materials used to produce concrete, concrete itself and testing thereof shall comply with the applicable standards listed in ACI 318.

1903.2 Special inspections.

Where required, special inspections and tests shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.

1903.3 Glass fiber-reinforced concrete.

Glass fiber-reinforced concrete (GFRC) and the materials used in such concrete shall be in accordance with the PCI MNL 128 standard.

1903.4 Flat wall insulating concrete form (ICF) systems.

Insulating concrete form material used for forming flat concrete walls shall conform to ASTM E2634.

SECTION 1904
DURABILITY REQUIREMENTS
1904.1 Structural concrete.

Structural concrete shall conform to the durability requirements of ACI 318.

Exception: For Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies not more than three stories above grade plane, the specified compressive strength, f′c, for concrete in basement walls, foundation walls, exterior walls and other vertical surfaces exposed to the weather shall be not less than 3,000 psi (20.7 MPa).

1904.2 Nonstructural concrete.

The registered design professional shall assign nonstructural concrete a freeze-thaw exposure class, as defined in ACI 318, based on the anticipated exposure of nonstructural concrete. Nonstructural concrete shall have a minimum specified compressive strength, f′c, of 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa) for Class F0; 3,000 psi (20.7 MPa) for Class F1; and 3,500 psi (24.1 MPa) for Classes F2 and F3. Nonstructural concrete shall be air entrained in accordance with ACI 318.

SECTION 1905
MODIFICATIONS TO ACI 318
1905.1 General.

The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in Sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.6.

1905.1.1 ACI 318, Section 2.3.

Modify existing definitions and add the following definitions to ACI 318, Section 2.3.

DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL. A wall complying with the requirements of Chapter 14, including 14.6.2.

ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. A precast wall complying with the requirements of Chapters 1 through 13, 15, 16 and 19 through 26.

ORDINARY REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL. A cast-in-place wall complying with the requirements of Chapters 1 through 13, 15, 16 and 19 through 26.

ORDINARY STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE WALL. A wall complying with the requirements of Chapter 14, excluding 14.6.2.

1905.1.2 ACI 318, Section 18.2.1.

Modify ACI 318 Section 18.2.1.2 to read as follows:

18.2.1.2 – Structures shall satisfy requirements of Chapters 1 through 17 and 19 through 26; Chapter 18 does not apply.

1905.1.3 ACI 318, Section 18.5.

Modify ACI 318, Section 18.5, by adding new Section 18.5.2.2 and renumbering existing Section 18.5.2.2 to become 18.5.2.3.

18.5.2.2 – Connections that are designed to yield shall be capable of maintaining 80 percent of their design strength at the deformation induced by the design displacement or shall use Type 2 mechanical splices.

18.5.2.3 – For elements of the connection that are not designed to yield, the required strength shall be based on 1.5 Sy of the yielding portion of the connection.

1905.1.4 ACI 318, Section 18.11.

Modify ACI 318, Section 18.11.2.1, to read as follows:

18.11.2.1 – Special structural walls constructed using precast concrete shall satisfy all the requirements of 18.10 for cast-in-place special structural walls in addition to 18.5.2.

1905.1.5 ACI 318, Section 18.13.1.1.

Reserved.

1905.1.6 ACI 318, Section 14.6.

Modify ACI 318, Section 14.6, by adding new Section 14.6.2 to read as follows:

14.6.2 – Detailed plain concrete structural walls.

14.6.2.1 – Detailed plain concrete structural walls are walls conforming to the requirements of ordinary structural plain concrete walls and 14.6.2.2.

14.6.2.2 – Reinforcement shall be provided as follows:

(a)Vertical reinforcement of at least 0.20 square inch (129 mm2) in cross-sectional area shall be provided continuously from support to support at each corner, at each side of each opening and at the ends of walls. The continuous vertical bar required beside an opening is permitted to substitute for one of the two No. 5 bars required by 14.6.1.

(b)Horizontal reinforcement at least 0.20 square inch (129 mm2) in cross-sectional area shall be provided:

1.Continuously at structurally connected roof and floor levels and at the top of walls;

2.At the bottom of load-bearing walls or in the top of foundations where doweled to the wall; and

3.At a maximum spacing of 120 inches (3048 mm).

Reinforcement at the top and bottom of openings, where used in determining the maximum spacing specified in Item 3 above, shall be continuous in the wall.

SECTION 1906
FOOTINGS FOR LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
1906.1 Plain concrete footings.

For Group R-3 occupancies and buildings of other occupancies less than two stories above grade plane of light-frame construction, the required thickness of plain concrete footings is permitted to be 6 inches (152 mm), provided that the footing does not extend more than 4 inches (102 mm) on either side of the supported wall.

SECTION 1907
MINIMUM SLAB PROVISIONS
1907.1 General.

The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground shall not be less than 31/2 inches (89 mm). A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.15 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor transmission through the floor slab.

Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:

1.	For detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group R-3, such as garages, utility buildings or other unheated facilities.

2.	For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3.

3.	For buildings of other occupancies where migration of moisture through the slab from below will not be detrimental to the intended occupancy of the building.

4.	For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork that will not be enclosed at a later date.

5.	Where approved based on local site conditions.

1907.2 Control and contraction joints.

Concrete slabs-on-ground shall be provided with control and contraction joints in accordance with ACI 360 or other approved industry standards. Control and contraction joints shall be designed by an architect or engineer.

Exception: One- and two-family dwellings and townhouses shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R506.2.4.

In addition to control and contraction joints, concrete slabs-on-ground shall be provided with crack containment complying with one of the following:

1.	Concrete slabs-on-ground shall contain micro- or macro-synthetic fiber reinforcement. Fiber length shall be 1/2 inch to 2.25 inches (13 to 56 mm) in length. Dosage amounts shall be from 0.75 to 3.0 pounds per cubic yard (0.45 to 1.78 kg/m3) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Synthetic fibers shall comply with ASTM C1116. The manufacturer or supplier shall provide certification of compliance with ASTM C1116 when requested by the building official; or,

2.	Concrete slabs-on-ground containing 6 × 6 W1.4 × W1.4 welded wire reinforcement fabric located in the middle to the upper one-third of the slab. Welded wire reinforcement fabric shall be supported with approved materials or supports at spacing of 3 feet (914 mm) or less. Welded plain wire reinforcement fabric for concrete shall conform to ASTM A1064/A1064M Carbon-Steel Wire and Welded Wire Reinforcement, Plain and Deformed, for Concrete.

Exception: Where random cracking is acceptable to the building owner, contraction joints are not required where crack containment complying with one of the above methods is provided.

SECTION 1908
SHOTCRETE
1908.1 General.

Shotcrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of ACI 318.

SECTION 1909
SPECIAL WIND PROVISIONS FOR CONCRETE
1909.1 Reinforced concrete.

The design and construction of reinforced concrete for buildings sited in areas where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is equal to or greater than 115 mph (45 m/s) in accordance with Figure 1609.3(1), 1609.3(2), 1609.3(3) or 1609.3(4) shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 or with Section 1609.1.1, Exception 1, as applicable, except as modified in this section.

1909.2 Insulated concrete form wall.

Insulated concrete form (ICF) wall construction for buildings shall be in accordance with ACI 318 or with Section 1609.1.1, Exception 1, as applicable.

1909.3 Gable endwalls.
1909.3.1 General.

Gable endwalls shall be structurally continuous between points of lateral support.

1909.3.2 Cathedral endwalls.

Gable endwalls adjacent to cathedral ceilings shall be structurally continuous from the uppermost floor to ceiling diaphragm or to the roof diaphragm.

SECTIONS 1910 through 1916

RESERVED

SECTION 1917
LIGHTWEIGHT INSULATING CONCRETE ROOFS
1917.1 Lightweight insulating concrete.

Material produced with or without aggregate additions to Portland cement, water and air to form a hardened material possessing insulating qualities, which, when oven dried shall have a unit weight no greater than 50 pcf (801 kg/m3).

1917.1.1 Aggregate lightweight insulating concrete.

Insulating concrete formulated predominantly with perlite or vermiculite aggregate having a minimum compressive strength of 125 psi (861.8 kPa) when tested in compliance with ASTM C495.

1917.1.2 Cellular lightweight insulating concrete.

Insulating concrete formulated by mixing a hydrated cementitious matrix around noninterconnecting air cells created by the addition of preformed foam formed from hydrolyzed proteins or synthetic surfactants. The cured cellular lightweight insulating concrete shall have minimum compressive strength of 160 psi (1103 kPa) when tested in compliance with ASTM C495 and C796.

1917.1.3 Cellular/aggregate (hybrid) lightweight insulating concrete.

Insulated concrete formulated by combining preformed foam with low density aggregates to impart properties of both aggregate and cellular lightweight insulating concrete. It shall have a minimum compressive strength of 200 psi (1379 kPa) when tested in compliance with ASTM C495 and C796.

1917.2 Inspection.
1917.2.1

Application of all lightweight insulating concrete roof decks shall be by applicators approved by the light-weight insulating concrete deck manufacturer. Product approval shall be required for all lightweight insulating concrete systems.

1917.2.2

The permit holder shall notify the building official 48 hours prior to the pouring of lightweight insulating concrete.

1917.2.3

The permit holder shall make available to the building official a job log with the following minimum items.

1.	Cast density recordings/hour.

2.	Product evaluation for application.

3.	Date and job locations identified.

4.	Results of any field test conducted.

1917.2.4

Once the roof deck system can support foot traffic, the building official shall have clear access and clear path at his option for inspection of lightweight insulating concrete.

1917.3 Testing.

The building official may require tests of the lightweight insulating concrete to confirm the fastener withdrawal resistance, compressive strength or drainage ability.

1917.3.1

Existing roof assemblies to receive lightweight insulating concrete other than galvanized G-90 steel deck or structural concrete deck shall be tested for uplift for adhesion to the substrate to confirm compliance with design pressure.

1917.4 Materials and limitations of use.

Lightweight insulating concrete, in conjunction with galvanized formed steel sheets, shall not be used as a roof deck in areas where highly corrosive chemicals are used or stored.

1917.4.1

Lightweight insulating concrete shall be poured over bottom slotted galvanized (G-90) steel decking as follows; cellular, 0.5-percent open; hybrid, 0.75-percent open, aggregate, 1.5-percent open. No lightweight insulating concrete shall be poured over a painted or nongalvanized steel deck.

1.	Lightweight insulating concrete over structural concrete slabs, twin tees, precast units or other nonventing substrates shall be vented to allow the escape of excess moisture.

1917.4.2

Minimum thickness of lightweight insulating concrete shall be 2 inches (51 mm) over the top plane of the substrate unless otherwise specified in the product approval. Lightweight insulating concrete shall be of sufficient thickness to receive the specified base ply fastener length.

1917.4.3

Galvanized coatings of formed steel sheets shall be in accordance with ASTM A525 with a minimum coating designation of G-90. Base steel shall conform to ASTM A446, Grade A, B, C, D or greater and ASTM A611 C, D or E.

1917.4.4

Chemical admixtures shall be in compliance with ASTM C494. Calcium chloride or any admixture containing chloride salts shall not be used in insulating concrete. Fiber reinforcement may be used to control cracking. Mineral admixtures shall conform to ASTM C618.

1917.4.5

Vermiculite or perlite shall be in compliance with ASTM C332, Group I. Foam concentrates shall be in compliance with ASTM C796 and ASTM C869.

1917.4.6

Mixing, placing and finishing shall be in compliance with the deck system product approval. Slurry coating, two-density casting and double casting shall be acceptable in accordance with the specific manufacturer’s recommendations.

1917.4.7

If the lightweight insulating concrete deck is to receive product approval for a direct-adhered roofing system, the deck surface shall be prepared to the requirements set forth in the roof system product approval.

1917.4.8

All base ply fasteners for use in lightweight insulating concrete roof decks shall have a product approval for use with the specific lightweight insulating concrete roof system in compliance with manufacturer’s recommendations and the design pressure of Section 1609 (Section 1620 for the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone).

1917.4.9

The lightweight insulating concrete fastener withdrawal shall have a minimum resistance for new pours of:

1.	60 pounds (267 N) in 28 days when the fastener is installed and allowed to age in the concrete.

2.	40 pounds (178 N) at time of roofing.

1917.4.10

Insulation board with lightweight insulating concrete shall conform to Type I expanded polystyrene insulation as defined in ASTM C578.

1.	Packaged insulation board delivered to the job site shall comply with the provisions of Section 2603.2.

2.	Installation of insulating board in conjunction with lightweight insulating concrete shall comply with uplift requirements set forth in Section 1609 (Section 1620 for the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone). Insulation panels shall be placed in a minimum 1/8-inch (3.2 mm) slurry of insulating concrete while the material is still in a plastic state. The insulating concrete shall be cast over the insulation boards according to the insulating concrete manufacturer’s product approval. Insulation panels shall be provided with holes and/or slots for keying and venting.

1917.4.11

Reinforcing mesh shall be provided as required to meet fire-rating and/or special structural design requirements. Refer to a specific product approval for the specific requirements applicable to the product being installed.

SECTION 1918

RESERVED

SECTION 1919
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GENERAL

RESERVED

SECTION 1920
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
STANDARDS

RESERVED

SECTION 1921
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
DEFINITIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 1922
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
MATERIALS

RESERVED

SECTION 1923
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CONCRETE QUALITY

RESERVED

SECTION 1924
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
MIXING AND PLACING CONCRETE

RESERVED

SECTION 1925
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FORMWORK, EMBEDDED PIPES AND
CONSTRUCTION JOINTS

RESERVED

SECTION 1926
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
DETAILS OF REINFORCEMENT

RESERVED

SECTION 1927
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PRECAST CONCRETE UNITS

RESERVED

SECTION 1928
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PRESTRESSED CONCRETE

RESERVED

SECTION 1929
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PNEUMATICALLY PLACED CONCRETE
(SHOTCRETE)

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-2]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201
GENERAL
201.1 Scope.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.

201.2 Interchangeability.

Words used in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

201.3 Terms defined in other codes.

Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; Florida Fire Prevention Code; Florida Building Code, Mechanical or Florida Building Code, Plumbing, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.

201.4 Terms not defined.

Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

SECTION 202
DEFINITIONS

INSIGHTS

24-HOUR BASIS. The actual time that a person is an occupant within a facility for the purpose of receiving care. It shall not include a facility that is open for 24 hours and is capable of providing care to someone visiting the facility during any segment of the 24 hours.

[BS] AAC MASONRY. Masonry made of autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) units, manufactured without internal reinforcement and bonded together using thin- or thick-bed mortar.

ACCESSIBLE. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and unobstructed way of egress travel from any accessible point in a building or facility to a public way.

ACCESSIBLE ROUTE. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

ACCESSIBLE UNIT. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

ACCESSORY COMPONENTS. Components used in the installation of pedestals and pedestrian deck panels or pavers of the exterior elevated flooring system. Accessory components are made of either plastic, metal or other approved materials. Accessory components may be used to provide lateral bracing of the pedestals, to provide vertical support, for leveling the pedestal, to restrain the pedestrian deck panels or pavers to the top of the pedestal, or for other system requirements.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is accessory to and incidental to that of a building or dwelling(s) and that is located on the same lot.

ACCREDITATION BODY. An approved, third-party organization that is independent of the grading and inspection agencies, and the lumber mills, and that initially accredits and subsequently monitors, on a continuing basis, the competency and performance of a grading or inspection agency related to carrying out specific tasks.

[A] ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or height of a building or structure.

[BS] ADHERED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured and supported through the adhesion of an approved bonding material applied to an approved backing.

[BS] ADOBE CONSTRUCTION. Construction in which the exterior load-bearing and nonload-bearing walls and partitions are of unfired clay masonry units, and floors, roofs and interior framing are wholly or partly of wood or other approved materials.

Adobe, stabilized. Unfired clay masonry units to which admixtures, such as emulsified asphalt, are added during the manufacturing process to limit the units’ water absorption so as to increase their durability.

Adobe, unstabilized. Unfired clay masonry units that do not meet the definition of “Adobe, stabilized.”

[F] AEROSOL CONTAINER. A metal can or a glass or plastic bottle designed to dispense an aerosol.

[F] AEROSOL PRODUCT. A product that is dispensed from an aerosol container by a propellant. Aerosol products shall be classified by means of the calculation of their chemical heats of combustion and shall be designated Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3.

Level 1 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is less than or equal to 8,600 British thermal units per pound (Btu/lb) (20 kJ/g).

Level 2 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is greater than 8,600 Btu/lb (20 kJ/g), but less than or equal to 13,000 Btu/lb (30 kJ/g).

Level 3 aerosol products. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is greater than 13,000 Btu/lb (30 kJ/g).

[BS] AGGREGATE. In roofing, crushed stone, crushed slag or water-worn gravel used for surfacing for roof coverings.

AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. Reserved.

AIR-IMPERMEABLE INSULATION. An insulation having an air permeance equal to or less than 0.02 l/s × m2 at 75 pa pressure differential tested in accordance with ASTM E2178 or ASTM E283.

AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE. A structure that uses air-pressurized membrane beams, arches or other elements to enclose space. Occupants of such a structure do not occupy the pressurized area used to support the structure.

AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE. A structure wherein the shape of the structure is attained by air pressure and occupants of the structure are within the elevated pressure area. Air-supported structures are of two basic types:

Double skin. Similar to a single skin, but with an attached liner that is separated from the outer skin and provides an airspace which serves for insulation, acoustic, aesthetic or similar purposes.

Single skin. Where there is only the single outer skin and the air pressure is directly against that skin.

AISLE. An unenclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel.

AISLE ACCESSWAY. That portion of an exit access that leads to an aisle.

[F] ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A fire alarm system component such as a bell, horn, speaker, light or text display that provides audible, tactile or visible outputs, or any combination thereof.

[F] ALARM SIGNAL. A signal indicating an emergency requiring immediate action, such as a signal indicative of fire.

[F] ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. A feature of automatic fire detection and alarm systems to reduce unwanted alarms wherein smoke detectors report alarm conditions for a minimum period of time, or confirm alarm conditions within a given time period, after being automatically reset, in order to be accepted as a valid alarm-initiation signal.

ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. A method of proportioning structural members, such that elastically computed stresses produced in the members by nominal loads do not exceed specified allowable stresses (also called “working stress design”).

[A] ALTERATION. Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition.

ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. A device that has a series of steps between 50 and 70 degrees (0.87 and 1.22 rad) from horizontal, usually attached to a center support rail in an alternating manner so that the user does not have both feet on the same level at the same time.

AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided.

ANCHOR BUILDING. An exterior perimeter building of a group other than H having direct access to a covered or open mall building but having required means of egress independent of the mall.

[BS] ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured with approved mechanical fasteners to an approved backing.

ANNULAR SPACE. The opening around the penetrating item.

[F] ANNUNCIATOR. A unit containing one or more indicator lamps, alphanumeric displays or other equivalent means in which each indication provides status information about a circuit, condition or location.

APPLICABLE GOVERNING BODY. A city, county, state, state agency or other political government subdivision or entity authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this code, as adopted or amended. Also applies to administrative authority.

[A] APPROVED. Acceptable to the building official.

[A] APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized agency that is regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, where such agency has been approved by the building official.

[BS] APPROVED FABRICATOR. An established and qualified person, firm or corporation approved by the building official pursuant to Chapter 17 of this code.

[A] APPROVED SOURCE. An independent person, firm or corporation, approved by the building official, who is competent and experienced in the application of engineering principles to materials, methods or systems analyses.

ARCHITECT. A Florida-registered architect.

[BS] AREA (for masonry).

Gross cross-sectional. The area delineated by the out-to-out specified dimensions of masonry in the plane under consideration.

Net cross-sectional. The area of masonry units, grout and mortar crossed by the plane under consideration based on out-to-out specified dimensions.

AREA, BUILDING. The area included within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.

AREA OF REFUGE. An area where persons unable to use stairways can remain temporarily to await instructions or assistance during emergency evacuation.

AREA OF SPORT ACTIVITY. That portion of an indoor or outdoor space where the play or practice of a sport occurs.

AREAWAY. A subsurface space adjacent to a building open at the top or protected at the top by a grating or guard.

ASSEMBLY SEATING, MULTILEVEL. See “Multilevel assembly seating.”

ATRIUM. A vertical space that is closed at the top connecting two or more stories in Group I-2 and I-3 Occupancies or three stories in all other occupancies.

ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof rafters.

[F] AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A notification appliance that alerts by the sense of hearing.

[F] AUTOMATIC. As applied to fire protection devices, a device or system providing an emergency function without the necessity for human intervention and activated as a result of a predetermined temperature rise, rate of temperature rise or combustion products.

[F] AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. An approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the area of a fire.

AUTOMATIC FLUSH BOLT. Door-locking hardware, installed on the inactive leaf of a pair of doors, which has a bolt that is extended automatically into the door frame or floor when the active leaf is closed after the inactive leaf, and which holds the inactive leaf in a closed position. When the active leaf is opened, the automatic flush bolt retracts the bolt or rod allowing the inactive leaf to be opened (see CONSTANT LATCHING BOLT, DEAD BOLT, MANUAL BOLT).

[F] AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that has initiation devices that utilize smoke detectors for protection of an area such as a room or space with detectors to provide early warning of fire.

[F] AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. An automatic sprinkler system, for fire protection purposes, is an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The system includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the system above the ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a structure or area, generally overhead, and to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.

[F] AUTOMATIC WATER MIST SYSTEM. A system consisting of a water supply, a pressure source, and a distribution piping system with attached nozzles, which, at or above a minimum operating pressure, defined by its listing, discharges water in fine droplets meeting the requirements of NFPA 750 for the purpose of the control, suppression or extinguishment of a fire. Such systems include wet-pipe, dry-pipe and preaction types. The systems are designed as engineered, preengineered, local-application or total-flooding systems.

[F] AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The root mean square, A-weighted sound pressure level measured over a 24-hour period, or the time any person is present, whichever time period is less.

AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is partially or wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight frame structure over which a covering is attached. An awning may be fixed or moveable, cantilevered, or otherwise entirely supported from a building.

BACKING. The wall or surface to which the veneer is secured.

BALANCED DOOR. A door equipped with double-pivoted hardware so designed as to cause a semicounterbalanced swing action when opening.

[F] BALED COTTON. A natural seed fiber wrapped in and secured with industry accepted materials, usually consisting of burlap, woven polypropylene, polyethylene or cotton or sheet polyethylene, and secured with steel, synthetic or wire bands or wire; also includes linters (lint removed from the cottonseed) and motes (residual materials from the ginning process).

[F] BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED. Cotton made into banded bales with a packing density of not less than 22 pounds per cubic foot (360 kg/m3), and dimensions complying with the following: a length of 55 inches (1397 mm), a width of 21 inches (533.4 mm) and a height of 27.6 to 35.4 inches (701 to 899 mm).

[BS] BALLAST. In roofing, ballast comes in the form of large stones or paver systems or light-weight interlocking paver systems and is used to provide uplift resistance for roofing systems that are not adhered or mechanically attached to the roof deck.

[F] BARRICADE. A structure that consists of a combination of walls, floor and roof, which is designed to withstand the rapid release of energy in an explosion and which is fully confined, partially vented or fully vented; or other effective method of shielding from explosive materials by a natural or artificial barrier.

Artificial barricade. An artificial mound or revetment a minimum thickness of 3 feet (914 mm).

Natural barricade. Natural features of the ground, such as hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures that require protection cannot be seen from the magazine or building containing explosives when the trees are bare of leaves.

[BS] BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

[BS] BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

[BS] BASEMENT (for flood loads). The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. This definition of “Basement” is limited in application to the provisions of Section 1612.

BASEMENT. A story that is not a story above grade plane (see “Story above grade plane”). This definition of “Basement” does not apply to the provisions of Section 1612 for flood loads.

BEARING WALL STRUCTURE. A building or other structure in which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily supported by walls.

[BS] BED JOINT. The horizontal layer of mortar on which a masonry unit is laid.

BLEACHERS. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated structural system and two or more rows high and is not a building element (see “Grandstand”).

BOARDING HOUSE. A building arranged or used for lodging for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family unit.

[F] BOILING POINT. The temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the atmospheric pressure of 14.7 pounds per square inch (psia) (101 kPa) or 760 mm of mercury. Where an accurate boiling point is unavailable for the material in question, or for mixtures which do not have a constant boiling point, for the purposes of this classification, the 20-percent evaporated point of a distillation performed in accordance with ASTM D86 shall be used as the boiling point of the liquid.

[BS] BRACED WALL LINE. A straight line through the building plan that represents the location of the lateral resistance provided by the wall bracing.

[BS] BRACED WALL PANEL. A full-height section of wall constructed to resist in-plane shear loads through interaction of framing members, sheathing material and anchors. The panel’s length meets the requirements of its particular bracing method and contributes toward the total amount of bracing required along its braced wall line.

BREAKOUT. For revolving doors, a process whereby wings or door panels can be pushed open manually for means of egress travel.

[BS] BRICK.

Calcium silicate (sand lime brick). A pressed and subsequently autoclaved unit that consists of sand and lime, with or without the inclusion of other materials.

Clay or shale. A solid or hollow masonry unit of clay or shale, usually formed into a rectangular prism, then burned or fired in a kiln; brick is a ceramic product.

Concrete. A concrete masonry unit made from Portland cement, water, and suitable aggregates, with or without the inclusion of other materials.

[A] BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

BUILDING AREA. See “Area, building.”

BUILDING ELEMENT. A fundamental component of building construction, listed in Table 601, which may or may not be of fire-resistance-rated construction and is constructed of materials based on the building type of construction.

BUILDING HEIGHT. See “Height, building.”

BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC (BIPV) PRODUCT. A building product that incorporates photovoltaic modules and functions as a component of the building envelope.

BUILDING LINE. The line established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.

[A] BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative.

[BS] BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.

BURIAL CHAMBER MAUSOLEUM. A family mausoleum consisting of six or fewer casket placement crypts plus a chamber to be used for loading of caskets from the interior of the mausoleum which is not below the level of the ground and which is substantially exposed above ground.

CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that provides weather protection, identity or decoration. A canopy is permitted to be structurally independent or supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides.

[F] CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS. A system supplying carbon dioxide (CO2) from a pressurized vessel through fixed pipes and nozzles. The system includes a manual- or automatic-actuating mechanism.

CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM. A device for the purpose of detecting carbon monoxide, that produces a distinct audible alarm, and is listed or labeled with the appropriate standard, either ANSI/UL 2034, Standard for Single and Multiple Station CO Alarms, or UL 2075, Gas and Vapor Detector Sensor, in accordance with its application.

CARE SUITE. In Group I-2 occupancies, a group of treatment rooms, care recipient sleeping rooms and the support rooms or spaces and circulation space within the suite where staff are in attendance for supervision of all care recipients within the suite, and the suite is in compliance with the requirements of Section 407.4.4.

[BS] CAST STONE. A building stone manufactured from Portland cement concrete precast and used as a trim, veneer or facing on or in buildings or structures.

[F] CEILING LIMIT. The maximum concentration of an airborne contaminant to which one may be exposed. The ceiling limits utilized are those published in DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000. The ceiling Recommended Exposure Limit (REL-C) concentrations published by the U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Threshold Limit Value—Ceiling (TLV-C) concentrations published by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), Ceiling Workplace Environmental Exposure Level (WEEL-Ceiling) Guides published by the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA), and other approved, consistent measures are allowed as surrogates for hazardous substances not listed in DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000.

CEILING RADIATION DAMPER. A listed device installed in a ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly to limit automatically the radiative heat transfer through an air inlet/outlet opening. Ceiling radiation dampers include air terminal units, ceiling dampers and ceiling air diffusers. Ceiling radiation dampers are classified for use in either static systems that will automatically shut down in the event of a fire, or in dynamic systems that continue to operate during a fire. A dynamic ceiling radiation damper is tested and rated for closure under elevated temperature airflow.

CELL (Group I-3 occupancy). A room within a housing unit in a detention or correctional facility used to confine inmates or prisoners.

[BS] CELL (masonry). A void space having a gross cross-sectional area greater than 11/2 square inches (967 mm2).

CELL TIER. Levels of cells vertically stacked above one another within a housing unit.

[BS] CEMENT PLASTER. A mixture of Portland or blended cement, Portland cement or blended cement and hydrated lime, masonry cement or plastic cement and aggregate and other approved materials as specified in this code.

CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET. A high-temperature mineral wool insulation material made of alumina-silica ceramic or calcium magnesium silicate soluble fibers and weighing 4 to 10 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (64 to 160 kg/m3).

CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate stating that materials and products meet specified standards or that work was done in compliance with approved construction documents.

CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Either of the following shall be considered as a change of occupancy where this code requires a greater degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or structure:

1.	Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.

2.	Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the levelof activity within, a building or structure.

CHAPEL MAUSOLEUM. A mausoleum for the public that has heat or air conditioning, with or without a committal area or office.

[M] CHIMNEY. A primarily vertical structure containing one or more flues, for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from a fuel-burning appliance to the outdoor atmosphere.

Factory-built chimney. A listed and labeled chimney composed of factory-made components, assembled in the field in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions and the conditions of the listing.

Masonry chimney. A field-constructed chimney composed of solid masonry units, bricks, stones, or concrete.

Metal chimney. A field-constructed chimney of metal.

[M] CHIMNEY TYPES.

High-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, high-heat appliances producing combustion gases in excess of 2000°F (1093°C) measured at the appliance flue outlet (see Section 2113.11.3).

Low-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, low-heat appliances producing combustion gases not in excess of 1000°F (538°C) under normal operating conditions, but capable of producing combustion gases of 1400°F (760°C) during intermittent forces firing for periods up to 1 hour. Temperatures shall be measured at the appliance flue outlet.

Masonry type. A field-constructed chimney of solid masonry units or stones.

Medium-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, medium-heat appliances producing combustion gases not exceeding 2000°F (1093°C) measured at the appliance flue outlet (see Section 2113.11.2).

CIRCULATION PATH. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

[F] CLEAN AGENT. Electrically nonconducting, volatile or gaseous fire extinguishant that does not leave a residue upon vaporation.

[E] CLIMATE ZONE. A geographical region that has been assigned climatic criteria as specified in Chapters 3CE and 3RE of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical care on less than a 24-hour basis to persons who are not rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided.

[F] CLOSED SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous material involving a closed vessel or system that remains closed during normal operations where vapors emitted by the product are not liberated outside of the vessel or system and the product is not exposed to the atmosphere during normal operations; and all uses of compressed gases. Examples of closed systems for solids and liquids include product conveyed through a piping system into a closed vessel, system or piece of equipment.

[BS] COASTAL A ZONE. Area within a special flood hazard area, landward of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped coastal high hazard areas. In a coastal A zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood conditions, the potential for breaking wave height shall be greater than or equal to 11/2 feet (457 mm). The inland limit of the coastal A zone is (a) the Limit of Moderate Wave Action if delineated on a FIRM, or (b) designated by the authority having jurisdiction.

[BS] COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. Area within the special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary dune along an open coast and any other area that is subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources, and shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or other flood hazard map as velocity Zone V, VO, VE or V1-30.

[BS] COLLAR JOINT. Vertical longitudinal space between wythes of masonry or between masonry wythe and backup construction that is permitted to be filled with mortar or grout.

[BS] COLLECTOR. A horizontal diaphragm element parallel and in line with the applied force that collects and transfers diaphragm shear forces to the vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system or distributes forces within the diaphragm, or both.

COLUMBARIUM. A permanent structure consisting of niches.

COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to close automatically upon the detection of heat and resist the passage of flame and smoke. The device is installed to operate automatically, controlled by a smoke detection system, and where required, is capable of being positioned from a fire command center.

COMBINED PILE RAFT. A geotechnical composite construction that combines the bearing effect of both foundation elements, raft and piles, by taking into account interactions between the foundation elements and the subsoil.

[F] COMBUSTIBLE DUST. Finely divided solid material that is 420 microns or less in diameter and which, when dispersed in air in the proper proportions, could be ignited by a flame, spark or other source of ignition. Combustible dust will pass through a U.S. No. 40 standard sieve.

[F] COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS. Readily ignitable and free-burning materials in a fibrous or shredded form, such as cocoa fiber, cloth, cotton, excelsior, hay, hemp, henequen, istle, jute, kapok, oakum, rags, sisal, Spanish moss, straw, tow, wastepaper, certain synthetic fibers or other like materials. This definition does not include densely packed baled cotton.

[F] COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup flash point at or above 100°F (38°C). Combustible liquids shall be subdivided as follows:

Class II. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above 100°F (38°C) and below 140°F (60°C).

Class IIIA. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above 140°F (60°C) and below 200°F (93°C).

Class IIIB. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above 200°F (93°C).

The category of combustible liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids.

COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used to transport passengers or property where the motor vehicle:

1.	Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds (4540 kg) or more; or

2.	Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.

COMMISSION. The Florida Building Commission, created per Section 553.74, Florida Statutes.

COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. That portion of exit access travel distance measured from the most remote point of each room, area or space to that point where the occupants have separate and distinct access to two exits or exit access doorways.

COMMON USE. Interior or exterior circulation paths, rooms, spaces or elements that are not for public use and are made available for the shared use of two or more people.

COMPANION CRYPT. A permanent chamber in a mausoleum for the containment of human remains of more than one individual.

[F] COMPRESSED GAS. A material, or mixture of materials, that:

1.	Is a gas at 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmosphere (psia) (101 kPa) of pressure; and

2.	Has a boiling point of 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) which is either liquefied, nonliquefied or in solution, except those gases which have no other health- or physical-hazard properties are not considered to be compressed until the pressure in the packaging exceeds 41 psia (282 kPa) at 68°F (20°C).

The states of a compressed gas are categorized as follows:

1.	Nonliquefied compressed gases are gases, other than those in solution, which are in a packaging under the charged pressure and are entirely gaseous at a temperature of 68°F (20°C).

2.	Liquefied compressed gases are gases that, in a packaging under the charged pressure, are partially liquid at a temperature of 68°F (20°C).

3.	Compressed gases in solution are nonliquefied gases that are dissolved in a solvent.

4.	Compressed gas mixtures consist of a mixture of two or more compressed gases contained in a packaging, the hazard properties of which are represented by the properties of the mixture as a whole.

[BS] CONCRETE.

Carbonate aggregate. Concrete made with aggregates consisting mainly of calcium or magnesium carbonate, such as limestone or dolomite, and containing 40 percent or less quartz, chert or flint.

Cellular. A lightweight insulating concrete made by mixing a preformed foam with Portland cement slurry and having a dry unit weight of approximately 30 pcf (480 kg/m3).

Lightweight aggregate. Concrete made with aggregates of expanded clay, shale, slag or slate or sintered fly ash or any natural lightweight aggregate meeting ASTM C330 and possessing equivalent fire-resistance properties and weighing 85 to 115 pcf (1360 to 1840 kg/m3).

Perlite. A lightweight insulating concrete having a dry unit weight of approximately 30 pcf (480 kg/m3) made with perlite concrete aggregate. Perlite aggregate is produced from a volcanic rock which, when heated, expands to form a glass-like material of cellular structure.

Sand-lightweight. Concrete made with a combination of expanded clay, shale, slag, slate, sintered fly ash, or any natural lightweight aggregate meeting ASTM C330 and possessing equivalent fire-resistance properties and natural sand. Its unit weight is generally between 105 and 120 pcf (1680 and 1920 kg/m3).

Siliceous aggregate. Concrete made with normal-weight aggregates consisting mainly of silica or compounds other than calcium or magnesium carbonate, which contains more than 40-percent quartz, chert or flint.

Vermiculite. A light weight insulating concrete made with vermiculite concrete aggregate which is laminated micaceous material produced by expanding the ore at high temperatures. When added to a Portland cement slurry the resulting concrete has a dry unit weight of approximately 30 pcf (480 kg/m3).

CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof that contains sleeping units where residents share bathroom or kitchen facilities, or both.

CONSTANT LATCHING BOLT. Door-locking hardware installed on the inactive leaf of a pair of doors, which has a bolt that automatically latches into the door frame or the floor, and which holds the inactive leaf in a closed position. The latch bolt is retracted manually to allow the inactive leaf to be opened (see AUTOMATIC FLUSH BOLT, DEAD BOLT, MANUAL BOLT).

[F] CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. A designated location at a facility staffed by trained personnel on a continuous basis where alarm or supervisory signals are monitored and facilities are provided for notification of the fire department or other emergency services.

[A] CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. Written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of a project necessary for obtaining a building permit.

CONSTRUCTION TYPES. See Section 602.

Type I. See Section 602.2.

Type II. See Section 602.2.

Type III. See Section 602.3.

Type IV. See Section 602.4.

Type V. See Section 602.5.

[F] CONTROL AREA. Spaces within a building where quantities of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area are stored, dispensed, used or handled. See the definition of “Outdoor control area” in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH MATERIAL. A self-compacted, cementitious material used primarily as a backfill in place of compacted fill.

CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. Construction whose primary structural elements are formed by a system of repetitive wood-framing members. See Chapter 23 for conventional light-frame construction provisions.

CORNICE. A projecting horizontal molded element located at or near the top of an architectural feature.

CORRIDOR. An enclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel.

CORRIDOR, OPEN-ENDED. See “Open-ended corridor.”

CORRIDOR DAMPER. A listed device intended for use where air ducts penetrate or terminate at horizontal openings in the ceilings of fire-resistance-rated corridors, where the corridor ceiling is permitted to be constructed as required for the corridor walls.

[BS] CORROSION RESISTANCE. The ability of a material to withstand deterioration of its surface or its properties when exposed to its environment.

[F] CORROSIVE. A chemical that causes visible destruction of, or irreversible alterations in, living tissue by chemical action at the point of contact. A chemical shall be considered corrosive if, when tested on the intact skin of albino rabbits by the method described in DOTn 49 CFR, Part 173.137, such chemical destroys or changes irreversibly the structure of the tissue at the point of contact following an exposure period of 4 hours. This term does not refer to action on inanimate surfaces.

COURT. An open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky, bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls or other enclosing devices.

COVERED MALL BUILDING. A single building enclosing a number of tenants and occupants, such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, passenger transportation terminals, offices and other similar uses wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more malls. Anchor buildings shall not be considered as a part of the covered mall building. The term “covered mall building” shall include open mall buildings as defined below.

Mall. A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a covered mall building that serves as access for two or more tenants and not to exceed three levels that are open to each other. The term “mall” shall include open malls as defined below.

Open mall. An unroofed common pedestrian way serving a number of tenants not exceeding three levels. Circulation at levels above grade shall be permitted to include open exterior balconies leading to exits discharging at grade.

Open mall building. Several structures housing a number of tenants, such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, offices, and other similar uses, wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more open malls. Anchor buildings are not considered as a part of the open mall building.

[BS] CRIPPLE WALL. A framed stud wall extending from the top of the foundation to the underside of floor framing for the lowest occupied floor level.

[F] CRITICAL CIRCUIT. A circuit that requires continuous operation to ensure safety of the structure and occupants.

[BS] CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER. A prefabricated engineered wood product consisting of not less than three layers of solid-sawn lumber or structural composite lumber where the adjacent layers are cross oriented and bonded with structural adhesive to form a solid wood element.

[F] CRYOGENIC FLUID. A liquid having a boiling point lower than -150°F (-101°C) at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmosphere (psia) (an absolute pressure of 101 kPa).

CRYPT. A permanent chamber in a mausoleum for the containment of human remains.

CUSTODIAL CARE. Assistance with day-to-day living tasks; such as assistance with cooking, taking medication, bathing, using toilet facilities and other tasks of daily living. Custodial care includes persons receiving care who have the ability to respond to emergency situations and evacuate at a slower rate and/or who have mental and psychiatric complications.

[BS] DALLE GLASS. A decorative composite glazing material made of individual pieces of glass that are embedded in a cast matrix of concrete or epoxy.

DAMPER. See “Ceiling radiation damper,” “Combination fire/smoke damper,” “Corridor damper,” “Fire damper” and “Smoke damper.”

[BS] DANGEROUS. Any building, structure or portion thereof that meets any of the conditions described below shall be deemed dangerous:

1.	The building or structure has collapsed, has partially collapsed, has moved off its foundation or lacks the necessary support of the ground.

2.	There exists a significant risk of collapse, detachment or dislodgment of any portion, member, appurtenance or ornamentation of the building or structure under permanent, routine, or frequent loads; under actual loads already in effect; or under wind, rain, flood, or other environmental loads when such loads are imminent.

[F] DAY BOX. A portable magazine designed to hold explosive materials constructed in accordance with the requirements for a Type 3 magazine as defined and classified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

DEAD BOLT. Door-locking hardware with a bolt which is extended and retracted by action of the lock mechanism (see AUTOMATIC FLUSH BOLT, CONSTANT LATCHING BOLT, MANUAL BOLT).

[BS] DEAD LOAD. The weight of materials of construction incorporated into the building, including but not limited to walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, finishes, cladding and other similarly incorporated architectural and structural items, and the weight of fixed service equipment, including cranes and material-handling systems.

DECORATIVE CEMENTITIOUS FINISH. A skim coat, as defined in ASTM C926, of Portland cement-based plaster applied to concrete or masonry surfaces intended for cosmetic purposes.

[BS] DECORATIVE GLASS. A carved, leaded or Dalle glass or glazing material whose purpose is decorative or artistic, not functional; whose coloring, texture or other design qualities or components cannot be removed without destroying the glazing material and whose surface, or assembly into which it is incorporated, is divided into segments.

[F] DECORATIVE MATERIALS. All materials applied over the building interior finish for decorative, acoustical or other effect including, but not limited to, curtains, draperies, fabrics and streamers; and all other materials utilized for decorative effect including, but not limited to, bulletin boards, artwork, posters, photographs, batting, cloth, cotton, hay, stalks, straw, vines, leaves, trees, moss and similar items, foam plastics and materials containing foam plastics. Decorative materials do not include wall coverings, ceiling coverings, floor coverings, ordinary window shades, interior finish and materials 0.025 inch (0.64 mm) or less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a substrate.

[BS] DEEP FOUNDATION. A deep foundation is a foundation element that does not satisfy the definition of a shallow foundation.

DEFEND-IN-PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building.

[A] DEFERRED SUBMITTAL. Those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.

[F] DEFLAGRATION. An exothermic reaction, such as the extremely rapid oxidation of a flammable dust or vapor in air, in which the reaction progresses through the unburned material at a rate less than the velocity of sound. A deflagration can have an explosive effect.

DELAYED ACTION CLOSER. Self-closing device that incorporates a delay prior to the initiation of closing. Delayed action closers are mechanical devices with an adjustable delay.

[F] DELUGE SYSTEM. A sprinkler system employing open sprinklers attached to a piping system connected to a water supply through a valve that is opened by the operation of a detection system installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When this valve opens, water flows into the piping system and discharges from all sprinklers attached thereto.

[BS] DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas:

1.	Area with a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year.

2.	Area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

[BS] DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where a depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet (610 mm).

[A] DESIGN PROFESSIONAL, REGISTERED. See “Registered design professional.”

[A] DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE, REGISTERED. See “Registered design professional in responsible charge.”

[BS] DESIGN STRENGTH. The product of the nominal strength and a resistance factor (or strength reduction factor).

[F] DETACHED BUILDING. A separate single-story building, without a basement or crawl space, used for the storage or use of hazardous materials and located an approved distance from all structures.

[BS] DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.1.1

DETECTABLE WARNING. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

[F] DETECTOR, HEAT. A fire detector that senses heat—either abnormally high temperature or rate of rise, or both.

[F] DETONATION. An exothermic reaction characterized by the presence of a shock wave in the material which establishes and maintains the reaction. The reaction zone progresses through the material at a rate greater than the velocity of sound. The principal heating mechanism is one of shock compression. Detonations have an explosive effect.

DETOXIFICATION FACILITIES. Facilities that provide treatment for substance abuse, serving care recipients who are incapable of self-preservation or who are harmful to themselves or others.

[BS] DIAPHRAGM. A horizontal or sloped system acting to transmit lateral forces to vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system. When the term “diaphragm” is used, it shall include horizontal bracing systems.

Diaphragm, blocked. In light-frame construction, a diaphragm in which all sheathing edges not occurring on a framing member are supported on and fastened to blocking.

Diaphragm boundary. In light-frame construction, a location where shear is transferred into or out of the diaphragm sheathing. Transfer is either to a boundary element or to another force-resisting element.

Diaphragm chord. A diaphragm boundary element perpendicular to the applied load that is assumed to take axial stresses due to the diaphragm moment.

Diaphragm, unblocked. A diaphragm that has edge nailing at supporting members only. Blocking between supporting structural members at panel edges is not included. Diaphragm panels are field nailed to supporting members.

DIMENSIONS (for Chapter 21).

Nominal. The specified dimension plus an allowance for the joints with which the units are to be laid. Nominal dimensions are usually stated in whole numbers. Thickness is given first, followed by height and then length.

Specified. Dimensions specified for the manufacture or construction of a unit, joint or element.

DIRECT ACCESS. A path of travel from a space to an immediately adjacent space through an opening in the common wall between the two spaces.

[F] DISPENSING. The pouring or transferring of any material from a container, tank or similar vessel, whereby vapors, dusts, fumes, mists or gases are liberated to the atmosphere.

DOOR, BALANCED. See “Balanced door.”

DOOR, LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED. See “Low-energy power-operated door.”

DOOR, POWER-ASSISTED. See “Power-assisted door.”

DOOR, POWER-OPERATED. See “Power-operated door.”

DOORWAY, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access doorway.”

DORMITORY. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons not members of the same family group, under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories or fraternity houses.

DRAFTSTOP. A material, device or construction installed to restrict the movement of air within open spaces of concealed areas of building components such as crawl spaces, floor/ceiling assemblies, roof/ceiling assemblies and attics.

[BS] DRAG STRUT. See “Collector.”

[BS] DRILLED SHAFT. A cast-in-place deep foundation element, also referred to as caisson, drilled pier and bored pile, constructed by drilling a hole (with or without permanent casing or drilling fluid) into soil or rock and filling it with fluid concrete after the drilling equipment is removed.

Socketed drilled shaft. A drilled shaft with a permanent pipe or tube casing that extends down to bedrock and an uncased socket drilled into the bedrock.

[F] DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT. A powder composed of small particles, usually of sodium bicarbonate, potassium bicarbonate, urea-potassium-based bicarbonate, potassium chloride or monoammonium phosphate, with added particulate material supplemented by special treatment to provide resistance to packing, resistance to moisture absorption (caking) and the proper flow capabilities.

[BS] DRY FLOODPROOFING. A combination of design modifications that results in a building or structure, including the attendant utilities and equipment and sanitary facilities, being water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capacity to resist loads as identified in ASCE 7.

DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit where all permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking are contained in a single room.

DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, MULTISTORY. See “Multistory unit.”

DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE A. Reserved.

DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, TYPE B. Reserved.

EGRESS COURT. A court or yard which provides access to a public way for one or more exits.

ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT PROTECTIVE SYSTEM. A specific construction of devices, materials, or coatings installed as a fire-resistive barrier system applied to electrical system components, such as cable trays, conduits and other raceways, open run cables and conductors, cables, and conductors.

[F] ELEVATOR GROUP. A grouping of elevators in a building located adjacent or directly across from one another that responds to common hall call buttons.

[F] EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. A system to provide indication and warning of emergency situations involving hazardous materials.

[F] EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION. An approved location on the premises where signals from emergency equipment are received and which is staffed by trained personnel.

EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An operable exterior window, door or other similar device that provides for a means of escape and access for rescue in the event of an emergency.

[F] EMERGENCY VOICE/ALARM COMMUNICATIONS. Dedicated manual or automatic facilities for originating and distributing voice instructions, as well as alert and evacuation signals pertaining to a fire emergency, to the occupants of a building.

[F] EMERGENCY POWER SYSTEM. A source of automatic electric power of a required capacity and duration to operate required life safety, fire alarm, detection and ventilation systems in the event of a failure of the primary power. Emergency power systems are required for electrical loads where interruption of the primary power could result in loss of human life or serious injuries.

EMITTANCE. The ratio of radiant heat flux emitted by a specimen to that emitted by a blackbody at the same temperature and under the same conditions.

EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

Local enforcement agency. An agency of local government, a local school board, a community college board of trustees, or a university board of trustees in the State University System with jurisdiction to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the codes which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification, or demolition of public or private buildings, structures, or facilities.

State enforcement agency. The agency of state government with authority to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the codes, as required by Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification, or demolition of public or private buildings, structures, or facilities.

ENGINEER. A Florida-registered engineer.

[BS] ENGINEERED WOOD RIM BOARD. A full-depth structural composite lumber, wood structural panel, structural glued laminated timber or prefabricated wood I-joist member designed to transfer horizontal (shear) and vertical (compression) loads, provide attachment for diaphragm sheathing, siding and exterior deck ledgers, and provide lateral support at the ends of floor or roof joists or rafters.

ENTRANCE, PUBLIC. See “Public entrance.”

ENTRANCE, RESTRICTED. See “Restricted entrance.”

ENTRANCE, SERVICE. See “Service entrance.”

EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. An unoccupied, elevated platform used exclusively for mechanical systems or industrial process equipment, including the associated elevated walkways, stairways, alternating tread devices and ladders necessary to access the platform (see Section 505.3).

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. Buildings and other structures that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind or tornado.

[F] EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE. An appliance or piece of equipment that consists of a top, a back and two sides providing a means of local exhaust for capturing gases, fumes, vapors and mists. Such enclosures include laboratory hoods, exhaust fume hoods and similar appliances and equipment used to locally retain and exhaust the gases, fumes, vapors and mists that could be released. Rooms or areas provided with general ventilation, in themselves, are not exhausted enclosures.

EXISTING BUILDING. A building erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

[BS] EXISTING STRUCTURE. A structure erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

EXIT. That portion of a means of egress system between the exit access and the exit discharge or public way. Exit components include exterior exit doors at the level of exit discharge, interior exit stairways and ramps, exit passageways, exterior exit stairways and ramps and horizontal exits.

EXIT ACCESS. That portion of a means of egress system that leads from any occupied portion of a building or structure to an exit.

EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY. A door or access point along the path of egress travel from an occupied room, area or space where the path of egress enters an intervening room, corridor, exit access stairway or ramp.

EXIT ACCESS RAMP. A ramp within the exit access portion of the means of egress system.

EXIT ACCESS STAIRWAY. A stairway with the exit access portion of the means of egress system.

EXIT DISCHARGE. That portion of a means of egress system between the termination of an exit and a public way.

EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF. The story at the point at which an exit terminates and an exit discharge begins.

EXIT, HORIZONTAL. See “Horizontal exit.”

EXIT PASSAGEWAY. An exit component that is separated from other interior spaces of a building or structure by fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives, and provides for a protected path of egress travel in a horizontal direction to an exit or to the exit discharge.

EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING. Wall covering consisting of a woven textile backing, an expanded vinyl base coat layer and a nonexpanded vinyl skin coat. The expanded base coat layer is a homogeneous vinyl layer that contains a blowing agent. During processing, the blowing agent decomposes, causing this layer to expand by forming closed cells. The total thickness of the wall covering is approximately 0.055 inch to 0.070 inch (1.4 mm to 1.78 mm).

[F] EXPLOSION. An effect produced by the sudden violent expansion of gases, which may be accompanied by a shock wave or disruption, or both, of enclosing materials or structures. An explosion could result from any of the following:

1.	Chemical changes such as rapid oxidation, deflagration or detonation, decomposition of molecules and runaway polymerization (usually detonations).

2.	Physical changes such as pressure tank ruptures.

3.	Atomic changes (nuclear fission or fusion).

[F] EXPLOSIVE. A chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, igniters and display fireworks, 1.3G.

 The term “explosive” includes any material determined to be within the scope of USC Title 18: Chapter 40 and also includes any material classified as an explosive other than consumer fireworks, 1.4G by the hazardous materials regulations of DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-185.

High explosive. Explosive material, such as dynamite, which can be caused to detonate by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined.

Low explosive. Explosive material that will burn or deflagrate when ignited. It is characterized by a rate of reaction that is less than the speed of sound. Examples of low explosives include, but are not limited to, black powder; safety fuse; igniters; igniter cord; fuse lighters; fireworks, 1.3G and propellants, 1.3C.

Mass-detonating explosives. Division 1.1, 1.2 and 1.5 explosives alone or in combination, or loaded into various types of ammunition or containers, most of which can be expected to explode virtually instantaneously when a small portion is subjected to fire, severe concussion, impact, the impulse of an initiating agent or the effect of a considerable discharge of energy from without. Materials that react in this manner represent a mass explosion hazard. Such an explosive will normally cause severe structural damage to adjacent objects. Explosive propagation could occur immediately to other items of ammunition and explosives stored sufficiently close to and not adequately protected from the initially exploding pile with a time interval short enough so that two or more quantities must be considered as one for quantity-distance purposes.

UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives. The former classification system used by DOTn included the terms “high” and “low” explosives as defined herein. The following terms further define explosives under the current system applied by DOTn for all explosive materials defined as hazard Class 1 materials. Compatibility group letters are used in concert with the division to specify further limitations on each division noted (i.e., the letter G identifies the material as a pyrotechnic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic substance and similar materials).

Division 1.1. Explosives that have a mass explosion hazard. A mass explosion is one which affects almost the entire load instantaneously.

Division 1.2. Explosives that have a projection hazard but not a mass explosion hazard.

Division 1.3. Explosives that have a fire hazard and either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard or both, but not a mass explosion hazard.

Division 1.4. Explosives that pose a minor explosion hazard. The explosive effects are largely confined to the package and no projection of fragments of appreciable size or range is to be expected. An external fire must not cause virtually instantaneous explosion of almost the entire contents of the package.

Division 1.5. Very insensitive explosives. This division is comprised of substances that have a mass explosion hazard, but that are so insensitive there is very little probability of initiation or of transition from burning to detonation under normal conditions of transport.

Division 1.6. Extremely insensitive articles which do not have a mass explosion hazard. This division is comprised of articles that contain only extremely insensitive detonating substances and which demonstrate a negligible probability of accidental initiation or propagation.

EXTERIOR ELEVATED FLOORING SYSTEM. An assembly installed over a roof assembly or other exterior supporting structure consisting of a walking surface of pedestrian deck panels or pavers mounted on pedestals using other accessory components, mechanical fasteners or adhesives as required by the manufacturer’s installation instructions for attaching pedestrian deck panels or pavers to pedestals and other accessory components. Exterior elevated flooring systems may have pedestals attached to the roof or other supporting structure or pedestals installed independently of the roof or supporting structure with the restraint of the pavers at the perimeter and discontinuous edges. Exterior elevated flooring systems are not part of the roof assembly.

Attached systems. Attached systems are those where pedestals are attached to the roof or other supporting structure by mechanical fasteners, adhesives or both.

Independent systems. Independent systems are those where pedestals are not attached to the roof but rest on the roof or other supporting structure.

EXTERIOR EXIT RAMP. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS). EIFS are nonstructural, nonload-bearing, exterior wall cladding systems that consist of an insulation board attached either adhesively or mechanically, or both, to the substrate; an integrally reinforced base coat and a textured protective finish coat.

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE. An EIFS that incorporates a means of drainage applied over a water-resistive barrier.

EXTERIOR SURFACES. Weather-exposed surfaces.

EXTERIOR WALL. A wall, bearing or nonbearing, that is used as an enclosing wall for a building, other than a fire wall, and that has a slope of 60 degrees (1.05 rad) or greater with the horizontal plane.

EXTERIOR WALL COVERING. A material or assembly of materials applied on the exterior side of exterior walls for the purpose of providing a weather-resisting barrier, insulation or for aesthetics, including but not limited to, veneers, siding, exterior insulation and finish systems, architectural trim and embellishments such as cornices, soffits, fascias, gutters and leaders.

EXTERIOR WALL ENVELOPE. A system or assembly of exterior wall components, including exterior wall finish materials, that provides protection of the building structural members, including framing and sheathing materials, and conditioned interior space, from the detrimental effects of the exterior environment.

F RATING. The time period that the through-penetration firestop system limits the spread of fire through the penetration when tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479.

FABRIC PARTITION. A partition consisting of a finished surface made of fabric, without a continuous rigid backing, that is directly attached to a framing system in which the vertical framing members are spaced greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.

[BS] FABRICATED ITEM. Structural, load-bearing or lateral load-resisting members of assemblies consisting of materials assembled prior to installation in a building or structure, or subjected to operations such as heat treatment, thermal cutting, cold working or reforming after manufacture and prior to installation in a building or structure. Materials produced in accordance with standards referenced by this code, such as rolled structural steel shapes, steel reinforcing bars, masonry units and wood structural panels, or in accordance with a referenced standard that provides requirements for quality control done under the supervision of a third-party quality control agency, are not “fabricated items.”

[F] FABRICATION AREA. An area within a semiconductor fabrication facility and related research and development areas in which there are processes using hazardous production materials. Such areas are allowed to include ancillary rooms or areas such as dressing rooms and offices that are directly related to the fabrication area processes.

[A] FACILITY. All or any portion of buildings, structures, site improvements, elements and pedestrian or vehicular routes located on a site.

[BS] FACTORED LOAD. The product of a nominal load and a load factor.

FAMILY MAUSOLEUM. A mausoleum for the private use of a family or group of family members.

FENESTRATION. Products classified as either vertical fenestration or skylights and sloped glazing, installed in such a manner as to preserve the weather-resistant barrier of the wall or roof in which they are installed. Fenestration includes products with glass or other transparent or translucent materials.

FENESTRATION, VERTICAL. Windows that are fixed or movable, opaque doors, glazed doors, glazed block and combination opaque and glazed doors installed in a wall at less than 15 degrees from vertical.

[BS] FIBER-CEMENT (BACKER BOARD, SIDING, SOFFIT, TRIM AND UNDERLAYMENT) PRODUCTS. Manufactured thin section composites of hydraulic cementitious matrices and discrete nonasbestos fibers.

FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMER. A polymeric composite material consisting of reinforcement fibers, such as glass, impregnated with a fiber-binding polymer which is then molded and hardened. Fiber-reinforced polymers are permitted to contain cores laminated between fiber-reinforced polymer facings.

[BS] FIBERBOARD. A fibrous, homogeneous panel made from lignocellulosic fibers (usually wood or cane) and having a density of less than 31 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (497 kg/m3) but more than 10 pcf (160 kg/m3).

[BS] FIELD NAILING. See “Nailing, field.”

FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. See “Manual fire alarm box.”

[F] FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. A system component that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm devices and may be capable of supplying power to detection devices and transponders or off-premises transmitters. The control unit may be capable of providing a transfer of power to the notification appliances and transfer of condition to relays or devices.

[F] FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. A signal initiated by a fire alarm-initiating device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch or other device whose activation is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature.

[F] FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals.

FIRE AREA. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by fire walls, fire barriers, exterior walls or horizontal assemblies of a building. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the fire area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor next above.

FIRE BARRIER. A fire-resistance-rated wall assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which continuity is maintained.

[F] FIRE COMMAND CENTER. The principal attended or unattended location where the status of detection, alarm communications and control systems is displayed, and from which the systems can be manually controlled.

FIRE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to close automatically upon detection of heat and resist the passage of flame. Fire dampers are classified for use in either static systems that will automatically shut down in the event of a fire, or in dynamic systems that continue to operate during a fire. A dynamic fire damper is tested and rated for closure under elevated temperature airflow.

[F] FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. A device designed to detect the presence of a fire signature and to initiate action.

FIRE DOOR. The door component of a fire door assembly.

FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. Any combination of a fire door, frame, hardware and other accessories that together provide a specific degree of fire protection to the opening.

FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY, FLOOR. See “Floor fire door assembly.”

FIRE EXIT HARDWARE. Panic hardware that is listed for use on fire door assemblies.

[F] FIRE LANE. A road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

FIRE PARTITION. A vertical assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which openings are protected.

FIRE PROTECTION RATING. The period of time that an opening protective will maintain the ability to confine a fire as determined by tests specified in Section 716. Ratings are stated in hours or minutes.

[F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. Approved devices, equipment and systems or combinations of systems used to detect a fire, activate an alarm, extinguish or control a fire, control or manage smoke and products of a fire or any combination thereof.

FIRE RESISTANCE. That property of materials or their assemblies that prevents or retards the passage of excessive heat, hot gases or flames under conditions of use.

[F] FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. Building and fire control functions that are intended to increase the level of life safety for occupants or to control the spread of harmful effects of fire.

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from the building face to one of the following:

1.	The closest interior lot line.

2.	To the centerline of a street, an alley or public way.

3.	To an imaginary line between two buildings on the lot.

The distance shall be measured at right angles from the face of the wall.

FIRE WALL. A fire-resistance-rated wall having protected openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to or through the roof, with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall.

FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY. A window constructed and glazed to give protection against the passage of fire.

FIREBLOCKING. Building materials, or materials approved for use as fireblocking, installed to resist the free passage of flame to other areas of the building through concealed spaces.

[M] FIREPLACE. A hearth and fire chamber or similar prepared place in which a fire may be made and which is built in conjunction with a chimney.

FIREPLACE THROAT. The opening between the top of the firebox and the smoke chamber.

FIRE-RATED GLAZING. Glazing with either a fire protection rating or a fire-resistance rating.

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. The period of time a building element, component or assembly maintains the ability to confine a fire, continues to perform a given structural function, or both, as determined by the tests, or the methods based on tests, prescribed in Section 703.

FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM. An assemblage of specific materials or products that are designed, tested and fire-resistance rated in accordance with either ASTM E1966 or UL 2079 to resist for a prescribed period of time the passage of fire through joints made in or between fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

FIRESTOP, MEMBRANE-PENETRATION. See “Membrane-penetration firestop.”

FIRESTOP, PENETRATION. See “Penetration firestop.”

FIRESTOP SYSTEM, THROUGH-PENETRATION. See “Through-penetration firestop system.”

[F] FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration or detonation that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks.

Fireworks, 1.3G. Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not limited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2 grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits for classification as 1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks are also described as fireworks, UN0335 by the DOTn.

Fireworks, 1.4G. Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks which comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the DOTn for fireworks, UN0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: Parts 1500 and 1507, are not explosive materials for the purpose of this code.

FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). A commercial business granted the right by the airport sponsor to operate on an airport and provide aeronautical services, such as fueling, hangaring, tie-down and parking, aircraft rental, aircraft maintenance and flight instruction.

FIXED SEATING. Furniture or fixture designed and installed for the use of sitting and secured in place including bench-type seats and seats with or without backs or arm rests.

FLAME SPREAD. The propagation of flame over a surface.

FLAME SPREAD INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from visual measurements of the spread of flame versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

[F] FLAMMABLE GAS. A material that is a gas at 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 pounds per square inch atmosphere (psia) (101 kPa) of pressure [a material that has a boiling point of 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa)] which:

1.	Is ignitable at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) when in a mixture of 13 percent or less by volume with air; or

2.	Has a flammable range at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) with air of at least 12 percent, regardless of the lower limit.

 The limits specified shall be determined at 14.7 psi (101 kPa) of pressure and a temperature of 68°F (20°C) in accordance with ASTM E681.

[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. A liquefied compressed gas which, under a charged pressure, is partially liquid at a temperature of 68°F (20°C) and which is flammable.

[F] FLAMMABLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup flash point below 100°F (38°C). Flammable liquids are further categorized into a group known as Class I liquids. The Class I category is subdivided as follows:

Class IA. Liquids having a flash point below 73°F (23°C) and a boiling point below 100°F (38°C).

Class IB. Liquids having a flash point below 73°F (23°C) and a boiling point at or above 100°F (38°C).

Class IC. Liquids having a flash point at or above 73°F (23°C) and below 100°F (38°C). The category of flammable liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids.

[F] FLAMMABLE MATERIAL. A material capable of being readily ignited from common sources of heat or at a temperature of 600°F (316°C) or less.

[F] FLAMMABLE SOLID. A solid, other than a blasting agent or explosive, that is capable of causing fire through friction, absorption or moisture, spontaneous chemical change, or retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which has an ignition temperature below 212°F (100°C) or which burns so vigorously and persistently when ignited as to create a serious hazard. A chemical shall be considered a flammable solid as determined in accordance with the test method of CPSC 16 CFR; Part 1500.44, if it ignites and burns with a self-sustained flame at a rate greater than 0.1 inch (2.5 mm) per second along its major axis.

[F] FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES. The concentration of flammable constituents in air that exceeds 25 percent of their lower flammable limit (LFL).

[F] FLASH POINT. The minimum temperature in degrees Fahrenheit at which a liquid will give off sufficient vapors to form an ignitable mixture with air near the surface or in the container, but will not sustain combustion. The flash point of a liquid shall be determined by appropriate test procedure and apparatus as specified in ASTM D56, ASTM D93 or ASTM D3278.

FLIGHT. A continuous run of rectangular treads, winders or combination thereof from one landing to another.

FLOATING RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A structure primarily designed or constructed as a living unit, built on a floating base, which is not designed primarily as a vessel, is not self-propelled although it may be towed about from place to place, and is primarily intended to be anchored or otherwise moored in a fixed location.

[BS] FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from:

1.	The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

2.	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

[BS] FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.

FLOOD, DESIGN. See “Design flood.”

FLOOD ELEVATION, DESIGN. See “Design flood elevation.”

[BS] FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas:

1.	The area within a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year.

2.	The area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, SPECIAL. See “Special flood hazard area.”

[BS] FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

[BS] FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency containing the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), the water surface elevation of the base flood and supporting technical data.

[BS] FLOODWAY. The channel of the river, creek or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, ramps, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts.

FLOOR AREA, NET. The actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms and closets.

FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. A combination of a fire door, a frame, hardware and other accessories installed in a horizontal plane, which together provide a specific degree of fire protection to a through-opening in a fire-resistance-rated floor (see Section 712.1.13.1).

[F] FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A special system discharging a foam made from concentrates, either mechanically or chemically, over the area to be protected.

FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. A plastic that is intentionally expanded by the use of a foaming agent to produce a reduced-density plastic containing voids consisting of open or closed cells distributed throughout the plastic for thermal insulating or acoustical purposes and that has a density less than 20 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (320 kg/m3).

FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING. Tiered seating having an overall shape and size that is capable of being reduced for purposes of moving or storing and is not a building element.

FOOD COURT. A public seating area located in the mall that serves adjacent food preparation tenant spaces.

FOSTER CARE FACILITIES. Facilities that provide care to more than five children, 21/2 years of age or less.

[BS] FOUNDATION PIER (for Chapter 21). An isolated vertical foundation member whose horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its thickness does not exceed three times its thickness and whose height is equal to or less than four times its thickness.

FRAME STRUCTURE. A building or other structure in which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily supported by columns.

GABLE. The triangular portion of a wall beneath the end of a dual-slope, pitched, or mono-slope roof or portion thereof and above the top plates of the story or level of the ceiling below.

GARAGE DOOR MANUFACTURER. The party responsible for the completed assembly of the garage door components.

GARDEN MAUSOLEUM. A mausoleum for the public built without heat or air conditioning but may contain an open-air committal area.

[F] GAS CABINET. A fully enclosed, ventilated noncombustible enclosure used to provide an isolated environment for compressed gas cylinders in storage or use. Doors and access ports for exchanging cylinders and accessing pressure-regulating controls are allowed to be included.

[F] GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. A system or portion of a combination system that utilizes one or more stationary sensors to detect the presence of a specified gas at a specified concentration and initiate one or more responses required by this code, such as notifying a responsible person, activating an alarm signal, or activating or deactivating equipment. A self-contained gas detection and alarm device is not classified as a gas detection system.

[F] GAS ROOM. A separately ventilated, fully enclosed room in which only compressed gases and associated equipment and supplies are stored or used.

[F] GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM. An assembly of piping, devices and apparatus designed to generate, store, contain, distribute or transport a nontoxic, gaseous hydrogen-containing mixture having not less than 95-percent hydrogen gas by volume and not more than 1-percent oxygen by volume. Gaseous hydrogen systems consist of items such as compressed gas containers, reactors and appurtenances, including pressure regulators, pressure relief devices, manifolds, pumps, compressors and interconnecting piping and tubing and controls.

GLASS FIBERBOARD. Fibrous glass roof insulation consisting of inorganic glass fibers formed into rigid boards using a binder. The board has a top surface faced with asphalt and kraft reinforced with glass fiber.

GLASS MAT GYPSUM PANEL. A gypsum panel consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum, surfaced with glass mat partially or completely embedded in the core.

[BS] GRADE (LUMBER). The classification of lumber in regard to strength and utility in accordance with American Softwood Lumber Standard DOC PS 20 and the grading rules of an approved lumber rules-writing agency.

GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building.

GRADE PLANE, STORY ABOVE. See “Story above grade plane.”

GRANDSTAND. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated structural system and two or more rows high and is not a building element (see “Bleachers”).

GROSS LEASABLE AREA. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use. The area of tenant occupancy is measured from the centerlines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls. All tenant areas, including areas used for storage, shall be included in calculating gross leasable area.

GROUP HOME. A facility for social rehabilitation, substance abuse or mental health problems that contains a group housing arrangement that provides custodial care but does not provide medical care.

GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

GUEST ROOM. A room used or intended to be used by one or more guests for living or sleeping purposes.

GYPSUM BOARD. The generic name for a family of sheet products consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum with paper surfacing.

[BS] GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT. The general name for a family of sheet products consisting essentially of gypsum complying with the standards specified in Tables 2506.2 and 2507.2, and Chapter 35. Gypsum board and glass mat gypsum panels are examples of gypsum panel products.

[BS] GYPSUM PLASTER. A mixture of calcined gypsum or calcined gypsum and lime and aggregate and other approved materials as specified in this code.

GYPSUM SHEATHING. Gypsum panel products specifically manufactured with enhanced water resistance for use as a substrate for exterior surface materials.

[BS] GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER. Gypsum plaster applied to an approved base in one or more coats normally not exceeding 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in total thickness.

GYPSUM WALLBOARD. A gypsum board used primarilyas an interior surfacing for building structures.

HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, screen enclosures, sunroom Categories I, II, III and IV as defined in Section 2002.6, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

[F] HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A fire-extinguishing system using one or more atoms of an element from the halogen chemical series: fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine.

[F] HANDLING. The deliberate transport by any means to a point of storage or use.

HANDRAIL. A horizontal or sloping rail intended for grasping by the hand for guidance or support.

HARDBOARD. A fibrous-felted, homogeneous panel made from lignocellulosic fibers consolidated under heat and pressure in a hot press to a density not less than 31 pcf (497 kg/m3).

HARDWARE. See “Fire exit hardware” and “Panic hardware.”

[F] HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Those chemicals or substances that are physical hazards or health hazards as classified in Section 307 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition.

[F] HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION MATERIAL (HPM). A solid, liquid or gas associated with semiconductor manufacturing that has a degree-of-hazard rating in health, flammability or instability of Class 3 or 4 as ranked by NFPA 704 and which is used directly in research, laboratory or production processes which have as their end product materials that are not hazardous.

[BS] HEAD JOINT. Vertical mortar joint placed between masonry units within the wythe at the time the masonry units are laid.

[F] HEALTH HAZARD. A classification of a chemical for which there is statistically significant evidence that acute or chronic health effects are capable of occurring in exposed persons. The term “health hazard” includes chemicals that are toxic or highly toxic, and corrosive.

HEAT DETECTOR. See “Detector, heat.”

HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.

HEIGHT, THRESHOLD BUILDING. The height of the building is at the mean distance between the eaves and the ridge of the roofing structure. If the distance from grade to the line which is the mean distance between the eaves and the ridge of the roofing structure is more than 50 feet (16 240 mm), the building is to be considered a “threshold building” within the contemplation of the Threshold Building Act.

HELICAL PILE. Manufactured steel deep foundation element consisting of a central shaft and one or more helical bearing plates. A helical pile is installed by rotating it into the ground. Each helical bearing plate is formed into a screw thread with a uniform defined pitch.

HELIPAD. A structural surface that is used for the landing, taking off, taxiing and parking of helicopters.

HELIPORT. An area of land or water or a structural surface that is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities.

HELISTOP. The same as “heliport,” except that no fueling, defueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted.

HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE EXTERIOR-GRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL). Panels consisting of layers of cellulose fibrous material impregnated with thermosetting resins and bonded together by a high-pressure process to form a homogeneous nonporous core suitable for exterior use.

HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE EXTERIOR-GRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL) SYSTEM. An exterior wall covering fabricated using HPL in a specific assembly including joints, seams, attachments, substrate, framing and other details as appropriate to a particular design.

HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

HIGH VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONE. This zone consists of Broward and Miami-Dade counties.

[F] HIGHLY TOXIC. A material which produces a lethal dose or lethal concentration that falls within any of the following categories:

1.	A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 50 milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

2.	A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 200 milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.

3.	A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air of 200 parts per million by volume or less of gas or vapor, or 2 milligrams per liter or less of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for 1 hour (or less if death occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

 Mixtures of these materials with ordinary materials, such as water, might not warrant classification as highly toxic. While this system is basically simple in application, any hazard evaluation that is required for the precise categorization of this type of material shall be performed by experienced, technically competent persons.

[A] HISTORIC BUILDINGS. Buildings that are listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or designated as historic under an appropriate state or local law (see Chapter 12 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building).

HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY. A fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which continuity is maintained.

HORIZONTAL EXIT. An exit component consisting of fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives intended to compartmentalize portions of a building or another building thereby creating refuge areas that afford safety from the fire and smoke from the area of fire origin.

HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS. Facilities that provide care or treatment for the medical, psychiatric, obstetrical, or surgical treatment of care recipients who are incapable of self-preservation.

HOUSING UNIT. A dormitory or a group of cells with a common dayroom in Group I-3.

[F] HPM. See “Hazardous Production Material.”

[F] HPM ROOM. A room used in conjunction with or serving a Group H-5 occupancy, where HPM is stored or used and which is classified as a Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancy.

[BS] HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS. Areas vulnerable to hurricanes defined as:

1.	The U. S. Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico coasts where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, for Risk Category II buildings is greater than 115 mph (51.4 m/s);

2.	Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, Virgin Islands and American Samoa.

[F] HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOM. A room or space that is intended exclusively to house a gaseous hydrogen system.

[BS] ICE-SENSITIVE STRUCTURE. A structure for which the effect of an atmospheric ice load governs the design of a structure or portion thereof. This includes, but is not limited to, lattice structures, guyed masts, overhead lines, light suspension and cable-stayed bridges, aerial cable systems (e.g., for ski lifts or logging operations), amusement rides, open catwalks and platforms, flagpoles and signs.

[F] IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND HEALTH (IDLH). The concentration of airborne contaminants which poses a threat of death, immediate or delayed permanent adverse health effects, or effects that could prevent escape from such an environment. This contaminant concentration level is established by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) based on both toxicity and flammability. It generally is expressed in parts per million by volume (ppmv/v) or milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3). If adequate data do not exist for precise establishment of IDLH concentrations, an independent certified industrial hygienist, industrial toxicologist, appropriate regulatory agency or other source approved by the building official shall make such determination.

[BS] IMPACT LOAD. The load resulting from moving machinery, elevators, craneways, vehicles and other similar forces and kinetic loads, pressure and possible surcharge from fixed or moving loads.

INCAPABLE OF SELF-PRESERVATION. Persons who, because of age, physical limitations, mental limitations, chemical dependency or medical treatment, cannot respond as an individual to an emergency situation.

[F] INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS. Materials that, when mixed, have the potential to react in a manner that generates heat, fumes, gases or byproducts which are hazardous to life or property.

INDIVIDUAL TRUSS MEMBER. A truss chord or truss web.

[F] INERT GAS. A gas that is capable of reacting with other materials only under abnormal conditions such as high temperatures, pressures and similar extrinsic physical forces. Within the context of the code, inert gases do not exhibit either physical or health hazard properties as defined (other than acting as a simple asphyxiant) or hazard properties other than those of a compressed gas. Some of the more common inert gases include argon, helium, krypton, neon, nitrogen and xenon.

[F] INITIATING DEVICE. A system component that originates transmission of a change-of-state condition, such as in a smoke detector, manual fire alarm box or supervisory switch.

INSULATING SHEATHING. A rigid panel or board insulation material having a thermal resistance of not less than R-2 of the core material with properties suitable for use on walls, floors, roofs or foundations.

INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE. This refers to a dwelling unit or sleeping unit that can or will be used all or part of the time as the occupant’s place of abode.

INTERIOR EXIT RAMP. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and provides for a protected path of egress travel to the exit discharge or public way.

INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and provides for a protected path of egress travel to the exit discharge or public way.

INTERIOR FINISH. Interior finish includes interior wall and ceiling finish and interior floor finish.

INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH. The exposed floor surfaces of buildings including coverings applied over a finished floor or stair, including risers.

INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE. Interior floor finish trim used to provide a functional or decorative border at the intersection of walls and floors.

INTERIOR SURFACES. Surfaces other than weather exposed surfaces.

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH. The exposed interior surfaces of buildings, including but not limited to: fixed or movable walls and partitions; toilet room privacy partitions; columns; ceilings; and interior wainscoting, paneling or other finish applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation, structural fire resistance or similar purposes, but not including trim.

[BS] INTERLAYMENT. A layer of felt or nonbituminous saturated felt not less than 18 inches (457 mm) wide, shingled between each course of a wood-shake roof covering.

INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTIVE MATERIAL. Liquid mixture applied to substrates by brush, roller, spray or trowel which expands into a protective foamed layer to provide fire-resistive protection of the substrates when exposed to flame or intense heat.

[BS] JOINT. The opening in or between adjacent assemblies that is created due to building tolerances, or is designed to allow independent movement of the building in any plane caused by thermal, wind or any other loading.

[A] JURISDICTION. The governmental unit that has adopted this code under due legislative authority.

L RATING. The air leakage rating of a through penetration firestop system or a fire-resistant joint system when tested in accordance with UL 1479 or UL 2079, respectively.

[A] LABEL. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer that contains the name of the manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics of the product or material and the name and identification of an approved agency, and that indicates that the representative sample of the product or material has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency (see Section 1703.5, “Manufacturer’s designation” and “Mark”).

[A] LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, approved agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A Florida-registered landscape architect.

LEVEL OF EXIT DISCHARGE. See “Exit discharge, level of.”

LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM. Construction consisting in whole or in part of lenses, panels, grids or baffles made with light-transmitting plastics positioned below independently mounted electrical light sources, skylights or light-transmitting plastic roof panels. Lenses, panels, grids and baffles that are part of an electrical fixture shall not be considered as a light-diffusing system.

LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. Construction whose vertical and horizontal structural elements are primarily formed by a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel framing members.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS. Structural plastic panels other than skylights that are fastened to structural members, or panels or sheathing and that are used as light-transmitting media in the plane of the roof.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS. Plastic materials that are fastened to structural members, or to structural panels or sheathing, and that are used as light-transmitting media in exterior walls.

[BS] LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION. Line shown on FIRMs to indicate the inland limit of the 11/2-foot (457 mm) breaking wave height during the base flood.

[BS] LIMIT STATE. A condition beyond which a structure or member becomes unfit for service and is judged to be no longer useful for its intended function (serviceability limit state) or to be unsafe (strength limit state).

[F] LIQUID. A material that has a melting point that is equal to or less than 68°F (20°C) and a boiling point that is greater than 68°F (20°C) at 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute (psia) (101 kPa). When not otherwise identified, the term “liquid” includes both flammable and combustible liquids.

[F] LIQUID STORAGE ROOM. A room classified as a Group H-3 occupancy used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in a closed condition.

[F] LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM. A room in which Class I, II and IIIA flammable or combustible liquids are used, dispensed or mixed in open containers.

[A] LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the building official and concerned with evaluation of products or services that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

[BS] LIVE LOAD. A load produced by the use and occupancy of the building or other structure that does not include construction or environmental loads such as wind load, rain load, flood load or dead load.

[BS] LIVE LOAD, ROOF. A load on a roof produced:

1.	During maintenance by workers, equipment and materials; or

2.	During the life of the structure by movable objects such as planters or other similar small decorative appurtenances that are not occupancy related.

LIVE/WORK UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit in which a significant portion of the space includes a nonresidential use that is operated by the tenant.

[BS] LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD). A method of proportioning structural members and their connections using load and resistance factors such that no applicable limit state is reached when the structure is subjected to appropriate load combinations. The term “LRFD” is used in the design of steel and wood structures.

[BS] LOAD EFFECTS. Forces and deformations produced in structural members by the applied loads.

[BS] LOAD FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the actual load from the nominal load, for uncertainties in the analysis that transforms the load into a load effect, and for the probability that more than one extreme load will occur simultaneously.

[BS] LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of building materials, occupants and their possessions, environmental effects, differential movement and restrained dimensional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in which variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as dead loads. All other loads are variable loads (see “Nominal loads”).

LOCAL FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. An ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant to the requirements in Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 59 and 60 for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.

LODGING HOUSE. A one-family dwelling where one or more occupants are primarily permanent in nature and rent is paid for guest rooms.

[A] LOT. A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.

[A] LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or any public place.

LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR. A swinging, sliding or folding door that opens automatically upon an action by a pedestrian such as pressing a push plate or waving a hand in front of a sensor. The door closes automatically, and operates with decreased forces and decreased speeds (see “Power-assisted door” and “Power-operated door”).

[F] LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL). The minimum concentration of vapor in air at which propagation of flame will occur in the presence of an ignition source. The LFL is sometimes referred to as “LEL” or “lower explosive limit.”

[BS] LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of Section 1612.

[BS] MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. An assemblage of structural elements assigned to provide support and stability for the overall structure. The system generally receives wind loading from more than one surface.

MALL BUILDING, COVERED and MALL BUILDING, OPEN. See “Covered mall building.”

MANUAL BOLT. Door-locking hardware operable from one side of the door, or from the edge of a door leaf, with a bolt or rod extended and retracted by manual movement of the bolt or rod, such as a manual flush bolt or manual surface bolt (see AUTOMATIC FLUSH BOLT, CONSTANT LATCHING BOLT, DEAD BOLT).

[F] MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. A manually operated device used to initiate an alarm signal.

[A] MANUFACTURER’S DESIGNATION. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating that a product or material complies with a specified standard or set of rules (see “Label” and “Mark”).

[A] MARK. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating the name of the manufacturer and the function of a product or material (see “Label” and “Manufacturer’s designation”).

MARQUEE. A canopy that has a top surface which is sloped less than 25 degrees from the horizontal and is located less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from operable openings above or adjacent to the level of the marquee.

[BS] MASONRY. A built-up construction or combination of building units or materials of clay, shale, concrete, glass, gypsum, stone or other approved units bonded together with or without mortar or grout or other accepted methods of joining.

Glass unit masonry. Masonry composed of glass units bonded by mortar.

Plain masonry. Masonry in which the tensile resistance of the masonry is taken into consideration and the effects of stresses in reinforcement are neglected.

Reinforced masonry. Masonry construction in which reinforcement acting in conjunction with the masonry is used to resist forces.

Solid masonry. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid contiguously with the joints between the units filled with mortar.

Unreinforced (plain) masonry. Masonry in which the tensile resistance of masonry is taken into consideration and the resistance of the reinforcing steel, if present, is neglected.

[BS] MASONRY UNIT. Brick, tile, stone, glass block or concrete block conforming to the requirements specified in Section 2103.

Hollow. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in any plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is less than 75 percent of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

Solid. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in every plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is 75 percent or more of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

MATERIAL CODE VIOLATION. A material code violation is a violation that exists within a completed building, structure or facility which may reasonably result, or has resulted, in physical harm to a person or significant damage to the performance of a building or its systems.

MATERIAL VIOLATION. As defined in Florida Statutes.

MAUSOLEUM. A permanent structure or building which is substantially exposed above the ground and is intended for the interment, entombment, or inurnment of human remains.

MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and unobstructed path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any occupied portion of a building or structure to a public way. A means of egress consists of three separate and distinct parts: the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge.

MEANS OF ESCAPE. As used in Section 1010.3.5, a way out of a building or structure that does not conform to the strict definition of means of egress but does provide an alternate way out. A means of escape consists of a door, stairway, passage or hall providing a way of unobstructed travel to the outside at street or ground level. It may also consist of a passage through an adjacent nonlockable space, independent of and remotely located from the means of egress, to any approved exit.

[BG] MECHANICAL-ACCESS ENCLOSED PARKING GARAGE. An enclosed parking garage that employs parking machines, lifts, elevators or other mechanical devices for vehicle moving from and to street level and in which public occupancy in the garage is prohibited in all areas except the vehicle access bay.

MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. Open parking garages employing parking machines, lifts, elevators or other mechanical devices for vehicles moving from and to street level and in which public occupancy is prohibited above the street level.

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN. A rooftop structure, not covered by a roof, used to aesthetically conceal plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment from view.

MEDICAL CARE. Care involving medical or surgical procedures, nursing or for psychiatric purposes.

MEMBRANE-COVERED CABLE STRUCTURE. A nonpressurized structure in which a mast and cable system provides support and tension to the membrane weather barrier and the membrane imparts stability to the structure.

MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME STRUCTURE. A nonpressurized building wherein the structure is composed of a rigid framework to support a tensioned membrane which provides the weather barrier.

MEMBRANE PENETRATION. A breach in one side of a floor-ceiling, roof-ceiling or wall assembly to accommodate an item installed into or passing through the breach.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP. A material, device or construction installed to resist for a prescribed time period the passage of flame and heat through openings in a protective membrane in order to accommodate cables, cable trays, conduit, tubing, pipes or similar items.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. An assemblage consisting of a fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling, roof-ceiling or wall assembly, one or more penetrating items installed into or passing through the breach in one side of the assembly and the materials or devices, or both, installed to resist the spread of fire into the assembly for a prescribed period of time.

MERCHANDISE PAD. A merchandise pad is an area for display of merchandise surrounded by aisles, permanent fixtures or walls. Merchandise pads contain elements such as nonfixed and moveable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions from which customers browse or shop.

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM). A factory-manufactured panel consisting of metal skins bonded to both faces of a solid plastic core.

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM) SYSTEM. An exterior wall covering fabricated using MCM in a specific assembly including joints, seams, attachments, substrate, framing and other details as appropriate to a particular design.

[BS] METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having a minimum installed weather exposure of 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

[BS] METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

[RB] METAL ROOF PANEL, METAL ROOF SHINGLE MANUFACTURER. The party responsible that forms raw material into metal roof panels and/or metal roof shingles used in building construction.

MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story and in accordance with Section 505.

[BS] MICROPILE. A micropile is a bored, grouted-in-place deep foundation element that develops its load-carrying capacity by means of a bond zone in soil, bedrock or a combination of soil and bedrock.

MINERAL BOARD. A rigid felted thermal insulation board consisting of either felted mineral fiber or cellular beads of expanded aggregate formed into flat rectangular units.

MINERAL FIBER. Insulation composed principally of fibers manufactured from rock, slag or glass, with or without binders.

MINERAL WOOL. Synthetic vitreous fiber insulation made by melting predominately igneous rock or furnace slag, and other inorganic materials, and then physically forming the melt into fibers.

[BS] MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more layers of polymer-modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate or held in place with an approved ballast layer.

[BS] MORTAR. A mixture consisting of cementitious materials, fine aggregates, water, with or without admixtures, that is used to construct unit masonry assemblies.

[BS] MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING. A mixture to bond concrete masonry units that contains hydraulic cement, glass fiber reinforcement with or without inorganic fillers or organic modifiers and water.

MULTILEVEL ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating that is arranged in distinct levels where each level is comprised of either multiple rows, or a single row of box seats accessed from a separate level.

[F] MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. Two or more single-station alarm devices that can be interconnected such that actuation of one causes all integral or separate audible alarms to operate. A multiple-station alarm device can consist of one single-station alarm device having connections to other detectors or to a manual fire alarm box.

[F] MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. Two or more single-station alarm devices that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one causes the appropriate alarm signal to operate in all interconnected alarms.

MULTISTORY UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit with habitable space located on more than one story.

[BF] NAILABLE SUBSTRATE. A product or material such as framing, sheathing or furring, composed of wood, wood-based materials or other materials providing equivalent fastener withdrawal resistance.

[BS] NAILING, BOUNDARY. A special nailing pattern required by design at the boundaries of diaphragms.

[BS] NAILING, EDGE. A special nailing pattern required by design at the edges of each panel within the assembly of a diaphragm or shear wall.

[BS] NAILING, FIELD. Nailing required between the sheathing panels and framing members at locations other than boundary nailing and edge nailing.

[BS] NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. The heartwood of the following species except for the occasional piece with corner sapwood, provided 90 percent or more of the width of each side on which it occurs is heartwood.

Decay resistant. Redwood, cedar, black locust and black walnut.

Termite resistant. Redwood, Alaska yellow cedar, Eastern red cedar and Western red cedar.

NICHE. A permanent chamber in a columbarium or mausoleum to hold the cremated remains of one or more individuals.

[BS] NOMINAL LOADS. The magnitudes of the loads specified in Chapter 16 (dead, live, soil, wind, tornadoes, rain, and flood ).

[BS] NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER). The commercial size designation of width and depth, in standard sawn lumber and glued-laminated lumber grades; somewhat larger than the standard net size of dressed lumber, in accordance with DOCPS 20 for sawn lumber and with the ANSI/AWC NDS for glued-laminated lumber.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A membrane structure in which the membrane and all component parts of the structure are noncombustible.

[BS] NONSTRUCTURAL CONCRETE. Any element made of plain or reinforced concrete that is not part of a structural system required to transfer either gravity or lateral loads to the ground.

NONVISITATION CRYPT MAUSOLEUM. A mausoleum for the public where the crypts are not accessible to the public.

[F] NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE (NTP). A temperature of 70°F (21°C) and a pressure of 1 atmosphere [14.7 psia (101 kPa)].

NOSING. The leading edge of treads of stairs and of landings at the top of stairway flights.

NOTIFICATION ZONE. See “Zone, notification.”

[F] NUISANCE ALARM. An alarm caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or lack of proper maintenance, or an alarm activated by a cause that cannot be determined.

NURSING HOMES. Facilities that provide care, including both intermediate care facilities and skilled nursing facilities where any of the persons are incapable of self-preservation.

OCCUPANT LOAD. The number of persons for which the means of egress of a building or portion thereof is designed.

OCCUPIABLE SPACE. A room or enclosed space designed for human occupancy in which individuals congregate for amusement, educational or similar purposes or in which occupants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means of egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the requirements of this code.

OPEN-AIR ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating served by means of egress that is not subject to smoke accumulation within or under a structure and is open to the atmosphere.

OPEN-ENDED CORRIDOR. An interior corridor that is open on each end and connects to an exterior stairway or ramp at each end with no intervening doors or separation from the corridor.

OPEN PARKING GARAGE. A structure or portion of a structure with the openings as described in Section 406.5.2 on two or more sides that is used for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles as described in Section 406.5.3.

[F] OPEN SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous material involving a vessel or system that is continuously open to the atmosphere during normal operations and where vapors are liberated, or the product is exposed to the atmosphere during normal operations. Examples of open systems for solids and liquids include dispensing from or into open beakers or containers, dip tank and plating tank operations.

[F] OPERATING BUILDING. A building occupied in conjunction with the manufacture, transportation or use of explosive materials. Operating buildings are separated from one another with the use of intraplant or intraline distances.

[BS] ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

[BS] ORDINARY REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

[BS] ORDINARY STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

[F] ORGANIC PEROXIDE. An organic compound that contains the bivalent -O-O- structure and which may be considered to be a structural derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen atoms have been replaced by an organic radical. Organic peroxides can pose an explosion hazard (detonation or deflagration) or they can be shock sensitive. They can also decompose into various unstable compounds over an extended period of time.

Class I. Those formulations that are capable of deflagration but not detonation.

Class II. Those formulations that burn very rapidly and that pose a moderate reactivity hazard.

Class III. Those formulations that burn rapidly and that pose a moderate reactivity hazard.

Class IV. Those formulations that burn in the same manner as ordinary combustibles and that pose a minimal reactivity hazard.

Class V. Those formulations that burn with less intensity than ordinary combustibles or do not sustain combustion and that pose no reactivity hazard.

Unclassified detonable. Organic peroxides that are capable of detonation. These peroxides pose an extremely high explosion hazard through rapid explosive decomposition.

[BS] ORTHOGONAL. To be in two horizontal directions, at 90 degrees (1.57 rad) to each other.

[BS] OTHER STRUCTURES (for Chapters 16-23). Structures, other than buildings, for which loads are specified in Chapter 16.

OUTPATIENT CLINIC. See “Clinic, outpatient.”

[A] OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, entity, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding an interest or title to the property; or otherwise having possession or control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

[F] OXIDIZER. A material that readily yields oxygen or other oxidizing gas, or that readily reacts to promote or initiate combustion of combustible materials and, if heated or contaminated, can result in vigorous self-sustained decomposition.

Class 4. An oxidizer that can undergo an explosive reaction due to contamination or exposure to thermal or physical shock and that causes a severe increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes into contact. Additionally, the oxidizer causes a severe increase in the burning rate and can cause spontaneous ignition of combustibles.

Class 3. An oxidizer that causes a severe increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes in contact.

Class 2. An oxidizer that will cause a moderate increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes in contact.

Class 1. An oxidizer that does not moderately increase the burning rate of combustible materials.

[F] OXIDIZING GAS. A gas that can support and accelerate combustion of other materials more than air does.

[BS] PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). The section of a floor, wall or roof comprised between the supporting frame of two adjacent rows of columns and girders or column bands of floor or roof construction.

PANIC HARDWARE. A door-latching assembly incorporating a device that releases the latch upon the application of a force in the direction of egress travel. See “Fire exit hardware.”

[BS] PARTICLEBOARD. A generic term for a panel primarily composed of cellulosic materials (usually wood), generally in the form of discrete pieces or particles, as distinguished from fibers. The cellulosic material is combined with synthetic resin or other suitable bonding system by a process in which the interparticle bond is created by the bonding system under heat and pressure.

PEDESTAL. A fixed or adjustable-height support column composed of a support base, a vertical structural element and a load-bearing top cap surface.

PEDESTRIAN DECK PANELS OR PAVERS. Pedestrian deck panels or pavers for this section are manufactured from materials such as naturally durable wood, ceramic, stone or concrete suitable for exterior applications.

PENETRATION FIRESTOP. A through-penetration firestop or a membrane-penetration firestop.

PENTHOUSE. An enclosed, unoccupied rooftop structure used for sheltering mechanical and electrical equipment, tanks, elevators and related machinery, and vertical shaft openings.

[BS] PERFORMANCE CATEGORY. A designation of wood structural panels as related to the panel performance used in Chapter 23.

PERMANENT INDIVIDUAL TRUSS MEMBER DIAGONAL BRACING (PITMDB). Structural member or assembly intended to permanently stabilize the PITMRs.

PERMANENT INDIVIDUAL TRUSS MEMBER RESTRAINT (PITMR). Restraint that is used to prevent local buckling of an individual truss chord or web member because of the axial forces in the individual truss member.

[A] PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the building official that authorizes performance of a specified activity.

[A] PERSON. An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.

PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. The care of persons who do not require medical care. Personal care involves responsibility for the safety of the persons while inside the building

PHOTOLUMINESCENT. Having the property of emitting light that continues for a length of time after excitation by visible or invisible light has been removed.

PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE. A complete, environmentally protected unit consisting of solar cells, optics and other components, exclusive of tracker, designed to generate DC power when exposed to sunlight.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL. A collection of modules mechanically fastened together, wired and designed to provide a field-installable unit.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL SYSTEM. A system that incorporates discrete photovoltaic panels, that converts solar radiation into electricity, including rack support systems.

PHOTOVOLTAIC SHINGLES. A roof covering resembling shingles that incorporates photovoltaic modules.

[F] PHYSICAL HAZARD. A chemical for which there is evidence that it is a combustible liquid, cryogenic fluid, explosive, flammable (solid, liquid or gas), organic peroxide (solid or liquid), oxidizer (solid or liquid), oxidizing gas, pyrophoric (solid, liquid or gas), unstable (reactive) material (solid, liquid or gas) or water-reactive material (solid or liquid).

[F] PHYSIOLOGICAL WARNING THRESHOLD LEVEL. A concentration of airborne contaminants, normally expressed in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per cubic meter (mg/m3), that represents the concentration at which persons can sense the presence of the contaminant due to odor, irritation or other quick-acting physiological response. When used in conjunction with the permissible exposure limit (PEL) the physiological warning threshold levels are those consistent with the classification system used to establish the PEL. See the definition of “Permissible exposure limit (PEL)” in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP. See “Religious worship, place of.”

PLANS. All construction drawings and specifications for any structure necessary for the building official to review in order to determine whether a proposed structure, addition or renovation will meet the requirements of this code and other applicable codes.

PLASTIC, APPROVED. Any thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting plastic material that conforms to combustibility classifications specified in the section applicable to the application and plastic type.

PLASTIC COMPOSITE. A generic designation that refers to wood/plastic composites, plastic lumber and similar materials.

PLASTIC GLAZING. Plastic materials that are glazed or set in frame or sash and not held by mechanical fasteners that pass through the glazing material.

PLASTIC LUMBER. A manufactured product made primarily of plastic materials (filled or unfilled) which is generally rectangular in cross section.

PLATFORM. A raised area within a building used for worship, the presentation of music, plays or other entertainment; the head table for special guests; the raised area for lecturers and speakers; boxing and wrestling rings; theater-in-the-round stages; and similar purposes wherein, other than horizontal sliding curtains, there are no overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound. A temporary platform is one installed for not more than 30 days.

PLAY STRUCTURE. A structure composed of one or more components, where the user enters a play environment.

POLYPROPYLENE SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from polypropylene homopolymer, or copolymer, which in some cases contains fillers or reinforcements, that is used to clad exterior walls of buildings.

[BS] PORCELAIN TILE. Ceramic tile having an absorption of 0.5 percent or less in accordance with ANSI A137.1, Table 10 or ANSI A137.3, Tables 4 or 5.

[BS] POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. The drainage condition in which consideration has been made for all loading deflections of the roof deck, and sufficient slope has been provided to ensure drainage of the roof within 48 hours of precipitation.

POWER-ASSISTED DOOR. Swinging door which opens by reduced pushing or pulling force on the door-operating hardware. The door closes automatically after the pushing or pulling force is released and functions with decreased forces. See “Low-energy power-operated door” and “Power-operated door.”

POWER-OPERATED DOOR. Swinging, sliding, or folding door which opens automatically when approached by a pedestrian or opens automatically upon an action by a pedestrian. The door closes automatically and includes provisions such as presence sensors to prevent entrapment. See “Low-energy power-operated door” and “Power-assisted door.”

[BS] PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST. Structural member manufactured using sawn or structural composite lumber flanges and wood structural panel webs bonded together with exterior exposure adhesives, which forms an “I” cross-sectional shape.

[BS] PRESTRESSED MASONRY. Masonry in which internal stresses have been introduced to counteract potential tensile stresses in masonry resulting from applied loads.

PRIMARY STRUCTURAL FRAME. The primary structural frame shall include all of the following structural members:

1.	The columns.

2.	Structural members having direct connections to the columns, including girders, beams, trusses and spandrels.

3.	Members of the floor construction and roof construction having direct connections to the columns.

4.	Bracing members that are essential to the vertical stability of the primary structural frame under gravity loading shall be considered part of the primary structural frame whether or not the bracing member carries gravity loads.

PRIVATE GARAGE. A building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles used by the owner or tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept, without provisions for repairing or servicing such vehicles for profit.

PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR AND MAPPER. An individual who is licensed or registered to engage in the practice of surveying and mapping under Chapter 472, Florida Statutes.

PROSCENIUM WALL. The wall that separates the stage from the auditorium or assembly seating area.

PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS. See “Hospitals.”

PUBLIC ENTRANCE. An entrance that is not a service entrance or a restricted entrance.

PUBLIC-USE AREAS. Interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are made available to the general public.

[A] PUBLIC WAY. A street, alley or other parcel of land open to the outside air leading to a street, that has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and which has a clear width and height of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).

[F] PYROPHORIC. A chemical with an auto-ignition temperature in air, at or below a temperature of 130°F (54.4°C).

[F] PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION. A chemical mixture that produces visible light displays or sounds through a self-propagating, heat-releasing chemical reaction which is initiated by ignition.

RADIANT BARRIER. A material having a low-emittance surface of 0.1 or less installed in building assemblies.

RAMP. A walking surface that has a running slope steeper than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope).

RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. Open parking garages employing a series of continuously rising floors or a series of interconnecting ramps between floors permitting the movement of vehicles under their own power from and to the street level.

RAMP, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access ramp.”

RAMP, EXTERIOR EXIT. See “Exterior exit ramp.”

RAMP, INTERIOR EXIT. See “Interior exit ramp.”

[A] RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings (“as builts”) that document the location of all devices, appliances, wiring sequences, wiring methods and connections of the components of a fire alarm system as installed.

REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE INSULATION. An insulation material packaged in rolls, that is less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick, with not less than one exterior low-emittance surface (0.1 or less) and a core material containing voids or cells.

[A] REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state or jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. This includes any registered design professional so long as they are practicing within the scope of their license, which includes those licensed under Chapters 471 and 481, Florida Statutes.

[A] REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE. A registered design professional engaged by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent to review and coordinate certain aspects of the project, as determined by the building official, for compatibility with the design of the building or structure, including submittal documents prepared by others, deferred submittal documents and phased submittal documents.

REGISTERED TERMITICIDE. Product listed as registered for use as a preventative treatment for termites for new construction by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services under authority of Chapter 487, Florida Statutes.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACE OF. A building or portion thereof intended for the performance of religious services.

[A] REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.

[BS] REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an existing roof covering. See “Roof recover” and “Roof replacement.”

RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR. An accessory building less than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) and 20 feet (6096 mm) in building height constructed on a one- or two-family property where aircraft are stored. Such use will be considered as a residential accessory use incidental to the dwelling.

[BS] RESISTANCE FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the actual strength from the nominal strength and the manner and consequences of failure (also called “strength reduction factor”).

RESTRICTED ENTRANCE. An entrance that is made available for common use on a controlled basis, but not public use, and that is not a service entrance.

RETRACTABLE AWNING. A retractable awning is a cover with a frame that retracts against a building or other structure to which it is entirely supported.

[BS] RISK CATEGORY. A categorization of buildings and other structures for determination of flood, wind, tornado and ice loads based on the risk associated with unacceptable performance.

[BS] ROOF ASSEMBLY A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof covering, roof deck and may include a vapor retarder, thermal barrier, insulation or similar substrate.

[BS] ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.

[BS] ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface constructed on top of the exterior walls of a building or other supports for the purpose of enclosing the story below, or sheltering an area, to protect it from the elements, not including its supporting members or vertical supports.

ROOF DRAINAGE, POSITIVE. See “Positive roof drainage.”

[BS] ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without removing the existing roof covering.

[BS] ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.

[BS] ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and installing a new roof covering.

ROOF SECTION. A separation or division of a roof area by existing joints, parapet walls, flashing (excluding valleys), difference of elevation (excluding hips and ridges), roof type or legal description; not including the roof area required for a proper tie-off with an existing system.

ROOF SYSTEM. A roof system consists of a roof covering and other interacting roofing components and may include vapor retarder, thermal barrier, insulation or other similar substrate. The system does not include the roof deck unless it is part of a single component serving as the roof covering and the roof deck.

ROOF VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, attics, cathedral ceilings or other enclosed spaces over which a roof assembly is installed.

ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. A structure erected on top of the roof deck or on top of any part of a building.

[BS] RUNNING BOND. The placement of masonry units such that head joints in successive courses are horizontally offset at least one-quarter the unit length.

SALLYPORT. A security vestibule with two or more doors or gates where the intended purpose is to prevent continuous and unobstructed passage by allowing the release of only one door or gate at a time.

SCISSOR STAIRWAY. Two interlocking stairways providing two separate paths of egress located within one exit enclosure.

SCREEN ENCLOSURE. A building or part thereof, in whole or in part self-supporting, and having walls of insect screening with or without removable vinyl or acrylic wind break panels and a roof of insect screening, plastic, aluminum or similar lightweight material, or other materials and assemblies such as a patio, deck, or the roof of a structure.

[BS] SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water to drain from a roof.

SECONDARY MEMBERS. The following structural members shall be considered secondary members and not part of the primary structural frame:

1.	Structural members not having direct connections to the columns.

2.	Members of the floor construction and roof construction not having direct connections to the columns.

3.	Bracing members other than those that are part of the primary structural frame.

SELF-CLOSING. As applied to a fire door or other opening protective, means equipped with a device that will ensure closing after having been opened.

SELF-LUMINOUS. Illuminated by a self-contained power source, other than batteries, and operated independently of external power sources.

SELF-PRESERVATION, INCAPABLE OF. See “Incapable of self-preservation.”

SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis.

SEPARATE ATMOSPHERE. The atmosphere that exists between rooms, spaces, or areas that are separated by an approved smoke barrier.

[F] SERVICE CORRIDOR. A fully enclosed passage used for transporting HPM and purposes other than required means of egress.

SERVICE ENTRANCE. An entrance intended primarily for delivery of goods or services.

SHAFT. An enclosed space extending through one or more stories of a building, connecting vertical openings in successive floors, or floors and roof.

SHAFT ENCLOSURE. The walls or construction forming the boundaries of a shaft.

[BS] SHALLOW FOUNDATION. A shallow foundation is an individual or strip footing, a mat foundation, a slab-on-grade foundation or a similar foundation element.

[BS] SHEAR WALL (for Chapter 23). A wall designed to resist lateral forces parallel to the plane of a wall.

Shear wall, perforated. A wood structural panel sheathed wall with openings, that has not been specifically designed and detailed for force transfer around openings.

Shear wall segment, perforated. A section of shear wall with full-height sheathing that meets the height-to-width ratio limits of Section 4.3.4 of AWC SDPWS.

[BS] SHINGLE FASHION. A method of installing roof or wall coverings, water-resistive barriers, flashing or other building components such that upper layers of material are placed overlapping lower layers of material to provide for drainage via gravity and moisture control.

[BS] SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is field applied using one layer of membrane material (either homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.

[F] SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. An assembly incorporating the detector, the control equipment and the alarm-sounding device in one unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation.

SITE. A parcel of land bounded by a lot line or a designated portion of a public right-of-way.

SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM. A system, fabricated on site and intended for acoustical, tackable or aesthetic purposes, that is composed of three elements:

1.	A frame (constructed of plastic, wood, metal or other material) used to hold fabric in place;

2.	A core material (infill, with the correct properties for the application); and

3.	An outside layer, composed of a textile, fabric or vinyl, that is stretched taut and held in place by tension or mechanical fasteners via the frame.

[BS] SKYLIGHT, UNIT. A factory-assembled, glazed fenestration unit, containing one panel of glazing material that allows for natural lighting through an opening in the roof assembly while preserving the weather-resistant barrier of the roof.

[BS] SKYLIGHTS AND SLOPED GLAZING. Glass or other transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a slope of 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or more from vertical. Glazing material in skylights, including unit skylights, tubular daylighting devices, solariums, sunrooms, roofs and sloped walls, are included in this definition.

SLEEPING UNIT. A single unit providing rooms or spaces for one or more persons, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating, sleeping and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

[F] SMOKE ALARM. A single- or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke. See “Multiple-station smoke alarm” and “Single-station smoke alarm.”

SMOKE BARRIER. A continuous membrane, either vertical or horizontal, such as a wall, floor or ceiling assembly, that is designed and constructed to restrict the movement of smoke.

SMOKE COMPARTMENT. A space within a building separated from other interior areas of the building by smoke barriers, including interior walls and horizontal assemblies.

SMOKE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to resist the passage of smoke. The device is installed to operate automatically, controlled by a smoke detection system, and where required, is capable of being positioned from a fire command center.

[F] SMOKE DETECTOR. A listed device that senses visible or invisible particles of combustion.

SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from measurements of smoke obscuration versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84.

SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE. An exit stairway or ramp designed and constructed so that the movement of the products of combustion produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building into the enclosure is limited.

SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating served by means of egress that is not subject to smoke accumulation within or under a structure for a specified design time by means of passive design or by mechanical ventilation.

SMOKE-PROTECTIVE CURTAIN ASSEMBLY FOR HOISTWAY. An automatic-closing smoke and draft control curtain assembly.

SOFT CONTAINED PLAY EQUIPMENT STRUCTURE. A play structure containing one or more components where the user enters a play environment that utilizes pliable materials.

[F] SOLID. A material that has a melting point, decomposes or sublimes at a temperature greater than 68°F (20°C).

SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING. A special amusement building is any temporary or permanent building or portion thereof that is occupied for amusement, entertainment or educational purposes and that contains a device or system that conveys passengers or provides a walkway along, around or over a course in any direction so arranged that the means of egress path is not readily apparent due to visual or audio distractions or is intentionally confounded or is not readily available because of the nature of the attraction or mode of conveyance through the building or structure.

SPECIAL EVENT STRUCTURE. Any ground-supported structure, platform, stage, stage scaffolding or rigging, canopy, tower or similar structure supporting entertainmentrelated equipment or signage.

[BS] SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land area subject to flood hazards and shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or other flood hazard map as Zone A, AE, A1-30, A99, AR, AO, AH, V, VO, VE or V1-30.

[BS] SPECIAL INSPECTION. Reserved.

[BS] SPECIAL INSPECTOR. Reserved.

[BS] SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY, f´m. Minimum compressive strength, expressed as force per unit of net cross-sectional area, required of the masonry used in construction by the approved construction documents, and upon which the project design is based. Whenever the quantity f´m is under the radical sign, the square root of numerical value only is intended and the result has units of pounds per square inch (psi) (MPa).

SPLICE. The result of a factory and/or field method of joining or connecting two or more lengths of a fire-resistant joint system into a continuous entity.

SPORT ACTIVITY, AREA OF. See “Area of sport activity.”

SPRAY-APPLIED FOAM PLASTIC. Single- and multiple-component, spray-applied foam plastic insulation used in nonstructural applications that are installed at locations wherein the material is applied in a liquid or frothed state, permitted to free rise and cure in situ.

SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTIVE MATERIALS. Cementitious or fibrous materials that are sprayed to provide fire-resistive protection of the substrates.

STAGE. A space within a building utilized for entertainment or presentations, which includes overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound.

STAIR. A change in elevation, consisting of one or more risers.

STAIRWAY. One or more flights of stairs, either exterior or interior, with the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one level to another.

STAIRWAY, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access stairway.”

STAIRWAY, EXTERIOR EXIT. See “Exterior exit stairway.”

STAIRWAY, INTERIOR EXIT. See “Interior exit stairway.”

STAIRWAY, SCISSOR. See “Scissor stairway.”

STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. A stairway having a closed circular form in its plan view with uniform section-shaped treads attached to and radiating from a minimum-diameter supporting column.

[F] STANDBY POWER SYSTEM. A source of automatic electric power of a required capacity and duration to operate required building, hazardous materials or ventilation systems in the event of a failure of the primary power. Standby power systems are required for electrical loads where interruption of the primary power could create hazards or hamper rescue or fire-fighting operations.

[F] STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. Standpipe classes are as follows:

Class I system. A system providing 21/2-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams.

Class II system. A system providing 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use primarily by the building occupants or by the fire department during initial response.

Class III system. A system providing 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use by building occupants and 21/2-inch (64 mm) hose connections to supply a larger volume of water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams.

[F] STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. Standpipe types are as follows:

Automatic dry. A dry standpipe system, normally filled with pressurized air, that is arranged through the use of a device, such as dry pipe valve, to admit water into the system piping automatically upon the opening of a hose valve. The water supply for an automatic dry standpipe system shall be capable of supplying the system demand.

Automatic wet. A wet standpipe system that has a water supply that is capable of supplying the system demand automatically.

Manual dry. A dry standpipe system that does not have a permanent water supply attached to the system. Manual dry standpipe systems require water from a fire department pumper to be pumped into the system through the fire department connection in order to meet the system demand.

Manual wet. A wet standpipe system connected to a water supply for the purpose of maintaining water within the system but does not have a water supply capable of delivering the system demand attached to the system. Manual-wet standpipe systems require water from a fire department pumper (or the like) to be pumped into the system in order to meet the system demand.

Semiautomatic dry. A dry standpipe system that is arranged through the use of a device, such as a deluge valve, to admit water into the system piping upon activation of a remote control device located at a hose connection. A remote control activation device shall be provided at each hose connection. The water supply for a semiautomatic dry standpipe system shall be capable of supplying the system demand.

[BS] START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns.

 Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual “start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

STATE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The agency of state government with authority to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the codes, as required by this part, which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification or demolition of public or private buildings, structures or facilities.

[BS] STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED. That type of construction made up entirely or in part of steel structural members cold formed to shape from sheet or strip steel such as roof deck, floor and wall panels, studs, floor joists, roof joists and other structural elements.

[BS] STEEL ELEMENT, STRUCTURAL. Any steel structural member of a building or structure consisting of rolled shapes, pipe, hollow structural sections, plates, bars, sheets, rods or steel castings other than cold-formed steel or steel joist members.

[BS] STEEL JOIST. Any steel structural member of a building or structure made of hot-rolled or cold-formed solid or open-web sections, or riveted or welded bars, strip or sheet steel members, or slotted and expanded, or otherwise deformed rolled sections.

STEEP SLOPE. A roof slope two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope) or greater.

[BS] STONE MASONRY. Masonry composed of field, quarried or cast stone units bonded by mortar.

[F] STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. The keeping, retention or leaving of hazardous materials in closed containers, tanks, cylinders, or similar vessels; or vessels supplying operations through closed connections to the vessel.

[BS] STORAGE RACKS. Cold-formed or hot-rolled steel structural members which are formed into steel storage racks, including pallet storage racks, movable-shelf racks, rack-supported systems, automated storage and retrieval systems (stacker racks), push-back racks, pallet-flow racks, case-flow racks, pick modules and rack-supported platforms. Other types of racks, such as drive-in or drive-through racks, cantilever racks, portable racks or racks made of materials other than steel, are not considered storage racks for the purpose of this code.

STORM SHELTER. A building, structure or portions thereof, constructed in accordance with ICC 500 and designated for use during a severe wind storm event, such as a hurricane or tornado.

Community storm shelter. A storm shelter not defined as a “Residential storm shelter.”

Residential storm shelter. A storm shelter serving occupants of dwelling units and having an occupant load not exceeding 16 persons.

STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above (see “Basement,” “Building height,” “Grade plane” and “Mezzanine”). A story is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.

STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished surface of the floor next above is:

1.	More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade plane; or

2.	More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground level at any point.

[BS] STRENGTH (For Chapter 21).

Design strength. Nominal strength multiplied by a strength reduction factor.

Nominal strength. Strength of a member or cross section calculated in accordance with these provisions before application of any strength-reduction factors.

Required strength. Strength of a member or cross section required to resist factored loads.

[BS] STRENGTH (for Chapter 16).

Nominal strength. The capacity of a structure or member to resist the effects of loads, as determined by computations using specified material strengths and dimensions and equations derived from accepted principles of structural mechanics or by field tests or laboratory tests of scaled models, allowing for modeling effects and differences between laboratory and field conditions.

Required strength. Strength of a member, cross section or connection required to resist factored loads or related internal moments and forces in such combinations as stipulated by these provisions.

Strength design. A method of proportioning structural members such that the computed forces produced in the members by factored loads do not exceed the member design strength [also called “load and resistance factor design” (LRFD)]. The term “strength design” is used in the design of concrete and masonry structural elements.

[BS] STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER. Structural member manufactured using wood elements bonded together with exterior adhesives. Examples of structural composite lumber are:

Laminated strand lumber (LSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.10 inch (2.54 mm) or less and their average lengths not less than 150 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

Laminated veneer lumber (LVL). A composite of wood veneer sheet elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the veneer element thicknesses are 0.25 inches (6.4 mm) or less.

Oriented strand lumber (OSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.10 inches (2.54 mm) or less and their average lengths not less than 75 times and less than 150 times the least dimension of the strand elements.

Parallel strand lumber (PSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.25 inches (6.4 mm) or less and their average lengths not less than 300 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

[BS] STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED TIMBER. An engineered, stress-rated product of a timber laminating plant, comprised of assemblies of specially selected and prepared wood laminations in which the grain of all laminations is approximately parallel longitudinally and the laminations are bonded with adhesives.

[BS] STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. Reserved.

[A] STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.

[BS] SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

[BS] SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1.	Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that is the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

2.	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

[BS] SUBSTANTIAL STRUCTURAL DAMAGE. A condition where one or both of the following apply:

1.	The vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system have suffered damage such that the lateral loadcarrying capacity of any story in any horizontal direction has been reduced by more than 33 percent from its predamage condition.

2.	The capacity of any vertical component carrying gravity load, or any group of such components, that has a tributary area more than 30 percent of the total area of the structure’s floors and roofs has been reduced more than 20 percent from its predamage condition and the remaining capacity of such affected elements, with respect to all dead and live loads, is less than 75 percent of that required by this code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose and location.

SUN CONTROL STRUCTURE. An accessory structure consisting of columns or posts supporting an open roof of girders, beams or cross rafters with or without fixed or operational louvers serving to direct sunlight.

[E] SUNROOM.

1.	A one-story structure attached to a building with a glazing area in excess of 40 percent of the gross area of the structure’s exterior walls and roof.

2.	A one-story structure added to a dwelling with solid roof panels without sloped glazing. The sunroom walls may have any configuration, provided the open areas consisting of operable or fixed glass or windows or side hinged or sliding glass doors of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 percent of the area below 6 foot 8 inches (2032 mm) of each wall, measured from the floor. For the purposes of this code the term sunroom as used herein shall include conservatories, sunspaces, solariums, and porch or patio covers or enclosures.

[F] SUPERVISING STATION. A facility that receives signals and at which personnel are in attendance at all times to respond to these signals.

[F] SUPERVISORY SERVICE. The service required to monitor performance of guard tours and the operative condition of fixed suppression systems or other systems for the protection of life and property.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. A signal indicating the need of action in connection with the supervision of guard tours, the fire suppression systems or equipment or the maintenance features of related systems.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE. An initiation device, such as a valve supervisory switch, water-level indicator or low-air pressure switch on a dry-pipe sprinkler system, whose change of state signals an off-normal condition and its restoration to normal of a fire protection or life safety system, or a need for action in connection with guard tours, fire suppression systems or equipment or maintenance features of related systems.

[BS] SUSCEPTIBLE BAY. A roof or portion thereof with:

1.	A slope less than 1/4-inch per foot (0.0208 rad); or

2.	On which water is impounded, in whole or in part, and the secondary drainage system is functional but the primary drainage system is blocked.

 A roof surface with a slope of 1/4-inch per foot (0.0208 rad) or greater towards points of free drainage is not a susceptible bay.

SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing located in a residential area serving four or fewer living units having a depth of 2 feet (610 mm) or more at any point as defined in Section 515.25, Florida Statutes, or the body of water is a public pool as defined in Section 514.011, Florida Statutes.

T RATING. The time period that the penetration firestop system, including the penetrating item, limits the maximum temperature rise to 325°F (163°C) above its initial temperature through the penetration on the nonfire side when tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479.

TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREA. Open elevated areas or spaces intended for entertainment technicians to walk on and occupy for servicing and operating entertainment technology systems and equipment. Galleries, including fly and lighting galleries, gridirons, catwalks, and similar areas are designed for these purposes.

TENSILE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A membrane structure having a shape that is determined by tension in the membrane and the geometry of the support structure. Typically, the structure consists of both flexible elements (e.g., membrane and cables), nonflexible elements (e.g., struts, masts, beams and arches) and the anchorage (e.g., supports and foundations). This includes frame-supported tensile membrane structures.

TENT. A structure, enclosure or shelter, with or without sidewalls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported in any manner except by air or the contents it protects.

TERMINATED STOPS. Factory feature of a door frame where the stops of the door frame are terminated not more than 6 inches from the bottom of the door frame. Terminated stops are also known as “hospital stops” or “sanitary stops.”

[E] THERMAL ISOLATION. A separation of conditioned spaces, between a sunroom and a dwelling unit, consisting of existing or new walls, doors or windows.

THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL. A plastic material that is capable of being repeatedly softened by increase of temperature and hardened by decrease of temperature.

THERMOSETTING MATERIAL. A plastic material that is capable of being changed into a substantially nonreformable product when cured.

THRESHOLD BUILDING. In accordance with Florida Statute, any building which is greater than 3 stories or 50 feet (15 240 mm) in height, or which has an assembly occupancy classification that exceeds 5,000 square feet (464.52 m2) in area and an occupant content of greater than 500 persons.

THROUGH PENETRATION. A breach in both sides of a floor, floor-ceiling or wall assembly to accommodate an item passing through the breaches.

THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. An assemblage consisting of a fire-resistance-rated floor, floor-ceiling, or wall assembly, one or more penetrating items passing through the breaches in both sides of the assembly and the materials or devices, or both, installed to resist the spread of fire through the assembly for a prescribed period of time.

[BS] TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN). A device used to resist uplift of the chords of shear walls.

[BS] TIE, WALL. Metal connector that connects wythes of masonry walls together.

[BS] TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY. A hollow masonry unit composed of burned clay, shale, fire clay or mixture thereof, and having parallel cells.

[F] TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. Storage of tires where the area available for storage exceeds 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3).

[A] TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit not exceeding three stories in height constructed in a group of two or more attached units with property lines separating such units in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on not less than two sides.

[F] TOXIC. A chemical falling within any of the following categories:

1.	A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 50 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 500 milligrams per kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

2.	A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 200 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 1,000 milligrams per kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.

3.	A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air of more than 200 parts per million, but not more than 2,000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, or more than 2 milligrams per liter but not more than 20 milligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for 1 hour (or less if death occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

TRANSIENT. Occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more than 30 days.

TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. Aircraft based at another location and that is at the transient location for not more than 90 days.

[BS] TREATED WOOD. Wood products that are conditioned to enhance fire-retardant or preservative properties.

Fire-retardant-treated wood. Wood products that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, exhibit reduced surface-burning characteristics and resist propagation of fire.

Preservative-treated wood. Wood products that, conditioned with chemicals by a pressure process or other means, exhibit reduced susceptibility to damage by fungi, insects or marine borers.

TRIM. Picture molds, chair rails, baseboards, handrails, door and window frames and similar decorative or protective materials used in fixed applications.

[F] TROUBLE SIGNAL. A signal initiated by the fire alarm system or device indicative of a fault in a monitored circuit or component.

[BS] TUBULAR DAYLIGHTING DEVICE (TDD). A non-operable fenestration unit primarily designed to transmit daylight from a roof surface to an interior ceiling via a tubular conduit. The basic unit consists of an exterior glazed weathering surface, a light-transmitting tube with a reflective interior surface, and an interior-sealing device such as a translucent ceiling panel. The unit can be factory assembled, or field-assembled from a manufactured kit.

24-HOUR BASIS. See “24-hour basis” located preceding “AAC masonry.”

TYPE A UNIT. Reserved.

TYPE B UNIT. Reserved.

[BS] UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of felt, sheathing paper, nonbituminous saturated felt or other approved material over which a steep-slope roof covering is applied.

UNDERPINNING. The alteration of an existing foundation to transfer loads to a lower elevation using new piers, piles or other permanent structural support elements installed below the existing foundation.

UNIT SKYLIGHT. See “Skylight, unit.”

[F] UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL. A material, other than an explosive, which in the pure state or as commercially produced, will vigorously polymerize, decompose, condense or become self-reactive and undergo other violent chemical changes, including explosion, when exposed to heat, friction or shock, or in the absence of an inhibitor, or in the presence of contaminants, or in contact with incompatible materials. Unstable (reactive) materials are subdivided as follows:

Class 4. Materials that in themselves are readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition or explosive reaction at normal temperatures and pressures. This class includes materials that are sensitive to mechanical or localized thermal shock at normal temperatures and pressures.

Class 3. Materials that in themselves are capable of detonation or of explosive decomposition or explosive reaction but which require a strong initiating source or which must be heated under confinement before initiation. This class includes materials that are sensitive to thermal or mechanical shock at elevated temperatures and pressures.

Class 2. Materials that in themselves are normally unstable and readily undergo violent chemical change but do not detonate. This class includes materials that can undergo chemical change with rapid release of energy at normal temperatures and pressures, and that can undergo violent chemical change at elevated temperatures and pressures.

Class 1. Materials that in themselves are normally stable but which can become unstable at elevated temperatures and pressure.

[F] USE (MATERIAL). Placing a material into action, including solids, liquids and gases.

VAPOR DIFFUSION PORT. An assembly constructed or installed within a roof assembly at an opening in the roof deck to convey water vapor from an unvented attic to the outside atmosphere.

VAPOR PERMEABLE. The property of having a moisture vapor permeance rating of 5 perms (2.9 × 10-10 kg/Pa × s × m2) or greater when tested in accordance with Procedure A or Procedure B of ASTM E96. A vapor permeable material permits the passage of moisture vapor.

VAPOR RETARDER CLASS. A measure of a material or assembly’s ability to limit the amount of moisture that passes through that material or assembly. Vapor retarder class shall be defined using the desiccant method of ASTM E96 as follows:

Class I: 0.1 perm or less.

Class II: 0.1 < perm ≤ 1.0 perm.

Class III: 1.0 < perm ≤ 10 perm.

VEGETATIVE ROOF. An assembly of interacting components designed to waterproof a building’s top surface that includes, by design, vegetation and related landscape elements.

VEHICLE BARRIER. A component or a system of components, near open sides or walls of garage floors or ramps that act as a restraint for vehicles.

VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a vehicular entrance or exit to a facility, building or portion thereof, and that is not intended for use by pedestrian traffic.

VENEER. A facing attached to a wall for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection or insulation, but not counted as adding strength to the wall.

[M] VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

VINYL SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC), that is used as an exterior wall covering.

[F] VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A notification appliance that alerts by the sense of sight.

WALKWAY, PEDESTRIAN. A walkway used exclusively as a pedestrian trafficway.

[BS] WALL (for Chapter 21). A vertical element with a horizontal length-to-thickness ratio greater than three, used to enclose space.

Cavity wall. A wall built of masonry units or of concrete, or a combination of these materials, arranged to provide an airspace within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of the wall are tied together with metal ties.

Dry-stacked, surface-bonded wall. A wall built of concrete masonry units where the units are stacked dry, without mortar on the bed or head joints, and where both sides of the wall are coated with a surface-bonding mortar.

Parapet wall. The part of any wall entirely above the roof line.

[BS] WALL, LOAD-BEARING. Any wall meeting either of the following classifications:

1.	Any metal or wood stud wall that supports more than 100 pounds per linear foot (1459 N/m) of vertical load in addition to its own weight.

2.	Any masonry or concrete wall that supports more than 200 pounds per linear foot (2919 N/m) of vertical load in addition to its own weight.

[BS] WALL, NONLOAD-BEARING. Any wall that is not a load-bearing wall.

[F] WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL. A material that explodes; violently reacts; produces flammable, toxic or other hazardous gases; or evolves enough heat to cause autoignition or ignition of combustibles upon exposure to water or moisture. Water-reactive materials are subdivided as follows:

Class 3. Materials that react explosively with water without requiring heat or confinement.

Class 2. Materials that react violently with water or have the ability to boil water. Materials that produce flammable, toxic or other hazardous gases or evolve enough heat to cause autoignition or ignition of combustibles upon exposure to water or moisture.

Class 1. Materials that react with water with some release of energy, but not violently.

WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. A material behind an exterior wall covering that is intended to resist liquid water that has penetrated behind the exterior covering from further intruding into the exterior wall assembly.

WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES. Surfaces of walls, ceilings, floors, roofs, soffits and similar surfaces exposed to the weather except the following:

1.	Ceilings and roof soffits enclosed by walls, fascia, bulkheads or beams that extend not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below such ceiling or roof soffits.

2.	Walls or portions of walls beneath an unenclosed roof area, where located a horizontal distance from an open exterior opening equal to not less than twice the height of the opening.

3.	Ceiling and roof soffits located a minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) from the outer edges of the ceiling or roof soffits.

[F] WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A solution of water and potassium-carbonate-based chemical, potassium-acetate-based chemical or a combination thereof, forming an extinguishing agent.

WHEELCHAIR SPACE. See the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

[BS] WINDBORNE DEBRIS REGION. Areas within hurricane-prone regions located:

1.	Within 1 mile (1.61 km) of the mean high-water line where an Exposure D condition exists upwind at the waterline and the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is 130 mph (58 m/s) or greater; or

2.	In areas where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is 140 mph (63.6 m/s) or greater.

 For Risk Category II buildings and other structures and Risk Category III buildings and other structures, except health care facilities, the wind-borne debris region shall be based on Figure 1609.3(1). For Risk Category III health care facilities, the wind-borne debris region shall be based on Figure 1609.3(2). For Risk Category IV buildings and other structures, the wind-borne debris region shall be based on Figure 1609.3(3).

WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM, MAIN. See “Main windforce-resisting system.”

[BS] WIND SPEED, Vult. Ultimate design wind speeds.

[BS] WIND SPEED, Vasd. Nominal design wind speeds.

WINDER. A tread with nonparallel edges.

[BS] WIRE BACKING. Horizontal strands of tautened wire attached to surfaces of vertical supports which, when covered with the building paper, provide a backing for cement plaster

[F] WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. A system or a part of a system that can transmit and receive signals without the aid of wire.

[BS] WOOD/PLASTIC COMPOSITE. A composite material made primarily from wood or cellulose-based materials and plastic.

[BS] WOOD SHEAR PANEL. A wood floor, roof or wall component sheathed to act as a shear wall or diaphragm.

[BS] WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. A panel manufactured from veneers, wood strands or wafers or a combination of veneer and wood strands or wafers bonded together with waterproof synthetic resins or other suitable bonding systems. Examples of wood structural panels are:

Composite panels. A wood structural panel that is comprised of wood veneer and reconstituted wood-based material and bonded together with waterproof adhesive;

Oriented strand board (OSB). A mat-formed wood structural panel comprised of thin rectangular wood strands arranged in cross-aligned layers with surface layers normally arranged in the long panel direction and bonded with waterproof adhesive; or

Plywood. A wood structural panel comprised of plies of wood veneer arranged in cross-aligned layers. The plies are bonded with waterproof adhesive that cures on application of heat and pressure.

[F] WORKSTATION. A defined space or an independent principal piece of equipment using HPM within a fabrication area where a specific function, laboratory procedure or research activity occurs. Approved or listed hazardous materials storage cabinets, flammable liquid storage cabinets or gas cabinets serving a workstation are included as part of the workstation. A workstation is allowed to contain ventilation equipment, fire protection devices, detection devices, electrical devices and other processing and scientific equipment.

[BS] WYTHE. Each continuous, vertical section of a wall, one masonry unit in thickness.

YARD. An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this code, on the lot on which a building is situated.

[F] ZONE. A defined area within the protected premises. A zone can define an area from which a signal can be received, an area to which a signal can be sent or an area in which a form of control can be executed.

[F] ZONE, NOTIFICATION. An area within a building or facility covered by notification appliances which are activated simultaneously.

 INSIGHTS (1)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-20]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 20
ALUMINUM
SECTION 2001
GENERAL
2001.1 Scope.

This chapter shall govern the quality, design, fabrication and erection of aluminum. The quality, design, fabrication and erection of aluminum used structurally in buildings or structures shall conform to good engineering practice, the provisions of this chapter and other applicable requirements of this code.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2002.7 and 2003.

SECTION 2002
MATERIALS
2002.1 General.

Aluminum used for structural purposes in buildings and structures shall comply with AA ASM 35 and AA ADM 1. The nominal loads shall be the minimum design loads required by Chapter 16. The use of aluminum alloys not listed in the manual shall be permitted provided their standard of performance is not less than those required in the manual and the performance is substantiated to the satisfaction of the building official.

2002.2 Definitions.

PRIMARY MEMBER. Structural framing members providing structural support to other members and/or surfaces of a structure including, but not limited to beams, posts, columns, joists, structural gutters, headers, eave rail, purlins, roof brace.

SECONDARY MEMBERS. Structural framing members which do not provide basic support for the entire structure, generally including, but not limited to, such members as kickplate rails, chair rails, roof or wall panels, wall brace.

STRUCTURAL MEMBERS. Members or sections that provide support to an assembly and/or resist applied loads.

2002.3 Screen enclosures.
2002.3.1 Thickness.

Actual wall thickness of extruded aluminum members shall be not less than 0.040 inch (1 mm).

2002.3.2

Reserved.

2002.3.3 Vinyl, tempered glass, and acrylic panels.

Vinyl, tempered glass, and acrylic panels shall be removable. Removable panels shall be identified as removable by a decal. The identification decal shall essentially state “Removable panel SHALL be removed when wind speeds exceed 75 mph (34 m/s).” Decals shall be placed such that the decal is visible when the panel is installed.

2002.4 Loads.

Structural members supporting screened enclosures shall be designed for wind in both of two orthogonal directions using the pressures given in Table 2002.4. Each primary member shall also be designed for a 300 pound (1.33 kN) load applied vertically downward along any 1 foot (305 mm) of any member, not occurring simultaneously with wind load.

Exception: In addition to wind pressures, purlins shall also be designed for a 200 pound (0.89 kN) load applied vertically downward along any 1 foot (305 mm) of any member, not occurring simultaneously with wind load.

TABLE 2002.4

DESIGN WIND PRESSURES SCREENED ENCLOSURESa, b, f, g, h

(STRENGTH DESIGN OR LRFD ONLY)

	ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEED VULT (MPH)
	110	120	130	140	150	160	170
Surface	Design Pressures by Exposure Category (psf)
B	C	D	B	C	D	B	C	D	B	C	D	B	C	D	B	C	D	B	C	D
Horizontal Pressures on
Windward Surfacesd
	17	24	28	20	28	33	23	32	38	27	38	44	31	43	51	36	49	58	40	56	66
Horizontal Pressures on
Leeward Surfacesd
	13	18	21	15	22	26	20	26	31	21	29	34	22	34	40	25	39	46	29	44	52
Vertical Pressures on Screen
Surfacesc
	4	7	8	6	8	9	6	9	11	8	11	12	9	12	14	10	14	16	11	15	18
Vertical Pressures on
Solid Surfacese
	17	24	29	21	29	34	24	34	40	28	39	46	32	45	53	36	51	60	41	58	68

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 9.479 kN/m2.

NOTES:

a.	Pressures apply to enclosures with a mean enclosure roof height of 30 feet (10 m). For other heights, multiply the pressures in this table by the factors in Table 2002.4A.

b.	Apply horizontal pressures to the area of the enclosure projected on a vertical plane normal to the assumed wind direction, simultaneously inward on the windward side and outward on the leeward side.

c.	Apply vertical pressures upward or downward to the area of the enclosure projected on a horizontal plane.

d.	Apply horizontal pressures simultaneously with vertical pressures.

e.	Table pressures are MWFRS Loads. The design of solid roof panels and their attachments shall be based on component and cladding loads for enclosed structures, partially enclosed structures, or attached canopies, as appropriate.

f.	Table pressures apply to 20 × 20 × 0.013" mesh screen. For 18 ×14 × 0.013" mesh screen, pressures on screen surfaces may be multiplied by 0.88. For screen densities greater than 20 × 20 × 0.013", use pressures for enclosed buildings.

g.	Table pressures may be interpolated using ASCE 7 methodology.

h.	For allowable stress design (ASD) pressures shall be permitted to be multiplied by 0.6.

TABLE 2002.4A

HEIGHT ADJUSTMENT FACTORS

MEAN ROOF
HEIGHT
	EXPOSURE
B	C	D
0–15	0.81	0.86	0.89
20	0.89	0.92	0.93
25	0.94	0.96	0.97
30	1	1	1
35	1.05	1.03	1.03
40	1.09	1.06	1.05
45	1.12	1.09	1.07
50	1.16	1.11	1.09
55	1.19	1.14	1.11
60	1.22	1.16	1.13
2002.4.1 Design guide.

The AAF Guide to Aluminum Construction in High Wind Areas shall be accepted as conforming to accepted engineering practices.

2002.5 Wall panels.

The minimum thickness for formed sheet aluminum structural wall panels shall be not less than 0.024 inch (0.6 mm), subject to approved tolerances.

2002.6 Sunroom design.
2002.6.1

Sunrooms shall comply with AAMA/NPEA/NSA 2100.

2002.6.2

For the purpose of applying the criteria of AAMA/NPEA/NSA 2100 based on the intended use, sunrooms shall be identified as one of the following categories by the permit applicant, design professional or the property owner or owner’s agent in the construction documents. Component and cladding pressures shall be used for the design of elements that do not qualify as main windforce-resisting systems. Main windforce-resisting system pressures shall be used for the design of elements assigned to provide support and stability for the overall sunroom.

Category I: A thermally isolated sunroom with walls that are open or enclosed with insect screening or 0.5 mm (20 mil) maximum thickness plastic film. The space is nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category II: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The openings are enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The space is nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category III: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The openings are enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for air infiltration resistance and water penetration resistance. The space is defined as a nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category IV: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated or cooled by a separate temperature control or system and is thermally isolated from the primary structure. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for water penetration resistance, air infiltration resistance and thermal performance. The space is nonhabitable and conditioned.

Category V: A sunroom with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated or cooled and is open to the main structure. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for water penetration resistance, air infiltration resistance and thermal performance. The space is habitable and conditioned.

2002.7 Alternative design method for screen enclosure.

(1)	The purpose of this section is to provide an alternate method for designing aluminum screen enclosures as defined by the Florida Building Code, permitting the loads of the structural frame to be based on portions of the screen in the screen walls removed, retracted, moved to the open position, or cut. The use of framing materials other than aluminum is allowed in accordance with Section 104.11 The method applies only to walls and roofs with 100-percent screen.

(a)	Screen enclosure frames designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, shall be designed using signed and sealed site-specific engineering and shall be designed in accordance with the wind load provisions of Section 1609.1.1,

(b)	Designs that consider these screen alternates shall comply with Section 2002.4 and Table 2002.4, using the 110 mph column as modified by Table 2002.4A with all screen panels in place.

(c)	Designs using strength design or load and resistance factor design in accordance with Section 1605.1 or allowable stress design methods of Section 1605.1 shall be permitted.

(d)	The design shall be by rational analysis or by 3D finite element analysis. Either method will be acceptable.

(2)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, removable screen may consist of removable panels, retractable panels, or by designating specific screen panels in the design in which the screen is to be removed by cutting the screen. Removable panels shall be removed, retractable panels shall be placed in the retracted position without increasing the load on the affected area. Screen designated in the design to be cut shall be completely cut when wind speeds are forecast to exceed 75 mph.

(3)	Where screen enclosures designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section serve as the barrier required by Section 454.2.17 the required minimum height of the barrier shall be maintained when screen panels are retracted, removed, moved to the open position, or cut.

(4)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, retractable screen panels, removable screen panels, and screen panels identified to be cut shall be clearly identified on adjacent structural members with highly visible permanent labels, at each panel, or by other means approved by the local building department.

(5)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, the retraction of screen panels, removal of screen panels, or cutting of screen panels shall not require the use of ladders or scaffolding.

(6)	Engineering documents submitted with building permit applications shall identify the panels to be removed, retracted, opened, or cut.

(7)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section based on removing screen panels by cutting the screen, the contractor shall provide replacement screen for a one-time replacement of all screen and spline designated by the design to be cut.

(8)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, the contractor shall provide written notice to the owner and the local building code enforcement department that the owner must retract, remove, or cut a panel or panels of the screen enclosure in accordance with the project engineering design or the manufacturer’s instructions when wind speeds are expected to exceed 75 mph (34 m/s).

2002.8 Sun control structure design.

A registered design professional shall design sun control structures.

2002.8.1

Free-standing sun control structures shall be permitted to be designed to resist wind speeds for Risk Category I of Figure 1609.3(4). Sun control structures relying on a host structure for support shall be designed for the risk category of the host structure.

2002.8.2

Operable louvers shall be repositioned and locked in the vertical open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph (34 m/s) or greater. The contractor shall post a legible and readily visible permanent decal or sign stating words to the effect that the operable louvers are to be locked in the vertically open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph (34 m/s) and during a hurricane warning or alert as designated by the National Weather Service. The warning label should essentially read:

THIS SUN CONTROL STRUCTURE SHALL HAVE
LOUVERED BLADES LOCKED IN THE VERTICAL
POSITION DURING A HURRICANE WARNING
OR ALERT AS DESIGNATED BY THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE OR WHEN WIND SPEEDS
ARE PREDICTED TO BE 75 MPH.

2002.8.3 Electrical installations.

All electrical components and installations shall comply with Chapter 27.

SECTION 2003
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ALUMINUM
2003.1 Design.

Aluminum members shall be designed by methods admitting of rational analysis according to established principles of mechanics.

2003.2 Standards.

The design, fabrication, and erection of structural aluminum shall conform to the Aluminum Design Manual.

2003.3 Workmanship.

Aluminum construction shall be in conformance with the tolerances, quality and methods of construction as set forth in Section 2003.2 and the American Welding Society’s Structural Welding Code—Aluminum (D1.2).

2003.4 Definitions.

Reserved.

2003.5 Identification.

Reserved.

2003.6 Allowable unit stresses.
2003.6.1

The design, fabrication and assembly of aluminum members for building and other structures shall conform to the standard set forth in Section 2003.2 and as otherwise set forth herein.

2003.6.2

Reserved.

2003.6.3

Aluminum members shall be limited by the deflections set forth in Section 1616.3.

2003.7

The building official may require that any structure using aluminum primary or secondary members be designed by a Florida-registered professional engineer.

2003.7.1

Reserved.

2003.7.2

In addition to flexural and shearing stresses, the critical factors of buckling, fatigue, stress raisers such as notches or holes or shape re-entrant corners, deflection and connections shall be considered and provided for by proper design.

2003.7.3

All solid roof systems shall be designed for a minimum 30 psf (1436 Pa) live load.

2003.7.4

All buildings and structures shall be designed to resist uplift. In the case of placement on existing slabs and foundations, sufficient information and calculations shall be provided by the professional engineer and/or architect to verify the ability of the slab or foundation to resist uplift loads.

2003.7.5

All connection devices shall be rated by load testing by an approved testing laboratory.

2003.7.5.1

All expansion anchors shall not be installed less than 3 inches (76 mm) from the edge of concrete slab and/or footings. All expansion anchors shall develop an ultimate withdrawal resisting force equal to four times the imposed load, with no stress increase for duration of load.

2003.8 Fabrication and construction details.
2003.8.1 Connections.

Aluminum members shall be designed as set forth in the standards in Section 2003.2.

2003.8.1.1 Fasteners.

Bolts and other fasteners shall be aluminum, stainless steel, hot-dip or electro-galvanized steel. Double cadmium plated steel bolts may also be used.

2003.8.1.2 Painting.

Reserved.

2003.8.1.3 Welding.

Aluminum parts shall be welded with an inert-gas-shielded arc or resistance welding process. No welding process that requires a welding flux shall be used. Filler alloys complying with the requirements of the standard in this chapter shall be used.

2003.8.1.4 Welder qualifications.

All welding of structural aluminum member shall be performed by certified welders.

2003.8.1.5 Erection.

During erection, structural aluminum shall be adequately braced and fastened to resist dead, wind and erection loads.

2003.8.2 Structural aluminum decking and siding.
2003.8.2.1

Aluminum sections spanning between supports shall be limited in span to satisfactorily support the positive and negative loads set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). The deflection of decking shall not exceed that set forth in Section 1616.

2003.8.2.2

Aluminum sheet used for roof decking or siding shall be not less than 0.032 inch (0.8 mm) in thickness.

2003.8.2.3

Aluminum sheets shall be secured to the supports to adequately resist positive and negative loads. Attachments shall be at intervals not exceeding 8 inches (203 mm) on center and shall be secured to each other at side laps at intervals as required by rational analysis and/or tests, but shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) on center.

2003.8.2.4

Fasteners shall have a head, and/or be provided with washers not less than 1/2 inch (13 mm) in diameter.

2003.8.2.5

Fasteners located at end laps shall be placed not more than 2 inches (51 mm) nor less than 1 inch (25 mm) from the end of overlapping sheets.

2003.8.2.6

Where roof or wall cladding is of aluminum, an approved membrane to protect against water intrusion to the interior shall be provided or the aluminum cladding shall be designed and constructed with an approved continuous edge-interlock, overlap or seam to prevent water intrusion.

2003.8.3 Nonstructural aluminum decking and siding.
2003.8.3.1

Nonstructural aluminum sheets shall be backed with cladding as set forth in Chapters 23 and 24 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2003.8.3.2

Nonstructural aluminum sheets shall have a minimum thickness of 0.032 inches (0.8 mm).

2003.8.3.3

Reserved.

2003.8.3.4

Nonstructural decking and siding shall be attached as set forth in Section 2003.8.2 except that the attachment of aluminum residential siding shall be by rational analysis and/or tests using a minimum 0.120-inch (3 mm) diameter aluminum nails of sufficient length to penetrate studs a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm). Nails at wood studs shall be as required by rational analysis and/or tests, but spaced not greater than 24 inches (610 mm) on center horizontally and no greater than 8 inches (203 mm) on center vertically.

2003.8.4 Dissimilar materials.

Reserved.

2003.8.5 Expansion and contraction.

Reserved.

2003.9 Sunrooms.
2003.9.1 Wind loads.

Basic wind speed in miles per hour (mph) shall be determined in accordance with Section 1620. Sunrooms including exposed structures, components, cladding, and roof covering shall be designed to resist the wind loads as established in Section 1620.1.

2003.9.2 Sunroom categories.

Sunrooms shall be categorized in one of the following categories by the permit applicant, design professional, or the property owner where the sunroom is being constructed:

Category I: A roof or a covering of an outdoor space. The openings shall be permitted to be enclosed with insect screening or 0.5 mm (20 mil) maximum thickness plastic film. The space is defined as nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category II: A roof or a covering of an outdoor space with enclosed walls. The openings are permitted to be enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The space is defined as nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category III: A roof or a covering of an outdoor space with enclosed walls. The openings are permitted to be enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The sunroom complies with additional requirements for forced entry resistance, air leakage resistance and water penetration resistance. The space is defined as nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category IV: A roof or a covering of an outdoor space with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated and/or cooled by a separate temperature control or system and is thermally isolated from the primary structure. The sunroom complies with additional requirements for forced entry resistance, water penetration resistance, air leakage resistance, and thermal performance. The space is defined as habitable and conditioned.

Category V: A roof or a covering of an outdoor space with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated and/or cooled and is open to the main structure. The sunroom complies with additional requirements for forced entry resistance, water penetration resistance, air leakage resistance, and thermal performance. The space is defined as habitable and conditioned.

2003.10 Sun control structure design.

A registered design professional shall design sun control structures.

2003.10.1 Wind loads.

Basic wind speed in miles per hour (mph) shall be determined in accordance with Section 1620.2. Sun control structures, including exposed structures, components, and cladding, shall be designed to resist the wind loads as established in Section 1620.1.

2003.10.2

Operable louvers shall be repositioned and locked in the vertical open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph (34 m/s) or greater. The contractor shall post a legible and readily visible permanent decal or sign stating words to the effect that the operable louvers are to be locked in the vertically open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph (34 m/s) and during a hurricane warning or alert as designated by the National Weather Service. The warning label should essentially read:

THIS SUN CONTROL STRUCTURE SHALL HAVE
LOUVERED BLADES LOCKED IN THE VERTICAL
POSITION DURING A HURRICANE WARNING
OR ALERT AS DESIGNATED BY THE NATIONAL
WEATHER SERVICE OR WHEN WIND SPEEDS
ARE PREDICTED TO BE 75 MPH.

2003.10.3 Electrical installations.

All electrical components and installations shall comply with Chapter 27.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-21]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 21
MASONRY
SECTION 2101
GENERAL
2101.1 Scope.

This chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of masonry.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2103 through 2105, 2107, 2108, 2110, 2114 and Sections 2119 through 2122.

2101.2 Design methods.

Masonry shall comply with the provisions of TMS 402, TMS 403 or TMS 404 as well as applicable requirements of this chapter.

2101.2.1 Masonry veneer.

Masonry veneer shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 14.

2101.3 Special inspection.

Reserved.

SECTION 2102
DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
2102.1 General.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AAC MASONRY.

ADOBE CONSTRUCTION.

Adobe, stabilized.

Adobe, unstabilized.

AREA.

Gross cross-sectional.

Net cross-sectional.

AUTOCLAVED AERATED CONCRETE (AAC).

BED JOINT.

BRICK.

Calcium silicate (sand lime brick).

Clay or shale.

Concrete.

CAST STONE.

CELL.

CHIMNEY.

CHIMNEY TYPES.

High-heat appliance type.

Low-heat appliance type.

Masonry type.

Medium-heat appliance type.

COLLAR JOINT.

DIMENSIONS.

Nominal.

Specified.

FIREPLACE.

FIREPLACE THROAT.

FOUNDATION PIER.

HEAD JOINT.

MASONRY.

Glass unit masonry.

Plain masonry.

Reinforced masonry.

Solid masonry.

Unreinforced (plain) masonry.

MASONRY UNIT.

Hollow.

Solid.

MORTAR.

MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING.

PRESTRESSED MASONRY.

RUNNING BOND.

SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY, f′m.

STONE MASONRY.

STRENGTH.

Design strength.

Nominal strength.

Required strength.

TIE, WALL.

TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY.

WALL.

Cavity wall.

Dry-stacked, surface-bonded wall.

Parapet wall.

WYTHE.

NOTATIONS.

db	=	Diameter of reinforcement, inches (mm).
Fs	=	Allowable tensile or compressive stress in reinforcement, psi (MPa).
fr	=	Modulus of rupture, psi (MPa).
f′AAC	=	Specified compressive strength of AAC masonry, the minimum compressive strength for a class of AAC masonry as specified in ASTM C1386, psi (MPa).
f ′m	=	Specified compressive strength of masonry at age of 28 days, psi (MPa).
f ′mi	=	Specified compressive strength of masonry at the time of prestress transfer, psi (MPa).
K	=	The lesser of the masonry cover, clear spacing between adjacent reinforcement, or five times db, inches (mm).
Ls	=	Distance between supports, inches (mm).
ld	=	Required development length or lap length of reinforcement, inches (mm).
P	=	The applied load at failure, pounds (N).
St	=	Thickness of the test specimen measured parallel to the direction of load, inches (mm).
Sw	=	Width of the test specimen measured parallel to the loading cylinder, inches (mm).
SECTION 2103
MASONRY CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
2103.1 Masonry units.

Concrete masonry units, clay or shale masonry units, stone masonry units, glass unit masonry and AAC masonry units shall comply with Article 2.3 of TMS 602. Architectural cast stone shall conform to ASTM C1364 and TMS 504. Adhered manufactured stone masonry veneer units shall conform to ASTM C1670.

Exception: Structural clay tile for nonstructural use in fireproofing of structural members and in wall furring shall not be required to meet the compressive strength specifications. The fire-resistance rating shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 and shall comply with the requirements of Table 705.5.

2103.1.1 Second-hand units.

Second-hand masonry units shall not be reused unless they conform to the requirements of new units. The units shall be of whole, sound materials and free from cracks and other defects that will interfere with proper laying or use. Old mortar shall be cleaned from the unit before reuse.

2103.2 Mortar.

Mortar for masonry construction shall comply with Section 2103.2.1, 2103.2.2, 2103.2.3 or 2103.2.4.

2103.2.1 Masonry mortar.

Mortar for use in masonry construction shall conform to Articles 2.1 and 2.6 A of TMS 602.

2103.2.2 Surface-bonding mortar.

Surface-bonding mortar shall comply with ASTM C887. Surface bonding of concrete masonry units shall comply with ASTM C946.

2103.2.3 Mortars for ceramic wall and floor tile.

Portland cement mortars for installing ceramic wall and floor tile shall comply with ANSI A108.1A and ANSI A108.1B and be of the compositions indicated in Table 2103.2.3.

TABLE 2103.2.3

CERAMIC TILE MORTAR COMPOSITIONS

LOCATION	MORTAR	COMPOSITION
Walls	Scratchcoat	1 cement;1/5 hydrated lime;
4 dry or 5 damp sand

Setting bed and
leveling coat
	1 cement;1/2 hydrated lime;
5 damp sand to 1 cement
1 hydrated lime, 7 damp sand
Floors	Setting bed	1 cement;1/10 hydrated lime;
5 dry or 6 damp sand; or 1
cement; 5 dry or 6 damp sand
Ceilings	Scratchcoat and
sand bed
	1 cement;1/2 hydrated lime;
21/2 dry sand or 3 damp sand
2103.2.3.1 Dry-set Portland cement mortars.

Premixed prepared Portland cement mortars, which require only the addition of water and are used in the installation of ceramic tile, shall comply with ANSI A118.1. The shear bond strength for tile set in such mortar shall be as required in accordance with ANSI A118.1. Tile set in dry-set Portland cement mortar shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.5.

2103.2.3.2 Latex-modified Portland cement mortar.

Latex-modified Portland cement thin-set mortars in which latex is added to dry-set mortar as a replacement for all or part of the gauging water that are used for the installation of ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.4. Tile set in latex-modified Portland cement shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.5.

2103.2.3.3 Epoxy mortar.

Ceramic tile set and grouted with chemical-resistant epoxy shall comply with ANSI A118.3. Tile set and grouted with epoxy shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.6.

2103.2.3.4 Furan mortar and grout.

Chemical-resistant furan mortar and grout that are used to install ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.5. Tile set and grouted with furan shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.8.

2103.2.3.5 Modified epoxy-emulsion mortar and grout.

Modified epoxy-emulsion mortar and grout that are used to install ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.8. Tile set and grouted with modified epoxyemulsion mortar and grout shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.9.

2103.2.3.6 Organic adhesives.

Water-resistant organic adhesives used for the installation of ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A136.1. The shear bond strength after water immersion shall be not less than 40 psi (275 kPa) for Type I adhesive and not less than 20 psi (138 kPa) for Type II adhesive when tested in accordance with ANSI A136.1. Tile set in organic adhesives shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.4.

2103.2.3.7 Portland cement grouts.

Portland cement grouts used for the installation of ceramic tile shall comply with ANSI A118.6. Portland cement grouts for tile work shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.10.

2103.2.4 Mortar for adhered masonry veneer.

Mortar for use with adhered masonry veneer shall conform to ASTM C270 for Type N or S, or shall comply with ANSI A118.4 for latex-modified Portland cement mortar.

2103.3 Grout.

Grout shall comply with Article 2.2 of TMS 602.

2103.4 Metal reinforcement and accessories.

Metal reinforcement and accessories shall conform to Article 2.4 of TMS 602. Where provided in exterior walls, joint reinforcement shall be a minimum No. 9-gauge ladder-type stainless steel, hot dipped galvanized, or epoxy coated in accordance with TMS 602 Section 2.4E1, 2.4F1b, or 2.4F2a as appropriate. Where unidentified reinforcement is approved for use, not less than three tension and three bending tests shall be made on representative specimens of the reinforcement from each shipment and grade of reinforcing steel proposed for use in the work.

SECTION 2104
CONSTRUCTION
2104.1 Masonry construction.

Masonry construction shall comply with the requirements of Sections 2104.1.1 and 2104.1.2 and with the requirements of either TMS 602 or TMS 604.

2104.1.1 Support on wood.

Masonry shall not be supported on wood girders or other forms of wood construction except as permitted in Section 2304.13.

2104.1.2 Molded cornices.

Unless structural support and anchorage are provided to resist the overturning moment, the center of gravity of projecting masonry or molded cornices shall lie within the middle one-third of the supporting wall. Terra cotta and metal cornices shall be provided with a structural frame of approved noncombustible material anchored in an approved manner.

SECTION 2105
QUALITY ASSURANCE
2105.1 General.

A quality assurance program shall be used to ensure that the constructed masonry is in compliance with the approved construction documents.

The quality assurance program shall comply with the inspection and testing requirements of TMS 602.

Exception: Unless otherwise specified by the designing architect or engineer, where plan review and inspections are performed by a local building department in accordance with Sections 107 and 110, the quality assurance program of TMS 402 and TMS 602 shall not apply.

SECTION 2106
SEISMIC DESIGN
2106.1 Seismic design requirements for masonry.

Reserved.

SECTION 2107
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN
2107.1 General.

The design of masonry structures using allowable stress design shall comply with Section 2106 and the requirements of Chapters 1 through 8 of TMS 402 except as modified by Sections 2107.2 through 2107.5.

Exception: Where plan review and inspections are performed by a local building department in accordance with Sections 107 and 110, the provisions of TMS 402, Chapter 3 Section 3.1 and TMS 602 Sections 1.5 and 1.6 shall not apply unless specified by the architect or engineer, or the building official.

TMS 402 , Section 6.1.6.1.1, lap splices." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
2107.2 TMS 402, Section 6.1.6.1.1, lap splices.

As an alternative to Section 6.1.6.1.1, it shall be permitted to design lap splices in accordance with Section 2107.2.1.

2107.2.1 Lap splices.

The minimum length of lap splices for reinforcing bars in tension or compression, ld, shall be

(Equation 21-1)

For SI: ld = 0.29dbfs

but not less than 12 inches (305 mm). In no case shall the length of the lapped splice be less than 40 bar diameters.

where:

db = Diameter of reinforcement, inches (mm).

fs = Computed stress in reinforcement due to design loads, psi (MPa).

In regions of moment where the design tensile stresses in the reinforcement are greater than 80 percent of the allowable steel tension stress, Fs, the lap length of splices shall be increased not less than 50 percent of the minimum required length, but need not be greater than 72 db. Other equivalent means of stress transfer to accomplish the same 50 percent increase shall be permitted. Where epoxy coated bars are used, lap length shall be increased by 50 percent.

TMS 402 , Section 6.1.6.1, splices of reinforcement." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
2107.3 TMS 402, Section 6.1.6.1, splices of reinforcement.

Modify Section 6.1.6.1 as follows:

6.1.6.1 – Splices of reinforcement. Lap splices, welded splices or mechanical splices are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. All welding shall conform to AWS D1.4. Welded splices shall be of ASTM A706 steel reinforcement. Reinforcement larger than No. 9 (M#29) shall be spliced using mechanical connections in accordance with Section 6.1.6.1.3.

2107.4

Reserved.

2107.5  TMS 402, Section 5.4 Pilasters.

Modify Section 5.4 as follows:

5.4 — Pilasters

5.4.3 Where vertical pilaster reinforcement is not provided to resist axial compressive stress, lateral ties are not required.

TMS 402 , Section 6.1.5.1.1 Development of bar reinforcement in tension or compression." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
2107.6 TMS 402, Section 6.1.5.1.1 Development of bar reinforcement in tension or compression.

Modify Section 6.1.5.1.1 as follows:

6.1.5.1.1 The required development length of reinforcing bars shall be determined by Equation (6-1), but shall not be less than 12 inches (305 mm) or 40 db and need not be greater than 72 db.

Equation 6-1, including the notations from TMS 402, is unchanged. Gamma factors are changed as follows:

γ	=	1.0 for No. 3 (M#10) through No. 5 (M#16) bars
γ	=	1.04 for No. 6 (M#19) through No. 7 (M#22) bars
γ	=	1.2 for No. 8 (M#25) through No. 11 (M#36) bars
SECTION 2108
STRENGTH DESIGN OF MASONRY
2108.1 General.

The design of masonry structures using strength design shall comply with Section 2106 and the requirements of Chapters 1 through 7 and Chapter 9 of TMS 402, except as modified by Sections 2108.2 through 2108.4.

Exceptions:

1.	AAC masonry shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 1 through 7 and Chapter 11 of TMS 402.

2.	Where plan review and inspections are performed by a local building department in accordance with Sections 107 and 110, the provisions of TMS 402, Chapter 3, Section 3.1 and TMS 602 Sections 1.5 and 1.6 shall not apply unless specified by the architect or engineer.

2108.2

Reserved.

2108.3

Reserved.

TMS 402 , Section 6.1.5.1.1 Development of bar reinforcement in tension or compression." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
2108.4TMS 402, Section 6.1.5.1.1 Development of bar reinforcement in tension or compression.

Modify Section 6.1.5.1.1 as follows:

6.1.5.1.1 The required development length of reinforcing bars shall be determined by Equation (6-1), but shall not be less than 12 inches or 40 db and need not be greater than 72 db.

Equation 6-1, including the notations from TMS 402, is unchanged. Gamma factors are changed as follows:

γ	=	1.0 for No. 3 (M#10) through No. 5 (M#16) bars
γ	=	1.04 for No. 6 (M#19) through No. 7 (M#22) bars
γ	=	1.2 for No. 8 (M#25) through No. 11 (M#36) bars
SECTION 2109
DRY-STACK MASONRY
2109.1 General.

The design of dry-stack masonry structures shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 1 through 8 of TMS 402 except as modified by Sections 2109.2 through 2109.5.

2109.2 Limitations.

Dry-stack masonry shall be prohibited in Risk Category IV structures.

2109.3 Materials.

Concrete masonry units complying with ASTM C90 shall be used.

2109.4 Strength.

Dry-stack masonry shall be of adequate strength and proportions to support all superimposed loads without exceeding the allowable stresses listed in Table 2109.4. Allowable stresses not specified in Table 2109.4 shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 8 of TMS 402.

TABLE 2109.4

GROSS CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA ALLOWABLE STRESS FOR DRY-STACK MASONRY

DESCRIPTION	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESS (psi)
Compression	45
Flexural tension	
 Horizontal span	30
 Vertical span	18
Shear	10

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 0.006895 MPa.

2109.5 Construction.

Construction of dry-stack masonry shall comply with ASTM C946.

SECTION 2110
GLASS UNIT MASONRY
2110.1 General.

Glass unit masonry construction shall comply with Chapter 13 of TMS 402 and this section.

2110.1.1 Limitations.

Solid or hollow approved glass block shall not be used in fire walls, party walls, fire barriers, fire partitions or smoke barriers, or for load-bearing construction. Such blocks shall be erected with mortar and reinforcement in metal channel-type frames, structural frames, masonry or concrete recesses, embedded panel anchors as provided for both exterior and interior walls or other approved joint materials. Wood strip framing shall not be used in walls required to have a fire-resistance rating by other provisions of this code.

Exceptions:

1.	Glass-block assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour shall be permitted as opening protectives in accordance with Section 716 in fire barriers, fire partitions and smoke barriers that have a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less and do not enclose exit stairways and ramps or exit passageways.

2.	Glass-block assemblies as permitted in Section 404.6, Exception 2.

SECTION 2111
MASONRY FIREPLACES
2111.1 General.

The construction of masonry fireplaces, consisting of concrete or masonry, shall be in accordance with this section.

2111.2 Fireplace drawings.

The construction documents shall describe in sufficient detail the location, size and construction of masonry fireplaces. The thickness and characteristics of materials and the clearances from walls, partitions and ceilings shall be indicated.

2111.3 Footings and foundations.

Footings for masonry fireplaces and their chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry at least 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend at least 6 inches (153 mm) beyond the face of the fireplace or foundation wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be at least 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.

2111.3.1 Ash dump cleanout.

Cleanout openings, located within foundation walls below fireboxes, when provided, shall be equipped with ferrous metal or masonry doors and frames constructed to remain tightly closed, except when in use. Cleanouts shall be accessible and located so that ash removal will not create a hazard to combustible materials.

2111.4 Seismic reinforcement.

Reserved.

2111.4.1 Vertical reinforcing.

Reserved

2111.4.2 Horizontal reinforcing.

Reserved

2111.5 Seismic anchorage.

Reserved

2111.6 Firebox walls.

Masonry fireboxes shall be constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. When a lining of firebrick at least 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness or other approved lining is provided, the minimum thickness of back and sidewalls shall each be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. The width of joints between firebricks shall be not greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). When no lining is provided, the total minimum thickness of back and sidewalls shall be 10 inches (254 mm) of solid masonry. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C27 or ASTM C1261 and shall be laid with medium-duty refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199.

2111.6.1 Steel fireplace units.

Steel fireplace units are permitted to be installed with solid masonry to form a masonry fireplace provided they are installed according to either the requirements of their listing or the requirements of this section. Steel fireplace units incorporating a steel firebox lining shall be constructed with steel not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in thickness, and an air-circulating chamber which is ducted to the interior of the building. The firebox lining shall be encased with solid masonry to provide a total thickness at the back and sides of not less than 8 inches (203 mm), of which not less than 4 inches (102 mm) shall be of solid masonry or concrete. Circulating air ducts employed with steel fireplace units shall be constructed of metal or masonry.

2111.7 Firebox dimensions.

The firebox of a concrete or masonry fireplace shall have a minimum depth of 20 inches (508 mm). The throat shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the fireplace opening. The throat opening shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) in depth. The cross-sectional area of the passageway above the firebox, including the throat, damper and smoke chamber, shall be not less than the cross-sectional area of the flue.

Exception: Rumford fireplaces shall be permitted provided that the depth of the fireplace is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and at least one-third of the width of the fireplace opening, and the throat is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the lintel, and at least 1/20 the cross-sectional area of the fireplace opening.

2111.8 Lintel and throat.

Masonry over a fireplace opening shall be supported by a lintel of noncombustible material. The minimum required bearing length on each end of the fireplace opening shall be 4 inches (102 mm). The fireplace throat or damper shall be located not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the fireplace opening.

2111.8.1 Damper.

Masonry fireplaces shall be equipped with a ferrous metal damper located not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the fireplace opening. Dampers shall be installed in the fireplace or at the top of the flue venting the fireplace, and shall be operable from the room containing the fireplace. Damper controls shall be permitted to be located in the fireplace.

2111.9 Smoke chamber walls.

Smoke chamber walls shall be constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. The total minimum thickness of front, back and sidewalls shall be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry. The inside surface shall be parged smooth with refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199. When a lining of firebrick not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick, or a lining of vitrified clay not less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) thick, is provided, the total minimum thickness of front, back and sidewalls shall be 6 inches (152 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C1261 and shall be laid with refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199. Vitrified clay linings shall conform to ASTM C315.

2111.9.1 Smoke chamber dimensions.

The inside height of the smoke chamber from the fireplace throat to the beginning of the flue shall be not greater than the inside width of the fireplace opening. The inside surface of the smoke chamber shall not be inclined more than 45 degrees (0.76 rad) from vertical when prefabricated smoke chamber linings are used or when the smoke chamber walls are rolled or sloped rather than corbeled. When the inside surface of the smoke chamber is formed by corbeled masonry, the walls shall not be corbeled more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical.

2111.10 Hearth and hearth extension.

Masonry fireplace hearths and hearth extensions shall be constructed of concrete or masonry, supported by noncombustible materials, and reinforced to carry their own weight and all imposed loads. No combustible material shall remain against the underside of hearths or hearth extensions after construction.

2111.10.1 Hearth thickness.

The minimum thickness of fireplace hearths shall be 4 inches (102 mm).

2111.10.2 Hearth extension thickness.

The minimum thickness of hearth extensions shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

Exception: When the bottom of the firebox opening is raised not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the hearth extension, a hearth extension of not less than 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) brick, concrete, stone, tile or other approved noncombustible material is permitted.

2111.11 Hearth extension dimensions.

Hearth extensions shall extend not less than 16 inches (406 mm) in front of, and not less than 8 inches (203 mm) beyond, each side of the fireplace opening. Where the fireplace opening is 6 square feet (0.557 m2) or larger, the hearth extension shall extend not less than 20 inches (508 mm) in front of, and not less than 12 inches (305 mm) beyond, each side of the fireplace opening.

2111.12 Fireplace clearance.

Any portion of a masonry fireplace located in the interior of a building or within the exterior wall of a building shall have a clearance to combustibles of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the front faces and sides of masonry fireplaces and not less than 4 inches (102 mm) from the back faces of masonry fireplaces. The airspace shall not be filled, except to provide fireblocking in accordance with Section 2111.13.

Exceptions:

1.	Masonry fireplaces listed and labeled for use in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 127 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions are permitted to have combustible material in contact with their exterior surfaces.

2.	When masonry fireplaces are constructed as part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete walls less than 12 inches (306 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.

3.	Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing materials, such as wood siding, flooring and drywall, are permitted to abut the masonry fireplace sidewalls and hearth extension, in accordance with Figure 2111.12, provided such combustible trim or sheathing is not less than 12 inches (306 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.

4.	Exposed combustible mantels or trim is permitted to be placed directly on the masonry fireplace front surrounding the fireplace opening, provided such combustible materials shall not be placed within 6 inches (153 mm) of a fireplace opening. Combustible material directly above and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the fireplace opening shall not project more than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) for each 1-inch (25 mm) distance from such opening. Combustible materials located along the sides of the fireplace opening that project more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the face of the fireplace shall have an additional clearance equal to the projection.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 2111.12

ILLUSTRATION OF EXCEPTION TO FIREPLACE CLEARANCE PROVISION

2111.13 Fireplace fireblocking.

All spaces between fireplaces and floors and ceilings through which fireplaces pass shall be fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in place. The fireblocking of spaces between wood joists, beams or headers shall be to a depth of 1 inch (25 mm) and shall only be placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces between combustible material and the chimney.

2111.14 Exterior air.

Factory-built or masonry fireplaces covered in this section shall be equipped with an exterior air supply to ensure proper fuel combustion unless the room is mechanically ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is neutral or positive.

2111.14.1 Factory-built fireplaces.

Exterior combustion air ducts for factory-built fireplaces shall be listed components of the fireplace, and installed according to the fireplace manufacturer’s instructions.

2111.14.2 Masonry fireplaces.

Listed combustion air ducts for masonry fireplaces shall be installed according to the terms of their listing and manufacturer’s instructions.

2111.14.3 Exterior air intake.

The exterior air intake shall be capable of providing all combustion air from the exterior of the dwelling. The exterior air intake shall not be located within a garage, attic, basement or crawl space of the dwelling nor shall the air intake be located at an elevation higher than the firebox. The exterior air intake shall be covered with a corrosion-resistant screen of 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) mesh.

2111.14.4 Clearance.

Unlisted combustion air ducts shall be installed with a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) clearance to combustibles for all parts of the duct within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the duct outlet.

2111.14.5 Passageway.

The combustion air passageway shall be not less than 6 square inches (3870 mm2) and not more than 55 square inches (0.035 m2), except that combustion air systems for listed fireplaces or for fireplaces tested for emissions shall be constructed according to the fireplace manufacturer’s instructions.

2111.14.6 Outlet.

The exterior air outlet is permitted to be located in the back or sides of the firebox chamber or within 24 inches (610 mm) of the firebox opening on or near the floor. The outlet shall be closable and designed to prevent burning material from dropping into concealed combustible spaces.

SECTION 2112
MASONRY HEATERS
2112.1 Definition.

A masonry heater is a heating appliance constructed of concrete or solid masonry, hereinafter referred to as “masonry,” which is designed to absorb and store heat from a solid fuel fire built in the firebox by routing the exhaust gases through internal heat exchange channels in which the flow path downstream of the firebox may include flow in a horizontal or downward direction before entering the chimney and which delivers heat by radiation from the masonry surface of the heater.

2112.2 Installation.

Masonry heaters shall be installed in accordance with this section and comply with one of the following:

1.	Masonry heaters shall comply with the requirements of ASTM E1602.

2.	Masonry heaters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1482 or EN 15250 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2112.3 Footings and foundation.

The firebox floor of a masonry heater shall be a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) of noncombustible material and be supported on a noncombustible footing and foundation in accordance with Section 2113.2.

2112.4 Seismic reinforcing.

Reserved

2112.5 Masonry heater clearance.

Combustible materials shall not be placed within 36 inches (914 mm) or the distance of the allowed reduction method from the outside surface of a masonry heater in accordance with NFPA 211, Section 12.6, and the required space between the heater and combustible material shall be fully vented to permit the free flow of air around all heater surfaces.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the masonry heater wall thickness is at least 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry and the wall thickness of the heat exchange channels is not less than 5 inches (127 mm) of solid masonry, combustible materials shall not be placed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the outside surface of a masonry heater. A clearance of not less than 8 inches (203 mm) shall be provided between the gas-tight capping slab of the heater and a combustible ceiling.

2.	Masonry heaters listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1482 or EN 15250 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION 2113
MASONRY CHIMNEYS
2113.1 General.

The construction of masonry chimneys consisting of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete shall be in accordance with this section.

2113.2 Footings and foundations.

Footings for masonry chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry not less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend at least 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the face of the foundation or support wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.

2113.3 Seismic reinforcement.

Reserved

2113.3.1 Vertical reinforcement.

Reserved

2113.3.2 Horizontal reinforcement.

Reserved

2113.4 Seismic anchorage.

Reserved

2113.5 Corbeling.

Masonry chimneys shall not be corbeled more than half of the chimney’s wall thickness from a wall or foundation, nor shall a chimney be corbeled from a wall or foundation that is less than 12 inches (305 mm) in thickness unless it projects equally on each side of the wall, except that on the second story of a two-story dwelling, corbeling of chimneys on the exterior of the enclosing walls is permitted to equal the wall thickness. The projection of a single course shall not exceed one-half the unit height or one-third of the unit bed depth, whichever is less.

2113.6 Changes in dimension.

The chimney wall or chimney flue lining shall not change in size or shape within 6 inches (152 mm) above or below where the chimney passes through floor components, ceiling components or roof components.

2113.7 Offsets.

Where a masonry chimney is constructed with a fireclay flue liner surrounded by one wythe of masonry, the maximum offset shall be such that the centerline of the flue above the offset does not extend beyond the center of the chimney wall below the offset. Where the chimney offset is supported by masonry below the offset in an approved manner, the maximum offset limitations shall not apply. Each individual corbeled masonry course of the offset shall not exceed the projection limitations specified in Section 2113.5.

2113.8 Additional load.

Chimneys shall not support loads other than their own weight unless they are designed and constructed to support the additional load. Masonry chimneys are permitted to be constructed as part of the masonry walls or concrete walls of the building.

2113.9 Termination.

Chimneys shall extend not less than 2 feet (610 mm) higher than any portion of the building within 10 feet (3048 mm), but shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the highest point where the chimney passes through the roof.

2113.9.1 Chimney caps.

Masonry chimneys shall have a concrete, metal or stone cap, sloped to shed water, a drip edge and a caulked bond break around any flue liners in accordance with ASTM C1283.

2113.9.2 Spark arrestors.

Where a spark arrestor is installed on a masonry chimney, the spark arrestor shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.	The net free area of the arrestor shall be not less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney flue it serves.

2.	The arrestor screen shall have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 19-gage galvanized steel or 24-gage stainless steel.

3.	Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) nor block the passage of spheres having a diameter less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

4.	The spark arrestor shall be accessible for cleaning and the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow for cleaning of the chimney flue.

2113.9.3 Rain caps.

Where a masonry or metal rain cap is installed on a masonry chimney, the net free area under the cap shall be not less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney flue it serves.

2113.10 Wall thickness.

Masonry chimney walls shall be constructed of concrete, solid masonry units or hollow masonry units grouted solid with not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal thickness.

2113.10.1 Masonry veneer chimneys.

Where masonry is used as veneer for a framed chimney, through flashing and weep holes shall be provided as required by Chapter 14.

2113.11 Flue lining (material).

Masonry chimneys shall be lined. The lining material shall be appropriate for the type of appliance connected, according to the terms of the appliance listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

2113.11.1 Residential-type appliances (general).

Flue lining systems shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Clay flue lining complying with the requirements of ASTM C315.

2.	Listed chimney lining systems complying with UL 1777.

3.	Factory-built chimneys or chimney units listed for installation within masonry chimneys.

4.	Other approved materials that will resist corrosion, erosion, softening or cracking from flue gases and condensate at temperatures up to 1,800°F (982°C).

2113.11.1.1 Flue linings for specific appliances.

Flue linings other than those covered in Section 2113.11.1 intended for use with specific appliances shall comply with Sections 2113.11.1.2 through 2113.11.1.4 and Sections 2113.11.2 and 2113.11.3.

2113.11.1.2 Gas appliances.

Flue lining systems for gas appliances shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

2113.11.1.3 Pellet fuel-burning appliances.

Flue lining and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with pellet fuel-burning appliances shall be limited to flue lining systems complying with Section 2113.11.1 and pellet vents listed for installation within masonry chimneys (see Section 2113.11.1.5 for marking).

2113.11.1.4 Oil-fired appliances approved for use with L-vent.

Flue lining and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with oil-fired appliances approved for use with Type L vent shall be limited to flue lining systems complying with Section 2113.11.1 and listed chimney liners complying with UL 641 (see Section 2113.11.1.5 for marking).

2113.11.1.5 Notice of usage.

When a flue is relined with a material not complying with Section 2113.11.1, the chimney shall be plainly and permanently identified by a label attached to a wall, ceiling or other conspicuous location adjacent to where the connector enters the chimney. The label shall include the following message or equivalent language: “This chimney is for use only with (type or category of appliance) that burns (type of fuel). Do not connect other types of appliances.”

2113.11.2 Concrete and masonry chimneys for medium-heat appliances.
2113.11.2.1 General.

Concrete and masonry chimneys for medium-heat appliances shall comply with Sections 2113.1 through 2113.5.

2113.11.2.2 Construction.

Chimneys for medium-heat appliances shall be constructed of solid masonry units or of concrete with walls not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, or with stone masonry not less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick.

2113.11.2.3 Lining.

Concrete and masonry chimneys shall be lined with an approved medium-duty refractory brick not less than 41/2 inches (114 mm) thick laid on the 41/2-inch bed (114 mm) in an approved medium-duty refractory mortar. The lining shall start 2 feet (610 mm) or more below the lowest chimney connector entrance. Chimneys terminating 25 feet (7620 mm) or less above a chimney connector entrance shall be lined to the top.

2113.11.2.4 Multiple passageway.

Concrete and masonry chimneys containing more than one passageway shall have the liners separated by a minimum 4-inch-thick (102 mm) concrete or solid masonry wall.

2113.11.2.5 Termination height.

Concrete and masonry chimneys for medium-heat appliances shall extend not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) higher than any portion of any building within 25 feet (7620 mm).

2113.11.2.6 Clearance.

A minimum clearance of 4 inches (102 mm) shall be provided between the exterior surfaces of a concrete or masonry chimney for medium-heat appliances and combustible material.

2113.11.3 Concrete and masonry chimneys for high-heat appliances.
2113.11.3.1 General.

Concrete and masonry chimneys for high-heat appliances shall comply with Sections 2113.1 through 2113.5.

2113.11.3.2 Construction.

Chimneys for high-heat appliances shall be constructed with double walls of solid masonry units or of concrete, each wall to be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick with a minimum airspace of 2 inches (51 mm) between the walls.

2113.11.3.3 Lining.

The inside of the interior wall shall be lined with an approved high-duty refractory brick, not less than 41/2 inches (114 mm) thick laid on the 41/2-inch bed (114 mm) in an approved high-duty refractory mortar. The lining shall start at the base of the chimney and extend continuously to the top.

2113.11.3.4 Termination height.

Concrete and masonry chimneys for high-heat appliances shall extend not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) higher than any portion of any building within 50 feet (15 240 mm).

2113.11.3.5 Clearance.

Concrete and masonry chimneys for high-heat appliances shall have approved clearance from buildings and structures to prevent overheating combustible materials, permit inspection and maintenance operations on the chimney and prevent danger of burns to persons.

2113.12 Clay flue lining (installation).

Clay flue liners shall be installed in accordance with ASTM C1283 and extend from a point not less than 8 inches (203 mm) below the lowest inlet or, in the case of fireplaces, from the top of the smoke chamber to a point above the enclosing walls. The lining shall be carried up vertically, with a maximum slope no greater than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from the vertical.

Clay flue liners shall be laid in medium-duty nonwater-soluble refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199 with tight mortar joints left smooth on the inside and installed to maintain an airspace or insulation not to exceed the thickness of the flue liner separating the flue liners from the interior face of the chimney masonry walls. Flue lining shall be supported on all sides. Only enough mortar shall be placed to make the joint and hold the liners in position.

2113.13 Additional requirements.
2113.13.1 Listed materials.

Listed materials used as flue linings shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listings and the manufacturer’s instructions.

2113.13.2 Space around lining.

The space surrounding a chimney lining system or vent installed within a masonry chimney shall not be used to vent any other appliance.

Exception: This shall not prevent the installation of a separate flue lining in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2113.14 Multiple flues.

When two or more flues are located in the same chimney, masonry wythes shall be built between adjacent flue linings. The masonry wythes shall be at least 4 inches (102 mm) thick and bonded into the walls of the chimney.

Exception: When venting only one appliance, two flues are permitted to adjoin each other in the same chimney with only the flue lining separation between them. The joints of the adjacent flue linings shall be staggered not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

2113.15 Flue area (appliance).

Chimney flues shall not be smaller in area than the area of the connector from the appliance. Chimney flues connected to more than one appliance shall be not less than the area of the largest connector plus 50 percent of the areas of additional chimney connectors.

Exceptions:

1.	Chimney flues serving oil-fired appliances sized in accordance with NFPA 31.

2.	Chimney flues serving gas-fired appliances sized in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

2113.16 Flue area (masonry fireplace).

Flue sizing for chimneys serving fireplaces shall be in accordance with Section 2113.16.1 or 2113.16.2.

TABLE 2113.16(1)

NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF ROUND FLUE SIZESa

FLUE SIZE, INSIDE DIAMETER
(inches)
	CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA (square
inches)

6	28
7	38
8	50
10	78
103/4	90
12	113
15	176
18	254

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

a.	Flue sizes are based on ASTM C315.

TABLE 2113.16(2)

NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF SQUARE AND RECTANGULAR FLUE SIZES

FLUE SIZE, OUTSIDE NOMINAL
DIMENSIONS (inches)
	CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA
(square inches)

4.5 × 8.5	23
4.5 × 13	34
8 × 8	42
8.5 × 8.5	49
8 × 12	67
8.5 × 13	76
12 × 12	102
8.5 × 18	101
13 × 13	127
12 × 16	131
13 × 18	173
16 × 16	181
16 × 20	222
18 × 18	233
20 × 20	298
20 × 24	335
24 × 24	431

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645 mm2.

FIGURE 2113.16

FLUE SIZES FOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS

2113.16.1 Minimum area.

Round chimney flues shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of not less than 1/12 of the fireplace opening. Square chimney flues shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of not less than 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio less than 2 to 1 shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of not less than 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio of 2 to 1 or more shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of not less than 1/8 of the fireplace opening.

2113.16.2 Determination of minimum area.

The minimum net cross-sectional area of the flue shall be determined in accordance with Figure 2113.16. A flue size providing not less than the equivalent net cross-sectional area shall be used. Cross-sectional areas of clay flue linings are as provided in Tables 2113.16(1) and 2113.16(2) or as provided by the manufacturer or as measured in the field. The height of the chimney shall be measured from the firebox floor to the top of the chimney flue.

2113.17 Inlet.

Inlets to masonry chimneys shall enter from the side. Inlets shall have a thimble of fireclay, rigid refractory material or metal that will prevent the connector from pulling out of the inlet or from extending beyond the wall of the liner.

2113.18 Masonry chimney cleanout openings.

Cleanout openings shall be provided within 6 inches (152 mm) of the base of each flue within every masonry chimney. The upper edge of the cleanout shall be located not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the lowest chimney inlet opening. The height of the opening shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm). The cleanout shall be provided with a noncombustible cover.

Exception: Chimney flues serving masonry fireplaces, where cleaning is possible through the fireplace opening.

2113.19 Chimney clearances.

Any portion of a masonry chimney located in the interior of the building or within the exterior wall of the building shall have a minimum airspace clearance to combustibles of 2 inches (51 mm). Chimneys located entirely outside the exterior walls of the building, including chimneys that pass through the soffit or cornice, shall have a minimum airspace clearance of 1 inch (25 mm). The airspace shall not be filled, except to provide fireblocking in accordance with Section 2113.20.

Exceptions:

1.	Masonry chimneys equipped with a chimney lining system listed and labeled for use in chimneys in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 1777, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, are permitted to have combustible material in contact with their exterior surfaces.

2.	Where masonry chimneys are constructed as part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete wall less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining.

3.	Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing materials, such as wood siding, are permitted to abut the masonry chimney sidewalls, in accordance with Figure 2113.19, provided such combustible trim or sheathing is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining. Combustible material and trim shall not overlap the corners of the chimney by more than 1 inch (25 mm).

FIGURE 2113.19

ILLUSTRATION OF EXCEPTION THREE CHIMNEY CLEARANCE PROVISION

2113.20 Chimney fireblocking.

All spaces between chimneys and floors and ceilings through which chimneys pass shall be fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in place. The fireblocking of spaces between wood joists, beams or headers shall be self-supporting or be placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces between combustible material and the chimney.

SECTION 2114
TERMITE INSPECTION
2114.1 Cleaning.

Cells and cavities in masonry units and air gaps between brick, stone or masonry veneers and the structure shall be cleaned of all nonpreservative treated or nonnaturally durable wood, or other cellulose-containing material prior to concrete placement.

Exception: Inorganic material manufactured for closing cells in foundation concrete masonry unit construction or clean earth fill placed in concrete masonry unit voids below slab level before termite treatment is performed.

2114.2 Concrete bearing ledge.

Brick, stone or other veneer shall be supported by a concrete bearing ledge at least equal to the total thickness of the brick, stone or other veneer, which is poured integrally with the concrete foundation. No supplemental concrete foundation pours which will create a hidden cold joint shall be used without supplemental treatment in the foundation unless there is an approved physical barrier. An approved physical barrier shall also be installed from below the wall sill plate or first block course horizontally to embed in a mortar joint. If masonry veneer extends below grade, a termite protective treatment must be applied to the cavity created between the veneer and the foundation, in lieu of a physical barrier.

Exception: Veneer supported by a shelf, angle or lintel secured to the foundation sidewall in accordance with TMS 402, provided at least a 6-inch (152 mm) clear inspection space of the foundation sidewall exterior exist between the veneer and the top of any soil, sod, mulch or other organic landscaping component, deck, apron, porch, walk or any other work immediately adjacent to or adjoining the structure.

SECTION 2115
SPECIAL WIND PROVISIONS FOR MASONRY
2115.1 Gable endwalls.
2115.1.1 General.

Gable endwalls shall be structurally continuous between points of lateral support.

2115.1.2 Cathedral endwalls.

Gable endwalls adjacent to cathedral ceilings shall be structurally continuous from the uppermost floor to the ceiling diaphragm or to the roof diaphragm.

SECTIONS 2116 and 2117

RESERVED

SECTION 2118
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—DESIGN

RESERVED

SECTION 2119
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
QUALITY, TESTS AND APPROVALS
2119.1 Quality.

Reserved.

2119.2 Tests.

Reserved.

2119.3 Approvals.
2119.3.1

Only such masonry units that bear the approval of the building official and are manufactured or fabricated by plants having a certificate of competency issued by the authority having jurisdiction, shall be considered acceptable for the construction of buildings or other structures.

2119.3.2

Approval of masonry units and manufacturing or fabricating plants shall be for periods not to exceed one year and may be obtained upon application and the submission of certificates of tests in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2119.3.3

The provisions for tests for approval of masonry units shall not be construed as in lieu of any tests otherwise required under this chapter.

2119.3.4

Failure of a manufacturer of masonry units to obtain approval or to submit tests as required in this chapter, or such additional tests as the building official may require, shall be cause for rejection of such masonry units.

2119.4 Brick.

Reserved.

2119.5 Stone.

Reserved.

2119.6 Cast stone.

Reserved.

2119.7 Concrete blocks.

Reserved.

2119.8 Structural clay tile.

Reserved.

2119.9 Gypsum tile.

Reserved.

2119.10 Plain concrete.

Reserved.

2119.11 Plain gypsum concrete.

Reserved.

2119.12 Mortar.

Reserved.

SECTION 2120
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ALLOWABLE UNIT STRESSES IN UNIT MASONRY

RESERVED

SECTION 2121
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
2121.1 General.
2121.1.1

Reserved.

2121.1.2

Reserved.

2121.1.3

Reserved.

2121.1.4

Reserved.

2121.1.5

Reserved.

2121.1.6

Minimum No. 9 gauge truss-type horizontal joint reinforcing at every alternate course (16-inch (406 mm) spacing], shall be provided. This reinforcement shall extend 4 inches (102 mm) into tie columns or be tied to structural columns with approved methods where structural columns replace the tie columns. In addition, horizontal joint reinforcement shall comply with TMS 602 Sections 2.4C through 2.4F and Section 3.4B.7.

2121.2 Exterior walls.
2121.2.1 General.
2121.2.1.1

Exterior walls of unit masonry shall have a minimum thickness of 8 inches (203 mm) except as otherwise set forth in Sections 2121.2.11.

2121.2.1.2

No roof or other members shall be placed to develop direct horizontal thrust on walls unless such walls are specifically designed.

2121.2.1.3

The maximum area of wall panels of 8 inch (203 mm) thick unit masonry, as measured between the concrete members which frame the panel such as the beams and tie columns, shall not exceed 240 square feet (22.3 m2), except as set forth in Section 2121.2.2.

2121.2.2 Tie columns.
2121.2.2.1 Concrete tie columns shall be required in exterior walls of unit masonry.

Concrete tie columns shall be required at all corners, at intervals not to exceed 16 feet (4.9 m) center-to-center of columns, adjacent to any corner opening exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) in width, and at the ends of free-standing walls exceeding 2 feet (610 mm) in length. When openings exceed 8 feet (2.4 m) in width, tie columns shall be provided on each side of all such openings. All gable and shed end corners shall have tie columns.

2121.2.2.2

When openings are between 3 and 8 feet (914 mm and 2.4 m) in width, such openings shall have one #5 vertical reinforcing bar at each side. The vertical bars shall be placed in concrete filled cells and shall extend into footings and into tie beams. All such bars shall be continuous from footing to tie beam. All splices, where needed, shall be 30 inches (762 mm) minimum.

2121.2.2.3

Tie columns shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in width. Tie columns having an unbraced height not exceeding 15 feet (4.6 m) shall be not less in thickness than the wall or less than a nominal 8 inches (203 mm), and, where exceeding 15 feet (4.6 m) in unbraced height, shall be not less in thickness than 12 inches (305 mm). The unbraced height shall be taken at the point of positive lateral support in the direction of consideration or the column may be designed to resist applicable lateral loads based on rational analysis.

2121.2.2.4

Tie columns shall be reinforced with not less than four #5 vertical bars for 8 inch by 12 inch (203 mm by 305 mm) columns nor less than four #6 vertical bars for 12 inch by 12 inch (305 mm by 305 mm) columns nor less reinforcing steel than 0.01 of the cross-sectional area for columns of other dimension nor less than may be required to resist axial loads or bending forces. Vertical reinforcing shall be doweled to the footing and splices shall be lapped 30 bar diameters. Columns shall be tied with #2 hoops spaced not more than 12 inches (305 mm) apart.

2121.2.2.5

The concrete tie columns set forth herein are a minimum to limit masonry panel areas and provide an integrated framework for masonry. The spacing of concrete columns for skeleton frame construction, designed as specified in Chapter 19 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), may exceed the spacing herein set forth provided the masonry panels have an area less than 240 square feet (22.3 m2) and the structural system is designed to transmit horizontal wind loads to the columns.

2121.2.2.6

Concrete tie columns designed to limit masonry panel areas may be offset at tie beams or other horizontal members to avoid openings, but the maximum spacing shall not be exceeded.

2121.2.2.7

Concrete columns in load-bearing walls shall be poured only after masonry units are in place. Where masonry walls of skeleton frame construction are laid up after the frame has been erected, adequate anchorage designed by a professional engineer shall be provided. Where structural steel members are made fire resistive with masonry units, the panel walls shall be bonded to the fire-resistive materials.

2121.2.2.8

Where the minimum spacing of tie columns, as set forth in Section 2121.2.2.1, has been satisfied and structural columns of skeleton frame construction are spaced as specified in Section 2121.2.2.5, provision for resisting the horizontal and vertical loads at the edges of masonry panels abutting door and window openings in masonry walls where openings are not bounded by such reinforced concrete columns shall be considered and, where necessary, transfer the forces through the materials of assembly to the ground.

2121.2.3 Tie beams.
2121.2.3.1

A tie beam of reinforced concrete shall be placed in all walls of unit masonry, at each floor or roof level, and at such intermediate levels as may be required to limit the vertical heights of the masonry units to 16 feet (4.9 m). Well-compacted and confined soil below grade may be considered lateral restraint but only above a point 1 foot (305 mm) below the grade where such restraint begins.

2121.2.3.2

Unless otherwise required by design, all tie beams shall have four #3 ties at 12 inches (305 mm) on center at corners and at each bend and at 48 inches (1219 mm) on center elsewhere. A tie beam shall be not less in dimension or reinforcing than required for the conditions of loading nor less than the following minimums: a tie beam shall have a width of not less than a nominal 8 inches (203 mm), shall have a height of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and shall be reinforced with not less than four #5 reinforcing bars placed two at the top and two at the bottom of the beam except that a tie beam using “U” type beam block may be used with the following limitations:

1.	Limited to one-story Group R3 occupancy.

2.	Limited to unsupported spans of 7 feet (2.1 m).

3.	Beam block shall be reinforced with one #7 bar in the top and one #7 bar in the bottom of the pour.

4.	Beam block shall provide not less than 14 inches (356 mm) vertical dimension or less than 41/2 inches (114 mm) horizontal dimension of poured-in-place beam cross-section.

5.	Where beam blocks are used, consideration of resistance to uplift caused by wind forces shall be based on only that portion of the dead load above the topmost mortar joint in the wall.

2121.2.3.3

The tie beam shall be continuous. Continuity of the reinforcing in straight runs shall be provided by lapping splices not less than 30 inches (762 mm). Continuity shall be provided at corners by bending two bars from each direction around the corner 30 inches (762 mm) or by adding two #5 bent bars which extend 30 inches (762 mm) each way from the corner. Continuity at columns shall be provided by continuing horizontal reinforcing through columns or by bending horizontal reinforcing in the columns a distance of 18 inches (457 mm).

2121.2.3.4

A tie beam shall not be required where floor or roof systems provide a rigid diaphragm of reinforced concrete with a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) or where a floor or roof system has an equivalent stiffness factor of not less than 0.5 cubic inches, as determined by the moment of inertia divided by the length. (Per foot of width, measured normal to the plane of the diaphragm and adequately anchored.)

2121.2.3.5

Changes in level of the beams or structural concrete beams (beam) shall be made at tie columns or structural concrete columns and said tie columns or structural concrete columns shall be continuous from beam to beam.

2121.2.3.6

A tie beam may follow the rake of a gable or shed end if the slope does not exceed 3:12 and the requirements of Sections 2121.2.1.2 and 2121.2.1.3 are met.

2121.2.3.7

The concrete in tie beams shall be placed to bond to the masonry units immediately below and shall not be separated therefrom by wood, felt or any other material which may prevent bond. Felt paper no wider than the width of the cells of the block may be used provided that it is depressed a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) in one cell of each block.

2121.2.3.8

Tie beams subject to uplift and lateral wind forces shall be sized and designed to resist all such forces. Tie beams over openings shall be sized and designed to resist dead and live loads combined with wind loads, whichever governs.

2121.2.4 Gable end and shed end walls.

All masonry structures with gable end and shed end (half gable) walls shall have such end walls constructed of masonry, only in accordance with this section. A horizontal tie beam shall be provided in line with the lower ends of the gables and sheds, except as permitted in Section 2121.2.3.6 above, and designed in accordance with Sections 2121.2.1.2 and 2121.2.1.3, and load requirements as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). A concrete coping following the rake of the gable, not less than 64 square inches (0.04 m2) in area reinforced with two #5 bars shall be provided. Tie columns at gable and shed ends shall be provided. Any intermediate tie columns required within the gable shall extend to the coping beam. Tie beams resting on masonry which are not subject to uplift and lateral wind forces shall be provided according to Section 2121.2.3.2.

2121.2.5 Parapet walls.
2121.2.5.1

Masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, shall be reinforced with minimum tie columns and shall be coped with a concrete beam not less than 64 square inches (0.04 m2) in cross-section, reinforced with two #4 reinforcing bars.

2121.2.5.2

A parapet wall exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm) in height above a tie beam or other point of lateral support shall be specifically designed to resist horizontal wind loads.

2121.2.6 Piers.
2121.2.6.1

In any section of a masonry wall of an enclosed structure where openings are arranged to leave sections of walls less than 16 inches (406 mm), such sections shall be steel or reinforced concrete.

2121.2.6.2

Isolated masonry piers of unenclosed structures shall be so constructed that the height of such piers shall not exceed 10 times the least dimension, that the cells are filled with cement grout and reinforced with not less than two #5 bars anchoring the beam to the foundation.

2121.2.7 Cavity walls.
2121.2.7.1

Cavity walls consisting of two separate walls with an air space of not less than 2 inches nor more than 6 inches (51 to 152 mm) may be constructed of solid or hollow-unit masonry provided such walls meet the specific requirements for tie columns and beams set forth in this section and are bonded together at intervals not more than 24 inches (610 mm) apart, vertically and horizontally, by masonry ties or by durable, rigid metal ties 0.10 square inch (64.5 mm2) in the cross section.

2121.2.7.2

The minimum thickness of the separate walls of cavity wall construction shall be 4 inches (102 mm), and units shall be laid in full beds of Portland cement mortar with full-end joints.

2121.2.8 Brick and stone walls.

Walls of brick and stone shall be laterally supported by tie columns and beams, or the equivalent thereof, as provided in this section and shall meet these additional requirements:

1.	In all brick walls at least every sixth course on both sides of the wall shall be a header course or there shall be at least one full header in every 72 square inches (0.05 m2) of each wall surface.

2.	In walls more than 12 inches (305 mm) thick, the inner joints of header courses shall be covered with another header course that shall break joints with the course below.

3.	Solid-unit masonry shall comply with the standard Building Code Requirements for Masonry, ANSI A41.1.

4.	Rubble stone walls shall be 4 inches (102 mm) thicker than is required for solid brick or concrete walls of the same respective heights, but in no part less than 16 inches (406 mm).

2121.2.9 Substitutions.
2121.2.9.1

Where, for architectural reasons or otherwise, it is desirable to reduce the area of any required tie column or tie beam below the specified requirements, the building official may grant such reduction, provided that the area of concrete omitted shall be replaced by reinforcing or structural steel in the ratio 1:(n-1) where n is defined as the modular ratio of elasticity (esteel/econcrete).

2121.2.9.2

Where it is desired to substitute for the #5 reinforcing as required by this section, three #4 bars may be substituted to replace two #5 bars.

2121.2.10 Wall additions.

Where new walls are connected to existing walls, such connection shall be by means of a starter column of minimum 8 inches by 8 inches (203 mm by 203 mm) dimension reinforced with two #5 bars.

2121.2.11 Chases, recesses and openings.
2121.2.11.1

Unit masonry walls required to be a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm) thick, such as exterior walls, fire walls and bearing walls, may be chased or recessed not deeper than one-half the wall thickness for an area not exceeding 8 square feet (0.74 m2), provided the horizontal dimension of the chase or recess does not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm) and provided the chasing shall not reduce the dimension of tie beams and tie columns to less than herein required, except as follows:

Exception: Four-inch (102 mm) deep chases or recesses in 8 inch (703 mm) unit masonry walls may be constructed with 4 inch (102 mm) unit masonry panels provided such 4 inch (102 mm) unit masonry panel does not exceed 5 feet (1524 mm) in width, does not exceed 8 feet (2.4 m) in height, is bonded on one vertical side to 8 inch (203 mm) masonry or a tie column, and is not load bearing. Where such panel exceeds 2 feet (610 mm) in width at locations 20 feet (6.1 m) or more above grade in exterior walls, resistance to wind load shall be considered in the design, and a minimum of 4 inch by 8 inch (102 mm by 203 mm) tie column with two #5 vertical bars shall be provided in the free standing end of such 4 inch (102 mm) wall.

2121.2.11.2

Openings shall have lintels of reinforced concrete. Where such lintel is precast or formed separately from a tie beam, it shall bear not less than nominal 8 inches (203 mm) on the masonry, at each end except as may otherwise be approved for compliance with this code by product approval, or after rational analysis, but not less than 4 inches (102 mm). Where such lintel is formed integrally with the tie beam by deepening the tie beam above the opening, and the tie beam itself is capable of safely supporting all loads, the beam may span up to 6 feet (1.8 m) in length and may be deepened not to exceed 8 inches (203 mm) without additional reinforcing. Where the tie beam is deepened in excess of 8 inches (203 mm) with a span less than 6 feet (1.8 m) in length, and the tie beam itself is capable of supporting all loads, the dropped portion shall contain a #3 horizontal bar at the bottom, bent up at each end and fastened to the upper tie beam steel or two #4 horizontal bars. The dropped portion shall bear at least 4 inches (102 mm) on the masonry at each end. Where the span is in excess of 6 feet (1.8 m), the principal beam reinforcing shall be at the bottom of the beam.

2121.2.12 Glass unit masonry.

Reserved.

2121.2.13 Grill block.

Reserved.

2121.3 Interior bearing walls.

Reserved.

2121.4 Fire walls.

Reserved.

2121.5 Panel walls.
2121.5.1

Panel walls of unit-masonry shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick and shall be limited in panel dimension as set forth in Section 2121.2.

2121.5.2

Panel walls of reinforced concrete shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) thick nor less than required by design as specified in Chapter 19 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2121.6 Veneered walls.

Reserved.

2121.7 Partitions.

Reserved.

2121.8 Fences.

Reserved.

2121.9 Other masonry walls.

Reserved.

SECTION 2122
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
REINFORCED UNIT MASONRY
2122.1 Standards.

The provisions of TMS 402 and TMS 602 are hereby adopted as a minimum for the design and construction of reinforced unit masonry. In addition to TMS 402 and TMS 602, reinforced unit masonry structures shall comply with Sections 2122.2 through 2122.10.

Exception: Unless otherwise specified by the designing architect or engineer, where plan review and inspections are performed by a local building department in accordance with Sections 107 and 110, the provisions of TMS 402, Chapter 3, Section 3.1 and TMS 602, Sections 1.5 and 1.6 shall not apply.

2122.2 General.
2122.2.1

Section 2121 shall not apply where design and construction are in accordance with the provisions of this section.

2122.2.2

The design of buildings and structures of reinforced unit masonry shall be by a professional engineer or registered architect.

2122.2.3

Minimum No. 9 gauge ladder-type hot-dipped galvanized, stainless steel, or epoxy coating horizontal joint reinforcing at every alternate course [16-inch (406 mm) spacing], for reinforced masonry shall be provided. This reinforcement shall be tied to structural columns with approved methods. In addition, horizontal joint reinforcement shall comply with TMS 602 Sections 2.4C through 2.4F and Section 3.4B.10.

2122.2.4 Special inspector.

A Florida-registered architect or professional engineer shall furnish inspection of all reinforced unit masonry structures.

2122.3 Concrete masonry strength.

Concrete masonry strength shall be determined by unit strength method from TMS 602 Section 1.4 or in accordance with ASTM C1314.

2122.4 Reinforcement.

Reinforcement shall comply with TMS 402 and TMS 602 except as modified herein Sections 2107 and 2108.

2122.5 Concentrated loads.

Bearing area and concentrated loads shall be in accordance with TMS 402 Sections 4.3.4 and 5.1.3.

2122.6 Reinforced masonry bearing walls.

Reinforced masonry bearing walls shall have a nominal thickness of not less than 8 inches (203 mm).

2122.7 Anchorage requirements.

Anchorage shall be in accordance with TMS 402. Loading shall comply with TMS 402 Section 4.1 and the following.

2122.7.1

Reinforced masonry walls shall be securely anchored to adjacent structural members such as roofs, floors, columns, pilasters, buttresses and intersection walls.

2122.7.2

Masonry walls shall be anchored to all floors and roofs that provide lateral support to such walls.

2122.7.3

Such anchorage shall provide a positive direct connection capable of resisting the horizontal forces as required in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), or a minimum force of 200 pounds per lineal foot (2919 N/m) of wall, whichever is greater.

2122.7.4

Required anchors shall be embedded in reinforced grouted cells. Anchor bolts shall be installed in accordance with TMS 602 Section 3.4D.

2122.7.5

Wood framing connected by nails shall not be considered as acceptable anchorage.

2122.8 Mortar and grout.
2122.8.1

Mortar materials shall comply with TMS 602 Section 2.1. Grout materials shall comply with TMS 602 Section 2.2.

2122.8.2

Vertical alignment of cells to be grouted shall maintain clear, unobstructed, continuous, vertical cores measuring not less than 21/2 inches by 3 inches (51 mm by 76 mm) for fine aggregate grout and 3 inches by 3 inches (76 mm by 76 mm) for coarse aggregate grout as defined by ASTM C476. The architect or engineer may specify other grout space sizes which shall be permitted provided they comply with TMS 402 Section 1.203.2.1 and TMS 602 Section 3.5C.

2122.8.3

Placing of mortar and masonry units shall comply with TMS 602 Section 3.3.

2122.8.4 Grout placement.

Grout placement shall be in accordance with TMS 402 and TMS602.

2122.8.5 Confinement.

Confine grout to the areas indicated on the project drawings. Use material to confine grout that permits bond between masonry units and mortar.

2122.8.6

Unless otherwise required, mix grout other than self-consolidating grout to a consistency that has a slump between 8 and 11 inches (203 and 279 mm). Self-consolidating grout shall comply with TMS 602.

2122.8.7

Grout shall be placed before any initial set has occurred, but in no case more than 11/2 hours after the mix-designed water has been added.

2122.8.8

Grout placement shall comply with Section 3.5 of TMS 602. Grouting shall be a continuous operation with grout pour height in accordance with Section 3.5C of TMS 602 and with grout lift height in accordance with Section 3.5D of TMS 602.

2122.8.9

Grouting shall be consolidated between lifts by puddling, rodding or mechanical vibration.

2122.8.10

Grout keys shall be formed between grout pours. Grout keys shall be formed between grout lifts when the first lift is permitted to set prior to placement of the subsequent lift.

1.	Form a grout key by terminating the grout a minimum of 11/2 inches (38.1 mm) below a mortar joint.

2.	Do not form grout keys within beams.

3.	At beams or lintels laid with closed bottom units, terminate the grout pour at the bottom of the beam or lintel without forming a grout key.

2122.9 Bearing.

Precast floor and roof units supported on masonry walls shall provide minimum bearing of 3 inches (76 mm) and anchorage in accordance with Section 2122.7.

2122.10 Intersecting walls.

Intersecting walls shall comply with TMS 402 Section 5.1.1.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-22]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 22
STEEL
SECTION 2201
GENERAL
2201.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter govern the quality, design, fabrication and erection of steel used structurally in buildings or structures.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2204 through 2209 and 2214 through 2224.

SECTION 2202
DEFINITIONS
2202.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED.

STEEL ELEMENT, STRUCTURAL.

STEEL JOIST.

SECTION 2203
IDENTIFICATION AND PROTECTION OF
STEEL FOR STRUCTURAL PURPOSES
2203.1 Identification.

Identification of structural steel elements shall be in accordance with AISC 360. Identification of cold-formed steel members shall be in accordance with AISI S100. Identification of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall also comply with the requirements contained in AISI S240 or AISI S220, as applicable. Other steel furnished for structural load-carrying purposes shall be properly identified for conformity to the ordered grade in accordance with the specified ASTM standard or other specification and the provisions of this chapter. Steel that is not readily identifiable as to grade from marking and test records shall be tested to determine conformity to such standards.

2203.2 Protection.

Painting of structural steel elements shall be in accordance with AISC 360. Painting of open-web steel joists and joist girders shall be in accordance with SJI 200 and SJI 100. Individual structural members and assembled panels of cold-formed steel construction shall be protected against corrosion in accordance with the requirements contained in AISI S100. Protection of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall be in accordance with AISI S240 or AISI S220, as applicable.

SECTION 2204
CONNECTIONS
2204.1 Welding.

The details of design, workmanship and technique for welding and qualification of welding personnel shall be in accordance with the specifications listed in Sections 2205, 2206, 2207, 2208, 2210 and 2211 (see Section 2222 for HVHZ) and 2211 (see Section 2222 for HVHZ).

2204.2 Bolting.

The design, installation and inspection of bolts shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sections 2205, 2206, 2207, 2210 and 2211.

2204.3 Anchor rods.

Anchor rods shall be set in accordance with the approved construction documents. The protrusion of the threaded ends through the connected material shall fully engage the threads of the nuts but shall not be greater than the length of the threads on the bolts.

SECTION 2205
STRUCTURAL STEEL
2205.1 General.

The design, fabrication and erection of structural steel elements in buildings, structures and portions thereof shall be in accordance with AISC 360.

SECTION 2206
COMPOSITE STRUCTURAL STEEL
AND CONCRETE STRUCTURES
2206.1 General.

Systems of structural steel elements acting compositely with reinforced concrete shall be designed in accordance with AISC 360 and ACI 318, excluding ACI 318 Chapter 14.

SECTION 2207
STEEL JOISTS
2207.1 General.

The design, manufacture and use of open-web steel joists and joist girders shall be in accordance with either SJI 200 or SJI 100, as applicable.

2207.2 Design.

The registered design professional shall indicate on the construction documents the steel joist and steel joist girder designations from the specifications listed in Section 2207.1; and shall indicate the requirements for joist and joist girder design, layout, end supports, anchorage, bridging design that differs from the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1, bridging termination connections and bearing connection design to resist uplift and lateral loads. These documents shall indicate special requirements as follows:

1.	Special loads including:

1.1.	Concentrated loads.

1.2.	Nonuniform loads.

1.3.	Net uplift loads.

1.4.	Axial loads.

1.5.	End moments.

1.6.	Connection forces.

2.	Special considerations including:

2.1.	Profiles for joist and joist girder configurations that differ from those defined by the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1.

2.2.	Oversized or other nonstandard web openings.

2.3.	Extended ends.

3.	Live and total load deflection criteria for joists and joist girder configurations that differ from those defined by the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1.

2207.3 Calculations.

The steel joist and joist girder manufacturer shall design the steel joists and steel joist girders in accordance with the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1 to support the load requirements of Section 2207.2. The registered design professional shall be permitted to require submission of the steel joist and joist girder calculations as prepared by a registered design professional responsible for the product design. Where requested by the registered design professional, the steel joist manufacturer shall submit design calculations with a cover letter bearing the seal and signature of the joist manufacturer’s registered design professional. In addition to the design calculations submitted under seal and signature, the following shall be included:

1.	Bridging design that differs from the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1, such as cantilevered conditions and net uplift.

2.	Connection design for:

2.1.	Connections that differ from the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1, such as flush-framed or framed connections.

2.2.	Field splices.

2.3.	Joist headers.

2207.4 Steel joist drawings.

Steel joist placement plans shall be provided to show the steel joist products as specified on the approved construction documents and are to be utilized for field installation in accordance with specific project requirements as stated in Section 2207.2. Steel joist placement plans shall include, at a minimum, the following:

1.	Listing of applicable loads as stated in Section 2207.2 and used in the design of the steel joists and joist girders as specified in the approved construction documents.

2.	Profiles for joist and joist girder configurations that differ from those defined by the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1.

3.	Connection requirements for:

3.1.	Joist supports.

3.2.	Joist girder supports.

3.3.	Field splices.

3.4.	Bridging attachments.

4.	Live and total load deflection criteria for joists and joist girder configurations that differ from those defined by the SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1.

5.	Size, location and connections for bridging.

6.	Joist headers.

Steel joist placement plans do not require the seal and signature of the joist manufacturer’s registered design professional.

2207.5 Certification.

At completion of manufacture, the steel joist manufacturer shall submit a certificate of compliance to the owner or the owner’s authorized agent for submittal to the building official as specified in Section 1704.5 stating that work was performed in accordance with approved construction documents and with SJI specifications listed in Section 2207.1.

SECTION 2208
STEEL CABLE STRUCTURES
2208.1 General.

The design, fabrication and erection including related connections, and protective coatings of steel cables for buildings shall be in accordance with ASCE 19.

SECTION 2209
STEEL STORAGE RACKS
2209.1 Storage racks.

The design, testing and utilization of storage racks made of cold-formed or hot-rolled steel structural members shall be in accordance with RMI/ANSI MH 16.1.

2209.2 Cantilevered steel storage racks.

The design, testing and utilization of cantilevered storage racks made of cold-formed or hot-rolled steel structural members shall be in accordance with RMI ANSI/MH 16.3.

SECTION 2210
COLD-FORMED STEEL
2210.1 General.

The design of cold-formed carbon and low-alloy steel structural members shall be in accordance with AISI S100. The design of cold-formed stainless-steel structural members shall be in accordance with ASCE 8. Cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall also comply with Section 2211.

2210.1.1 Steel decks.

The design and construction of cold-formed steel decks shall be in accordance with this section.

2210.1.1.1 Noncomposite steel floor decks.

Noncomposite steel floor decks shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with ANSI/SDI-NC1.0.

2210.1.1.2 Steel roof deck.

Steel roof decks shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with ANSI/SDI-RD1.0.

2210.1.1.3 Composite slabs on steel decks.

Composite slabs of concrete and steel deck shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with SDI-C.

2210.2 Seismic requirements for cold-formed steel structures.

Reserved.

2210.3 Test standard for joist hangers and connectors.

Allowable loads for joist hangers and connectors shall be in accordance with either AISI S914 or the procedure in ASTM D7147. Allowable loads for hold-downs shall be in accordance with AISI S913.

SECTION 2211
COLD-FORMED STEEL
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
2211.1 Structural framing.

For cold-formed steel light-frame construction, the design and installation of the following structural framing systems, including their members and connections, shall be in accordance with AISI S240 and Sections 2211.1.1 through 2211.1.3, as applicable:

1.	Floor and roof systems,

2.	Structural walls,

3.	Shear walls, strap braced walls and diaphragms to resist in-plane lateral loads, and

4.	Trusses.

2211.1.1 Seismic requirements for cold-formed steel structural systems.

Reserved.

2211.1.2 Prescriptive framing.

Detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, less than or equal to three stories above grade plane, shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with AISI S230 subject to the limitations therein.

2211.1.3 Truss design.

Cold-formed steel trusses shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2211.1.3.1 through 2211.1.3.3.

2211.1.3.1 Truss design drawings.

The truss design drawings shall conform to the requirements of Section I1 of AISI S202 and shall be provided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. The truss design drawings shall include the details of permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing in accordance with Section I1.6 of AISI S202 where these methods are utilized to provide restraint/bracing.

2211.1.3.2 Trusses spanning 60 feet or greater.

The owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall contract with a registered design professional for the design of the temporary installation restraint/bracing and the permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing for trusses with clear spans 60 feet (18 288 mm) or greater.

2211.1.3.3 Truss quality assurance.

Reserved.

2211.2 Nonstructural members.

For cold-formed steel light-frame construction, the design and installation of nonstructural members and connections shall be in accordance with AISI S220.

SECTION 2212
GABLE END WALLS
2212.1 Gable endwalls.

Gable endwalls shall be structurally continuous between points of lateral support.

2212.1.2 Cathedral endwalls.

Gable endwalls adjacent to cathedral ceilings shall be structurally continuous from the uppermost floor to the ceiling diaphragm or to the roof diaphragm.

SECTION 2213

RESERVED

SECTION 2214
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GENERAL—STEEL CONSTRUCTION
2214.1 Design.

Steel and iron members shall be designed by methods admitting of rational analysis according to established principles or methods.

2214.2

The design, fabrication and erection of iron and steel for buildings and other structures shall be as set forth in this chapter. The additional requirements set forth in Sections 2215 through 2221 herein, inclusive, apply to structural steel for buildings and other structures located in high-velocity hurricane zones. The additional requirements set forth in Sections 2222 and 2223 herein, inclusive, apply to cold-formed members of sheet or strip steel and cold-formed steel light frame construction located in high-velocity hurricane zones.

2214.3

The following standards, as set forth in Chapter 35 of this code, are hereby adopted.

1.	American Institute of Steel Construction, AISC.

a.	DG03, Serviceability Design Considerations for Steel Buildings, AISC.

b.	DG09, Torsional Analysis of Structural Steel Members, AISC.

c.	DG15, Rehabilitation and Retrofit, AISC.

d.	AISC Steel Construction Manual, AISC.

2.	American Iron and Steel Institute, AISI.

a.	AISI S100, North American Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Steel Structural Members.

b.	AISI S230, Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing–Prescriptive Method for One and Two Family Dwellings.

c.	AISI S240, North American Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Structural Framing.

3.	American Society of Civil Engineers, ASCE.

a.	ASCE 8, Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Stainless Steel Structural Members.

4.	American National Standards Institute/American Welding Society, ANSI/AWS.

a.	Specification for Welding Procedure and Performance Qualification, AWS B2.1.

b.	Structural Welding Code–Steel, ANSI/AWS D1.1—D1.1M.

c.	Structural Welding Code–Sheet Metal, ANSI/AWS D1.3—D1.3M.

d.	Structural Welding Code–Reinforcing Steel, ANSI/AWS D1.4.

e.	Sheet Metal Welding Code, AWS D9.1—D9.1M.

5.	ASTM International.

a.	Standard Specification for General Requirements for Rolled Steel Plates, Shapes, Sheet Piling and Bars for Structural Use, ASTM A6.

b.	Standard Specification for Sheet Steel, Carbon, Metallic, and Nonmetallic Coated for Cold-formed Steel Framing Members, ASTM A1003-A1003M.

c.	Standard Specification for High Strength Structural Bolts, Steel and Alloy Steel, Heat Treated, 120 ksi (830 MPa) and 150 ksi (1040 MPa) Minimum Tensile Strength, Inch and Metric Dimensions, ASTM F3125-F3125M.

6.	National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers, NAAMM.

a.	NAAMM MBG 531, Metal Grating Manual.

7.	Research Council on Structural Connections, RCSC.

a.	Specification for Structural Joints Using High-Strength Bolts, RCSC.

8.	Steel Deck Institute, Inc., SDI.

a.	Diaphragm Design Manual, SDI.

b.	SDI-C Standard for Composite Steel Floor Deck Slabs.

c.	SDI-RD Standard for Steel Roof Deck.

d.	SDI-NC Standard for Non-Composite Steel Floor Deck.

9.	Steel Joist Institute, SJI.

a.	45th Edition Standard Specifications Load Tables and Weight Tables for Steel Joists and Joist Girders, SJI.

b.	“Structural Design of Steel Joist Roofs to Resist Ponding Loads,” Technical Digest No. 3, SJI.

c.	“Vibration of Steel Joist-Concrete Floors,” Technical Digest No. 5, SJI.

d.	“Design of Steel Joist Roofs to Resist Uplift Loads,” Technical Digest No. 6, SJI.

e.	“Welding of Open Web Steel Joist and Joist Girders,” Technical Digest No. 8, SJI.

f.	“Handling and Erection of Steel Joists and Joist Girders,” Technical Digest No. 9, SJI.

g.	90 Years of Open Web Steel Joist Construction, SJI.

h.	“Design of Lateral Load Resisting Frames Using Steel Joists and Joist Girders,” Technical Digest No. 11, SJI.

10.	Steel Tube Institute, STI.

a.	HSS Design Manual, Volume 1: Section Properties & Design Information.

b.	HSS Design Manual, Volume 2A: Member Design 2016.

c.	HSS Design Manual, Volume 2B: Member Design 2016.

d.	HSS Design Manual, Volume 3: Connections at HSS Members 2016.

e.	HSS Design Manual, Volume 4: Truss & Bracing Connections 2016.

2214.4 Workmanship.

Reserved.

2214.5 Statements of the structural responsibilities of architects and professional engineers on the design of structural steel systems.

Reserved.

SECTION 2215
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
MATERIAL
2215.1 Steel.

Reserved.

2215.2 High-strength steel bolts.

Reserved.

2215.3 Used and damaged material.

All steel shall be straight and true, and any section damaged to be out of shape shall not be used. Steel previously used or fabricated for use or fabricated in error shall not be used except with the approval of the building official. Filled holes or welds shall not be concealed. Straightened or retempered fire-burned steel shall not be used except with the approval of the building official.

2215.4 Tests.

Reserved.

SECTION 2216
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
DESIGN LOADS
2216.1

Design shall be based on the dead, live, wind and other loads set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) and the additional stress considerations set forth in this chapter.

SECTION 2217
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
MINIMUM THICKNESS OF MATERIAL
2217.1

The minimum thickness of material shall not be less than as set forth in the applicable standards listed in Section 2214.3 except as otherwise set forth herein.

SECTION 2218
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CONNECTIONS

RESERVED

SECTION 2219
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
TUBULAR COLUMNS
2219.1

Tubular columns and other primary compression members, excluding secondary posts and struts not subject to bending and whose design load does not exceed 2,000 pounds (8900 N), shall have a minimum least dimension of 21/2 inches (64 mm) and a minimum wall thickness of 3/16 inch (4.8 mm).

2219.2

Tubular members when filled with concrete shall have 1/4-inch diameter (6.4 mm) pressure relief holes drilled through the shell, within 6 inches (152 mm) of the top and bottom of the exposed length of the member and one hole at midheight.

2219.3

Concrete fill in tubular members shall not be assumed to carry any of the load except in compression members having a least dimension of 8 inches (203 mm) or greater and having a 1 inch (25 mm) inspection hole in the plate at each end.

SECTION 2220
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PROTECTION OF METAL

RESERVED

SECTION 2221
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GENERAL—OPEN WEB STEEL JOISTS
2221.1 Standards.

Open web steel joists shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 2214.3.

2221.2

Reserved.

2221.3 Design.

Reserved.

2221.4 Connections.

Reserved.

2221.5 Bridging.

Reserved.

2221.6 End supports and anchorage.
2221.6.1

Joists shall not bear directly on unit masonry unless masonry is designed as engineered unit masonry with properly reinforced, grout-filled continuous bond beam.

2221.6.2

The ends of every joist shall be bolted, welded or encased in concrete at each point of bearing to provide not less than 100 percent of the net uplift reaction specified in the structural construction documents.

2221.6.3

The ends of joists shall have a minimum bearing, on reinforced concrete and steel supports as specified in the standard set forth in Section 2214.3(9).

2221.7 Fabrication.

Reserved.

2221.8 Shop standards.

Reserved.

SECTION 2222
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
COLD-FORMED STEEL CONSTRUCTION
2222.1

Cold-formed steel construction shall include individual structural members, structural decks or wall panels, and nonstructural roofing, siding and other construction elements formed from sheet or strip steel and as set forth in Section 2214.3(2) and (3).

2222.2 Standards.

Cold-formed steel used in structural applications shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 2214.3(2) and (3).

2222.2.1

Galvanizing as referred to herein is to be zinc coating conforming to the standard set forth in Section 2214.3(5)(b).

2222.3 Individual structural members.

Design, fabrication and erection of individual cold-formed steel structural members shall be as set forth herein.

2222.3.1

All structural members shall be positively connected to resist the loads set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2222.3.2

All connections shall be by welding, riveting, bolting or other approved fastening devices or methods providing positive attachment and resistance to loosening. Fasteners shall be of compatible material.

2222.3.3

Cables and rods shall not be used as lateral bracing in habitable structures. Lateral bracing, when used, shall have a slenderness ratio of 300 or less, unless restricted by any other section of this code.

2222.3.4

All doors shall be anchored as part of the frame in the closed position.

2222.3.5

No increase in strength shall be allowed for the effect of cold work.

2222.4 Structural sheets.

Decks and panels with or without an approved fill material may be designed as diaphragms in accordance with Diaphragm Design Manual of the Steel Deck Institute, provided other limitations in this code are complied with.

2222.4.1

Poured fill on roof and floor decks shall not be assumed to have any structural value to support or resist vertical or lateral loads or to provide stability or diaphragm action unless so designed, and poured fill and/or applied materials do not degrade when subjected to moisture.

2222.4.2

Positive attachment of sheets shall be provided to resist uplift forces. Attachment shall be as set forth in Section 2222.3.1 and as required by rational analysis, and/or tests, but not less frequently than the following maximum spacing:

1.	One fastener shall be placed near the corner of each sheet or at overlapping corners of sheets.

2.	Along each supporting member, the spacing of fasteners shall not exceed 8 inches (203 mm) on centers at ends of sheets or 12 inches (305 mm) on centers.

3.	The spacing of edge fasteners between panels, and between panels and supporting members, parallel to the direction of span, where continuous interlock is not otherwise provided shall be not more than 12 inches (305 mm) on centers.

4.	Fastening shall be by bolting, welding or other approved fastening device that provides a resistance to lateral movement as required by rational analysis or by test, but not less than 400 pounds per lineal foot (5838 N/m).

5.	Poured lightweight concrete fill will be acceptable as continuous interlock.

6.	Attachment to the supporting structure shall be provided at all perimeters and discontinuities by fasteners spaced at no more than 8 inches (203 mm) on center.

7.	Wall panels shall be attached as set forth in Section 2222.4.2(1), (2) and (3).

2222.4.3

Metal siding and roof panels shall be not less than 24 gauge.

Exception: Roof panels having an approved fill material designed to act as a diaphragm may use a lighter deck gauge provided that the product approval for the fill material allows its use over the same deck gauge, but in no case shall the deck be less than 26 gauge. The permit applicant shall provide the building official with signed and sealed structural calculations for the diaphragm design prepared by a licensed architect or engineer proficient in structural design. The diaphragm design shall comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 16 and Chapter 22 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2222.4.4 Deflection.
2222.4.4.1

Deflection of structural metal siding shall not exceed L/240.

2222.4.4.2

Deflection of structural metal roof panels shall not exceed L/180.

2222.4.5

The bending stress of metal siding and roof panels shall be designed using a safety factor of not less than 2.5.

2222.4.6

Minimum roof decking uplift loads shall comply with the design requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) utilizing rational analysis, but not less than UL 580 Class 90.

2222.4.7

Reserved.

2222.4.8

Metal siding and roof panels shall be designed, where possible, to be continuous over two or more spans.

2222.5 Nonstructural sheets.

Steel sheet sections not suitable by rational analysis for self-supporting structural sheets shall be termed roofing and siding. Roofing and siding shall be used only over solid wood sheathing or equivalent backing.

2222.5.1

Attachment of sheets shall be as set forth in Section 2222.4.2.

2222.6 Protection of metal.

All members shall be treated with protective paint coatings or equivalent protection except as permitted in Sections 2222.6.1 or 2222.6.2.

2222.6.1

All steel sheets having a thickness of less than 20 gauge, i.e., materials of higher gauge, shall be galvanized in accordance with the standards of Section 2214.3(5)(b) herein to provide a minimum coating designation of G90.

2222.6.2

Abrasions or damages to the protective coating shall be spot-treated with a material and in a manner compatible to the shop protective coating.

2222.7

Welding shall conform to the requirements of Sections 2214.3.

SECTION 2223
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PREENGINEERED, PREFABRICATED METAL
BUILDING SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS
(PREENGINEERED STRUCTURES)
2223.1 Scope.

Metal buildings (preengineered structures) shall include, but not be limited to, tapered or straight web structural steel frames and predominantly cold-formed steel secondary components, including, but not limited to, girts, purlins, roof sheets, wall sheets, etc.

2223.2 Standards.

Frames and components shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 2214.3.

2223.3

Structural construction documents for preengineered structures shall indicate the necessary measures for adapting the structures to the specific site. The structural construction documents shall indicate all openings, concentrated loads and other special requirements. Foundation conditions assumed in the design shall be indicated as well as the location and magnitude of building reactions on that foundation under all design conditions.

2223.4 Structural submittals.

Reserved.

2223.5 Design.

A building or component system in this section shall have a structural engineer of record and/or architect of record responsible for the overall design and performance of the entire building including the foundation and the anchorage of the preengineered metal systems buildings thereto. The structural engineer of record and/or the architect of record shall provide the structural construction documents necessary for permitting.

2223.5.1

Calculations for drift and deflection of the metal system building shall be by the specialty engineer.

2223.5.2

Calculations for deflection shall be done using only the bare frame method. Reductions based on engineering judgment using the assumed composite stiffness of the building envelope shall not be allowed. Drift shall follow AISC serviceability design considerations for low-rise buildings. The use of composite stiffness for deflection calculations shall be permitted only when actual calculations for the stiffness are included with the design for the specific project. When maximum deflections are specified by the structural construction documents, calculations shall be included in the design data.

2223.5.3

The manufacturer shall design the metal system building and/or component system in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), and the design shall be signed, dated and sealed by the specialty engineer and reviewed by the structural engineer of record and/or the architect of record. The manufacturer of the metal system building and or component system shall be responsible to provide all reactions to the structural engineer of record and/or the architect of record.

2223.5.4

Fastenings shall be by bolting, welding or other approved fastening device that provides a resistance to lateral movement as required by rational analysis or by test, but not less than 400 pounds per lineal foot (5838 N/m).

2223.6 Permitting.

Reserved.

2223.7 Fabrication and erection.
2223.7.1

Reserved.

2223.7.2

Temporary bracing shall be provided during erection and shall remain in place until all structural frames, purlins, girts, flange braces, cable or rod bracing and sheets used as diaphragms have been installed.

2223.8 Roof sheets, wall sheets, roof panels and wall panels.
2223.8.1

Reserved.

2223.8.2

The fusion welding of structural members and structural sheets defined in Section 2222.4 and less than 22 gauge (0.0299 inch nominal) in thickness shall have minimum of 5/8 inch (17 mm) diameter welds through weld washers not less than 14-gauge in thickness and 1 inch (25 mm) in diameter, contoured if necessary to provide continuous contact, or an equivalent device.

2223.8.3

Clip-mounted standing-seam roof sheets shall not be used as diaphragms nor shall they be considered as adequate lateral bracing of the flange of the secondary member to which they are attached unless one or both of these features are designed into the sheathing system and the manufacturer can certify by testing and/or analysis that such capabilities exist and are appropriately defined.

2223.8.4

Structural standing-seam roof sheets shall be a minimum of 24 gauge [0.0239 inch (0.6 mm) nominal] in thickness.

2223.8.5

Direct screw attached roof and wall sheets may be used as diaphragms provided the sheets are a minimum of 24 gauge [0.0239 inch (0.6 mm) nominal] in thickness. Additionally, these sheets shall be considered to laterally brace the flange of the secondary member to which they are attached.

2223.8.6

See Section 2222 for additional requirements for roof sheets, wall sheets, roof panels and wall panels.

2223.9 Roof purlins and wall girts.
2223.9.1

Adequate bracing shall be provided to the compression flanges of secondary members with special attention to those members subject to uplift or outward pressures where no roof or wall sheets are attached to provide such bracing. Sag rods shall not be considered bracing when located in the neutral axis of the web of the secondary members.

2223.9.2

Roof purlins and wall girts shall be laterally braced in addition to relying on deck and panel diaphragm action.

2223.9.3

The ends and bearing points of secondary members shall be designed to carry 100 percent of dead, live and collateral loads superimposed on them by wind.

2223.9.4

Upward or outward forces of wind are to be calculated without live and collateral loads. When downward or inward forces caused by wind are involved, the dead forces plus collateral load forces must be combined but the roof live load may be omitted.

2223.10 Individual structural members.
2223.10.1

Cables and rods shall not be used as lateral bracing in habitable structures. Lateral bracing, when used, shall have a slenderness ratio of 300 or less, unless restricted by any other section of this code.

2223.10.2

Reserved.

2223.10.3

All doors shall be anchored as part of the frame in the closed position.

2223.10.4

See Section 2222 for additional requirements for metal building systems and components.

2223.11 Inspection.

Reserved.

SECTION 2224
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CHAIN LINK FENCES

TABLE 2224

CHAIN LINK FENCE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

Fence Height (ft)	
Terminal Post Dimensions
(o.d. x wall
thickness)
(in inches)	
Line Post Dimensions
(o.d. x wall
thickness)
(in inches)	Terminal Post Concrete
Foundation Size
(diameter x depth)
(in inches)
	Line Post Concrete
Foundation Size
(diameter x depth)
(in inches)

Up to 4	2 3/8 × 0.042	1 5/8 × 0.047	10 × 24	8 × 24
Over 4 to 5	2 3/8 × 0.042	1 7/8 × 0.055	10 × 24	8 × 24
Over 5 to 6	2 3/8 × 0.042	1 7/8 × 0.065	10 × 24	8 × 24
Over 6 to 8	2 3/8 × 0.110	2 3/8 × 0.095	10 × 36	10 × 36
Over 8 to 10	2 7/8 × 0.110	2 3/8 × 0.130	12 × 40	10 × 40
Over 10 to 12	2 7/8 × 0.160	2 7/8 × 0.120	12 × 42	12 × 42

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

NOTES:

1.	This table is applicable only to fences with unrestricted airflow.

2.	Fabric: 121/2 gauge minimum.

3.	Tension bands: Use one less than the height of the fence in feet evenly spaced.

4.	Fabric ties: Must be minimum the same gauge of the fabric.

5.	Fabric tie spacing on the top rail: Five ties between posts, evenly spaced.

6.	Fabric tie spacing on line posts: One less than height of the fence in feet, evenly spaced.

7.	Either top rail or top tension wire shall be used.

8.	Braces must be used at terminal posts if top tension wire is used instead of top rail.

9.	Post spacing: 10 foot (3 m) on center maximum.

10.	Posts shall be embedded to within 6 inches (152 mm) from the bottom of the foundation.

11.	In order to follow the contour of the land, the bottom of the fence may clear the contour of the ground by up to 5 inches (127 mm) without increasing table values to the next higher limit.

2224.1

Chain link fences in excess of 12 feet (3.7 m) in height shall be designed according to the loads specified in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2224.2

Chain link fences less than 12 feet (3.7 m) in height shall be designed according to the loads specified in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) or may be constructed to meet the minimum requirements specified in Table 2224.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-23]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 23
WOOD
SECTION 2301
GENERAL
2301.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of wood members and their fasteners.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2302, 2303.1 through 2303.1.4, 2303.1.8, 2303.2, 2303.5, 2303.5.1, 2303.5.2, 2304.12, 2304.12.3 and Sections 2314 through 2330.

2301.2 General design requirements.

The design of structural elements or systems, constructed partially or wholly of wood or wood-based products, shall be in accordance with one of the following methods:

1.	Allowable stress design in accordance with Sections 2304, 2305 and 2306.

2.	Load and resistance factor design in accordance with Sections 2304, 2305 and 2307.

3.	Conventional light-frame construction in accordance with Section 2304.

4.	AWC WFCM in accordance with Section 2309.

5.	The design and construction of log structures in accordance with the provisions of ICC 400.

2301.3 Nominal sizes.

For the purposes of this chapter, where dimensions of lumber are specified, they shall be deemed to be nominal dimensions unless specifically designated as actual dimensions (see Section 2304.2).

SECTION 2302
DEFINITIONS
2302.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ACCREDITATION BODY.

BRACED WALL LINE.

BRACED WALL PANEL.

COLLECTOR.

CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION.

CRIPPLE WALL.

CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER.

DIAPHRAGM, UNBLOCKED.

DRAG STRUT.

ENGINEERED WOOD RIM BOARD.

FIBERBOARD.

GABLE.

GRADE (LUMBER).

HARDBOARD.

NAILING, BOUNDARY.

NAILING, EDGE.

NAILING, FIELD.

NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER).

PARTICLEBOARD.

PERFORMANCE CATEGORY.

PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST.

SHEAR WALL.

Shear wall, perforated.

Shear wall segment, perforated.

STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER.

Laminated strand lumber (LSL).

Laminated veneer lumber (LVL).

Oriented strand lumber (OSL).

Parallel strand lumber (PSL).

STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED TIMBER.

TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN).

TREATED WOOD.

Fire-retardant-treated wood.

Preservative-treated wood.

WOOD SHEAR PANEL.

WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL.

Composite panels.

Oriented strand board (OSB).

Plywood.

SECTION 2303
MINIMUM STANDARDS AND QUALITY

ES

2303.1 General.

Structural sawn lumber; end-jointed lumber; prefabricated wood I-joists; structural glued-laminated timber; wood structural panels; fiberboard sheathing (when used structurally); hardboard siding (when used structurally); particleboard; preservative-treated wood; structural log members; structural composite lumber; round timber poles and piles; fire-retardant-treated wood; hardwood plywood; wood trusses; joist hangers; nails; and staples shall conform to the applicable provisions of this section.

2303.1.1 Sawn lumber.

Sawn lumber used for load-supporting purposes, including end-jointed or edge-glued lumber, machine stress-rated or machine-evaluated lumber, shall be identified by the grade mark of a lumber grading or inspection agency that has been approved by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20 or equivalent. Grading practices and identification shall comply with rules published by an agency approved in accordance with the procedures of DOC PS 20 or equivalent procedures.

2303.1.1.1 Certificate of inspection.

In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section is permitted to be accepted for precut, remanufactured or rough-sawn lumber and for sizes larger than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal thickness.

2303.1.1.2 End-jointed lumber.

Approved end-jointed lumber is permitted to be used interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber used in an assembly required to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation “Heat Resistant Adhesive” or “HRA” included in its grade mark.

2303.1.2 Prefabricated wood I-joists.

Structural capacities and design provisions for prefabricated wood I-joists shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5055.

2303.1.3 Structural glued-laminated timber.

Glued-laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI/AITC A190.1 and ASTM D3737.

2303.1.4 Structural glued cross-laminated timber.

Cross-laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified in accordance with ANSI/APA PRG 320.

2303.1.5 Wood structural panels.

Wood structural panels, when used structurally (including those used for siding, roof and wall sheathing, subflooring, diaphragms and built-up members), shall conform to the requirements for their type in DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210. Each panel or member shall be identified for grade, bond classification, and Performance Category by the trademarks of an approved testing and grading agency. The Performance Category value shall be used as the “nominal panel thickness” or “panel thickness” whenever referenced in this code. Wood structural panel components shall be designed and fabricated in accordance with the applicable standards listed in Section 2306.1 and identified by the trademarks of an approved testing and inspection agency indicating conformance to the applicable standard. In addition, wood structural panels when permanently exposed in outdoor applications shall be of Exterior type, except that wood structural panel roof sheathing exposed to the outdoors on the underside is permitted to be Exposure 1 type.

2303.1.6 Fiberboard.

Fiberboard for its various uses shall conform to ASTM C208. Fiberboard sheathing, when used structurally, shall be identified by an approved agency as conforming to ASTM C208.

2303.1.6.1 Jointing.

To ensure tight-fitting assemblies, edges shall be manufactured with square, shiplapped, beveled, tongue-and-groove or U-shaped joints.

2303.1.6.2 Roof insulation.

Where used as roof insulation in all types of construction, fiberboard shall be protected with an approved roof covering.

2303.1.6.3 Wall insulation.

Where installed and fire-blocked to comply with Chapter 7, fiberboards are permitted as wall insulation in all types of construction. In fire walls and fire barriers, unless treated to comply with Section 803.1 for Class A materials, the boards shall be cemented directly to the concrete, masonry or other noncombustible base and shall be protected with an approved noncombustible veneer anchored to the base without intervening airspaces.

2303.1.6.3.1 Protection.

Fiberboard wall insulation applied on the exterior of foundation walls shall be protected below ground level with a bituminous coating.

2303.1.7 Hardboard.

Hardboard siding shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A135.6 and, where used structurally, shall be identified by the label of an approved agency. Hardboard underlayment shall meet the strength requirements of 7/32-inch (5.6 mm) or 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) service class hardboard planed or sanded on one side to a uniform thickness of not less than 0.200 inch (5.1 mm). Prefinished hardboard paneling shall meet the requirements of ANSI A135.5. Other basic hardboard products shall meet the requirements of ANSI A135.4. Hardboard products shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.

2303.1.8 Particleboard.

Particleboard shall conform to ANSI A208.1. Particleboard shall be identified by the grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency. Particleboard shall not be utilized for applications other than indicated in this section unless the particleboard complies with the provisions of Section 2306.3.

2303.1.8.1 Floor underlayment.

Particleboard floor underlayment shall conform to Type PBU of ANSI A208.1. Type PBU underlayment shall not be less than 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) thick and shall be installed in accordance with the instructions of the Composite Panel Association.

2303.1.9 Preservative-treated wood.

Lumber, timber, plywood, piles and poles supporting permanent structures required by Section 2304.12 to be preservative treated shall conform to AWPA U1 and M4. Lumber and plywood used in permanent wood foundation systems shall conform to Chapter 18.

2303.1.9.1 Identification.

Wood required by Section 2304.12 to be preservative treated shall bear the quality mark of an inspection agency that maintains continuing supervision, testing and inspection over the quality of the preservative-treated wood. Inspection agencies for preservative-treated wood shall be listed by an accreditation body that complies with the requirements of the American Lumber Standards Treated Wood Program, or equivalent. The quality mark shall be on a stamp or label affixed to the preservative-treated wood, and shall include the following information:

1.	Identification of treating manufacturer.

2.	Type of preservative used.

3.	Minimum preservative retention (pcf).

4.	End use for which the product is treated.

5.	AWPA standard to which the product was treated.

6.	Identity of the accredited inspection agency.

2303.1.9.2 Moisture content.

Where preservative-treated wood is used in enclosed locations where drying in service cannot readily occur, such wood shall be at a moisture content of 19 percent or less before being covered with insulation, interior wall finish, floor covering or other materials.

2303.1.10 Structural composite lumber.

Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5456.

2303.1.11 Structural log members.

Stress grading of structural log members of nonrectangular shape, as typically used in log buildings, shall be in accordance with ASTM D3957. Such structural log members shall be identified by the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or inspection agency. In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be permitted.

2303.1.12 Round timber poles and piles.

Round timber poles and piles shall comply with ASTM D3200 and ASTM D25, respectively.

2303.1.13 Engineered wood rim board.

Engineered wood rim boards shall conform to ANSI/APA PRR 410 or shall be evaluated in accordance with ASTM D7672. Structural capacities shall be in accordance with ANSI/APA PRR 410 or established in accordance with ASTM D7672. Rim boards conforming to ANSI/APA PRR 410 shall be marked in accordance with that standard.

2303.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood.

Fire-retardant-treated wood is any wood product that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, shall have, when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, a listed flame spread index of 25 or less. Additionally, the ASTM E84 or UL 723 test shall be continued for an additional 20-minute period and the flame front shall not progress more than 101/2 feet (3200 mm) beyond the centerline of the burners at any time during the test.

2303.2.1 Pressure process.

For wood products impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process, the process shall be performed in closed vessels under pressures not less than 50 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (345 kPa).

2303.2.2 Other means during manufacture.

For wood products impregnated with chemicals by other means during manufacture, the treatment shall be an integral part of the manufacturing process of the wood product. The treatment shall provide permanent protection to all surfaces of the wood product. The use of paints, coating, stains or other surface treatments is not an approved method of protection as required in this section.

2303.2.3 Fire testing of wood structural panels.

Wood structural panels shall be tested with a ripped or cut longitudinal gap of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

2303.2.4 Labeling.

In addition to the labels required in Section 2303.1.1 for sawn lumber and Section 2303.1.5 for wood structural panels, each piece of fire-retardant-treated lumber and wood structural panels shall be labeled. The label shall contain the following items:

1.	The identification mark of an approved agency in accordance with Section 1703.5.

2.	Identification of the treating manufacturer.

3.	The name of the fire-retardant treatment.

4.	The species of wood treated.

5.	Flame spread and smoke-developed index.

6.	Method of drying after treatment.

7.	Conformance with appropriate standards in accordance with Sections 2303.2.5 through 2303.2.8.

8.	For fire-retardant-treated wood exposed to weather, damp or wet locations, include the words “No increase in the listed classification when subjected to the Standard Rain Test” (ASTM D2898).

2303.2.5 Strength adjustments.

Design values for untreated lumber and wood structural panels, as specified in Section 2303.1, shall be adjusted for fire-retardant-treated wood. Adjustments to design values shall be based on an approved method of investigation that takes into consideration the effects of the anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment and redrying procedures.

2303.2.5.1 Wood structural panels.

The effect of treatment and the method of redrying after treatment, and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities on the flexure properties of fire-retardant-treated softwood plywood shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5516. The test data developed by ASTM D5516 shall be used to develop adjustment factors, maximum loads and spans, or both, for untreated plywood design values in accordance with ASTM D6305. Each manufacturer shall publish the allowable maximum loads and spans for service as floor and roof sheathing for its treatment.

2303.2.5.2 Lumber.

For each species of wood that is treated, the effects of the treatment, the method of redrying after treatment and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities on the allowable design properties of fire-retardant-treated lumber shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5664. The test data developed by ASTM D5664 shall be used to develop modification factors for use at or near room temperature and at elevated temperatures and humidity in accordance with ASTM D6841. Each manufacturer shall publish the modification factors for service at temperatures of not less than 80°F (27°C) and for roof framing. The roof framing modification factors shall take into consideration the climatological location.

2303.2.6 Exposure to weather, damp or wet locations.

Where fire-retardant-treated wood is exposed to weather, or damp or wet locations, it shall be identified as “Exterior” to indicate there is no increase in the listed flame spread index as defined in Section 2303.2 when subjected to ASTM D2898.

2303.2.7 Interior applications.

Interior fire-retardant-treated wood shall have moisture content of not over 28 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM D3201 procedures at 92-percent relative humidity. Interior fire-retardant-treated wood shall be tested in accordance with Section 2303.2.5.1 or 2303.2.5.2. Interior fire-retardant-treated wood designated as Type A shall be tested in accordance with the provisions of this section.

2303.2.8 Moisture content.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be dried to a moisture content of 19 percent or less for lumber and 15 percent or less for wood structural panels before use. For wood kiln-dried after treatment (KDAT), the kiln temperatures shall not exceed those used in kiln drying the lumber and plywood submitted for the tests described in Section 2303.2.5.1 for plywood and 2303.2.5.2 for lumber.

2303.2.9 Type I and II construction applications.

See Section 603.1 for limitations on the use of fire-retardant-treated wood in buildings of Type I or II construction.

2303.3 Hardwood and plywood.

Hardwood and decorative plywood shall be manufactured and identified as required in HPVA HP-1.

2303.4 Trusses.

Wood trusses shall comply with Sections 2303.4.1 through 2303.4.7.

2303.4.1 Design.

Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of this code and accepted engineering practice. Members are permitted to be joined by nails, glue, bolts, timber connectors, metal connector plates or other approved framing devices.

2303.4.1.1 Truss design drawings.

The written, graphic and pictorial depiction of each individual truss shall be provided to the building official for approval prior to installation. Truss design drawings shall also be provided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum, the information specified below:

1.	Slope or depth, span and spacing.

2.	Location of all joints and support locations.

3.	Number of plies if greater than one.

4.	Required bearing widths.

5.	Design loads as applicable, including:

5.1.	Top chord live load.

5.2.	Top chord dead load.

5.3.	Bottom chord live load.

5.4.	Bottom chord dead load.

5.5.	Additional loads and locations.

5.6.	Environmental design criteria and loads (wind, rain, etc.).

6.	Other lateral loads, including drag strut loads.

7.	Adjustments to wood member and metal connector plate design value for conditions of use.

8.	Maximum reaction force and direction, including maximum uplift reaction forces where applicable.

9.	Metal-connector-plate type, size and thickness or gage, and the dimensioned location of each metal connector plate except where symmetrically located relative to the joint interface.

10.	Size, species and grade for each wood member.

11.	Truss-to-truss connections and truss field assembly requirements.

12.	Calculated span-to-deflection ratio and maximum vertical and horizontal deflection for live and total load as applicable.

13.	Maximum axial tension and compression forces in the truss members.

14.	Required permanent individual truss member restraint location and the method and details of restraint and diagonal bracing to be used in accordance with Section 2303.4.1.2.

2303.4.1.2 Permanent individual truss member restraint (PITMR) and permanent individual truss member diagonal bracing (PITMDB).

Where the truss design drawings designate the need for permanent individual truss member restraint, it shall be accomplished by one of the following methods:

1.	PITMR and PITMDB installed using standard industry lateral restraint and diagonal bracing details in accordance with TPI 1, Section 2.3.3.1.1, accepted engineering practice, or Figures 2303.4.1.2(1a), (2a) and (3).

2.	Individual truss member reinforcement in place of the specified lateral restraints (i.e., buckling reinforcement such as T-reinforcement, L-reinforcement, proprietary reinforcement, etc.) such that the buckling of any individual truss member is resisted internally by the individual truss. The buckling reinforcement of individual truss members shall be installed as shown on the truss design drawing or on supplemental truss member buckling reinforcement details provided by the truss designer or in accordance with Figures 2303.4.1.2(1b) and (2b).

3.	A project-specific PITMR and PITMDB design provided by any registered design professional.

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(1a)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS REQUIRING ONE ROW OF PITMR

For SI:1 inch - 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(1b)

ALTERNATIVE INSTALLATION USING BUCKLING REINFORCEMENT FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS IN LIEU OF ONE ROW OF PITMR

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(2a)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS REQUIRING TWO ROWS OF PITMR

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(2b)

ALTERNATIVE INSTALLATION USING BUCKLING REINFORCEMENT FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS IN LIEU OF TWO ROWS OF PITMR

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(3)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR FLAT PORTION OF TOP CHORD IN A PIGGYBACK ASSEMBLY

2303.4.1.2.1 Trusses installed without a diaphragm.

Trusses installed without a diaphragm on the top or bottom chord shall require a project specific PITMR and PITMDB design prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: Group U occupancies.

2303.4.1.3 Trusses spanning 60 feet or greater.

The owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall contract with any qualified registered design professional for the design of the temporary installation restraint and diagonal bracing and the PITMR and PITMDB for all trusses with clear spans 60 feet (18 288 mm) or greater.

2303.4.1.4 Truss designer.

The individual or organization responsible for the design of trusses.

2303.4.1.4.1 Truss design drawings.

Where required by the registered design professional, the building official or the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed, each individual truss design drawing shall bear the seal and signature of the truss designer.

Exceptions:

1.	Where a cover sheet and truss index sheet are combined into a single sheet and attached to the set of truss design drawings, the single cover/truss index sheet is the only document required to be signed and sealed by the truss designer.

2.	When a cover sheet and a truss index sheet are separately provided and attached to the set of truss design drawings, the cover sheet and the truss index sheet are the only documents required to be signed and sealed by the truss designer.

2303.4.2 Truss placement diagram.

The truss manufacturer shall provide a truss placement diagram that identifies the proposed location for each individually designated truss and references the corresponding truss design drawing. The truss placement diagram shall be provided as part of the truss submittal package, and with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss placement diagrams that serve only as a guide for installation and do not deviate from the permit submittal drawings shall not be required to bear the seal or signature of the truss designer.

2303.4.3 Truss submittal package.

The truss submittal package provided by the truss manufacturer shall consist of each individual truss design drawing, the truss placement diagram, the permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing method and details and any other structural details germane to the trusses; and, as applicable, the cover/truss index sheet.

2303.4.4 Anchorage.

The design for the transfer of loads and anchorage of each truss to the supporting structure is the responsibility of the registered design professional.

2303.4.5 Alterations to trusses.

Truss members and components shall not be cut, notched, drilled, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without written concurrence and approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of loads to any member (e.g., HVAC equipment, piping, additional roofing or insulation, etc.) shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting such additional loading.

TPI 1 specifications." data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">
2303.4.6TPI 1 specifications.

In addition to Sections 2303.4.1 through 2303.4.5, the design, manufacture and quality assurance of metal-plate-connected wood trusses shall be in accordance with TPI 1. Job-site inspections shall be in compliance with Section 110.4, as applicable.

2303.4.7 Truss quality assurance.

Trusses not part of a manufacturing process in accordance with either Section 2303.4.6 or a referenced standard, which provides requirements for quality control done under the supervision of a third-party quality control agency, shall be manufactured in compliance with Sections 1704.2.5 and 1705.5, as applicable.

2303.5 Test standard for joist hangers and connectors.
2303.5.1

Allowable loads for joist hangers shall be in accordance with ASTM D7147.

2303.5.2

Allowable loads for other premanufactured connectors shall be established using the procedure in ASTM D7147. A maximum of two connectors shall be tested simultaneously when establishing loads for one connector.

Exception: Allowable loads for connectors that are flat and are not loaded eccentrically, such as straps, are permitted to be determined by calculations in accordance with the standards listed in this code.

2303.6 Nails and staples.

Nails and staples shall conform to requirements of ASTM F1667. Nails used for framing and sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending yield strengths as follows: 80 kips per square inch (ksi) (551 MPa) for shank diameters larger than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm) but not larger than 0.254 inch (6.45 mm), 90 ksi (620 MPa) for shank diameters larger than 0.142 inch (3.61 mm) but not larger than 0.177 inch (4.50 mm) and 100 ksi (689 MPa) for shank diameters of at least 0.099 inch (2.51 mm) but not larger than 0.142 inch (3.61 mm).

2303.7 Shrinkage.

Consideration shall be given in design for the effects of wood cross-grain dimensional changes that occur as a result of changes in the wood moisture content after installation.

SECTION 2304
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
2304.1 General.

The provisions of this section apply to design methods specified in Section 2301.2.

2304.2 Size of structural members.

Computations to determine the required sizes of members shall be based on the net dimensions (actual sizes) and not nominal sizes.

2304.3 Wall framing.

The framing of exterior and interior walls shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 2301.2 unless a specific design is furnished.

2304.3.1 Bottom plates.

Studs shall have full bearing on a 2-inch-thick (actual 11/2-inch, 38 mm) or larger plate or sill having a width at least equal to the width of the studs.

2304.3.2 Framing over openings.

Headers, double joists, trusses or other approved assemblies that are of adequate size to transfer loads to the vertical members shall be provided over window and door openings in load-bearing walls and partitions.

2304.3.3 Shrinkage.

Wood walls and bearing partitions shall not support more than two floors and a roof unless an analysis satisfactory to the building official shows that shrinkage of the wood framing will not have adverse effects on the structure or any plumbing, electrical or mechanical systems or other equipment installed therein due to excessive shrinkage or differential movements caused by shrinkage. The analysis shall also show that the roof drainage system and the foregoing systems or equipment will not be adversely affected or, as an alternate, such systems shall be designed to accommodate the differential shrinkage or movements.

2304.3.4 Gable endwalls.
2304.3.4.1 General.

Gable endwalls shall be structurally continuous between points of lateral support.

2304.3.4.2 Cathedral endwalls.

Gable endwalls adjacent to cathedral ceilings shall be structurally continuous from the uppermost floor to the ceiling diaphragm or to the roof diaphragm.

2304.3.4.3 Full height studs.

Full height studs may be sized using the bracing at a ceiling diaphragm for determining stud length requirements.

2304.4 Floor and roof framing.

The framing of wood-joisted floors and wood-framed roofs shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 2301.2 unless a specific design is furnished.

2304.5 Framing around flues and chimneys.

Combustible framing shall be a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm), but shall not be less than the distance specified in Sections 2111 and 2113 and the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, from flues, chimneys and fireplaces, and 6 inches (152 mm) away from flue openings.

2304.6 Exterior wall sheathing.

Wall sheathing on the outside of exterior walls, including gables, and the connection of the sheathing to framing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and shall be capable of resisting wind pressures in accordance with Section 1609.

2304.6.1 Wood structural panel sheathing.

Where wood structural panel sheathing is used as the exposed finish on the outside of exterior walls, it shall have an exterior exposure durability classification. Where wood structural panel sheathing is used elsewhere, but not as the exposed finish, it shall be of a type manufactured with exterior glue (Exposure 1 or Exterior). Wood structural panel sheathing, connections and framing spacing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.6.1 for the applicable wind speed and exposure category where used in enclosed buildings with a mean roof height not greater than 30 feet (9144 mm) and a topographic factor (Kz t) of 1.0.

TABLE 2304.6.1

MAXIMUM NOMINAL DESIGN WIND SPEED, Vasd, PERMITTED FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL WALL SHEATHING USED TO RESIST WIND PRESSURESa, b, c

MINIMUM NAIL	MINIMUM
WOOD
STRUCTURAL
PANEL SPAN
RATING	MINIMUM
NOMINAL
PANEL
THICKNESS
(inches)
	MAXIMUM
WALL STUD
SPACING
(inches)
	PANEL NAIL
SPACING
	MAXIMUM NOMINAL
DESIGN WIND SPEED, Vasd, d (MPH)

Size	Penetration
(inches)
	Edges
(inches o.c.)
	Field
(inches o.c.)
	Wind exposure category
B	C	D
6d common
(2.0" × 0.113")
	1.5	24/0	3/8	16	6	12	110	90	85
24/16	7/16	16	6	12	110	100	90
6	150	125	110
8d common
(2.5" × 0.131")
	1.75	24/16	7/16	16	6	12	130	110	105
6	150	125	110
24	6	12	110	90	85
6	110	90	85

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	Panel strength axis shall be parallel or perpendicular to supports. Three-ply plywood sheathing with studs spaced more than 16 inches on center shall be applied with panel strength axis perpendicular to supports.

b.	The table is based on wind pressures acting toward and away from building surfaces in accordance with Section 30.7 of ASCE 7. Lateral requirements shall be in accordance with Section 2305 or Section 2301.2.

c.	Wood structural panels with span ratings of wall-16 or wall-24 shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 24/0 span rating. Plywood siding rated 16 on center or 24 on center shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 24/16 span rating. Wall-16 and plywood siding 16 on center shall be used with studs spaced a maximum of 16 inches on center.

d.	Vasd shall be determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

2304.7 Interior paneling.

Softwood wood structural panels used for interior paneling shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 8 and shall be installed in accordance with Table 2304.10.1. Panels shall comply with DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210. Prefinished hardboard paneling shall meet the requirements of CPA/ANSI A135.5. Hardwood plywood shall conform to HPVA HP-1.

2304.8 Floor and roof sheathing.

Structural floor sheathing and structural roof sheathing shall comply with Sections 2304.8.1 and 2304.8.2, respectively.

TABLE 2304.8(1)

ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR LUMBER FLOOR AND ROOF SHEATHINGa

SPAN (inches)	MINIMUM NET THICKNESS (inches) OF LUMBER PLACED
Perpendicular to supports	Diagonally to supports
Surfaced drya	Surfaced unseasoned	Surfaced drya	Surfaced unseasoned
Floors
24	3/4	25/32	3/4	25/32
16	5/8	11/16	5/8	11/16
Roofs
24	5/8	11/16	3/4	25/32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Maximum 19-percent moisture content.

TABLE 2304.8(2)

SHEATHING LUMBER, MINIMUM GRADE REQUIREMENTS: BOARD GRADE

SOLID FLOOR OR ROOF SHEATHING	SPACED ROOF SHEATHING	GRADING RULES
Utility	Standard	NLGA, WCLIB, WWPA
4 common or utility	3 common or standard	NLGA, WCLIB, WWPA, NSLB or NELMA
No. 3	No. 2	SPIB
Merchantable	Construction common	RIS

TABLE 2304.8(3)

ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOADS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHING AND SINGLE-FLOOR GRADES CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS WITH STRENGTH AXIS PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORTSa

SHEATHING GRADES	ROOFb	FLOORc
Panel span rating roof/
floor span
	Panel thickness
(inches)
	Maximum span (inches)	Loadd (psf)	Maximum span
(inches)

With edge supporte	Without edge support	Total load	Live load
16/0	3/8	16	16	40	30	0
20/0	3/8	20	20	40	30	0
24/0	3/8, 7/16, 1/2	24	20f	40	30	0
24/16	7/16, 1/2	24	24	50	40	16
32/16	15/32, 1/2, 5/8	32	28	40	30	16g
40/20	19/32, 5/8, 3/4, 7/8	40	32	40	30	20g, h
48/24	23/32, 3/4, 7/8	48	36	45	35	24
54/32	7/8, 1	54	40	45	35	32
60/32	7/8, 11/8	60	48	45	35	32
SINGLE FLOOR GRADES	ROOFc	FLOORc
Panel span rating	Panel thickness
(inches)
	Maximum span (inches)	Loadd (psf)	Maximum span
(inches)

With edge supporte	Without edge support	Total load	Live load
16 o.c.	1/2, 19/32, 5/8	24	24	50	40	16g
20 o.c.	19/32, 5/8, 3/4	32	32	40	30	20g, h
24 o.c.	23/32, 3/4	48	36	35	25	24
32 o.c.	7/8, 1	48	40	50	40	32
48 o.c.	13/32, 11/8	60	48	50	40	48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.

a.	Applies to panels 24 inches or wider.

b.	Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only.

c.	Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking unless 1/4-inch minimum thickness underlayment or 11/2 inches of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 3/4-inch wood strip. Allowable uniform load based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 100 pounds per square foot except the span rating of 48 inches on center is based on a total load of 65 pounds per square foot.

d.	Allowable load at maximum span.

e.	Tongue-and-groove edges, panel edge clips (one midway between each support, except two equally spaced between supports 48 inches on center), lumber blocking or other. Only lumber blocking shall satisfy blocked diaphragm requirements.

f.	For 1/2-inch panel, maximum span shall be 24 inches.

g.	Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center where 3/4-inch wood strip flooring is installed at right angles to joist.

h.	Span is permitted to be 24 inches on center for floors where 11/2 inches of cellular or lightweight concrete is applied over the panels.

TABLE 2304.8(4)

ALLOWABLE SPAN FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL COMBINATION SUBFLOOR-UNDERLAYMENT (SINGLE FLOOR)a

(Panels Continuous Over Two or More Spans and Strength Axis Perpendicular to Supports)

IDENTIFICATION	MAXIMUM SPACING OF JOISTS (inches)
16	20	24	32	48
Species groupb	Thickness (inches)
1	1/2	5/8	3/4	—	—
2, 3	5/8	3/4	7/8	—	—
4	3/4	7/8	1	—	—
Single floor span ratingc	16 o.c.	20 o.c.	24 o.c.	32 o.c.	48 o.c.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.

a.	Spans limited to value shown because of possible effects of concentrated loads. Allowable uniform loads based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 100 pounds per square foot except allowable total uniform load for 11/8-inch wood structural panels over joists spaced 48 inches on center is 65 pounds per square foot. Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking, unless 1/4-inch minimum thickness underlayment or 11/2 inches of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 3/4-inch wood strip.

b.	Applicable to all grades of sanded exterior-type plywood. See DOC PS 1 for plywood species groups.

c.	Applicable to Underlayment grade, C-C (Plugged) plywood, and Single Floor grade wood structural panels.

TABLE 2304.8(5)

ALLOWABLE LOAD (PSF) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL ROOF SHEATHING CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS AND STRENGTH AXIS PARALLEL TO SUPPORTS

(Plywood Structural Panels Are Five-Ply, Five-Layer Unless Otherwise Noted)a, b

PANEL GRADE	THICKNESS (inch)	MAXIMUM SPAN (inches)	LOAD AT MAXIMUM SPAN (psf)
Live	Total
Structural I sheathing	7/16	24	20	30
15/32	24	35b	45b
1/2	24	40b	50b
19/32, 5/8	24	70	80
23/32, 3/4	24	90	100
Sheathing, other grades covered
in DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2
	7/16	16	40	50
15/32	24	20	25
1/2	24	25	30
19/32	24	40b	50b
5/8	24	45b	55b
23/32, 3/4	24	60b	65b

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2.

a.	Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only. Edges shall be blocked with lumber or other approved type of edge supports.

b.	For composite and four-ply plywood structural panel, load shall be reduced by 15 pounds per square foot.

2304.8.1 Structural floor sheathing.

Structural floor sheathing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code.

Floor sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table 2304.8(1), 2304.8(2), 2304.8(3) or 2304.8(4) shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section.

2304.8.2 Structural roof sheathing.

Structural roof sheathing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and the special provisions in this section.

Roof sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table 2304.8(1), 2304.8(2), 2304.8(3) or 2304.8(5) shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section. Wood structural panel roof sheathing shall be of a type manufactured with exterior glue (Exposure 1 or Exterior).

2304.9 Lumber decking.

Lumber decking shall be designed and installed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and Sections 2304.9.1 through 2304.9.5.3. Other lumber decking patterns and connection designs shall be substantiated through engineering analysis.

2304.9.1 General.

Each piece of lumber decking shall be square-end trimmed. When random lengths are furnished, each piece shall be square end trimmed across the face so that at least 90 percent of the pieces are within 0.5 degrees (0.00873 rad) of square. The ends of the pieces shall be permitted to be beveled up to 2 degrees (0.0349 rad) from the vertical with the exposed face of the piece slightly longer than the opposite face of the piece. Tongue-and-groove decking shall be installed with the tongues up on sloped or pitched roofs with pattern faces down.

2304.9.2 Layup patterns.

Lumber decking is permitted to be laid up following one of five standard patterns as defined in Sections 2304.9.2.1 through 2304.9.2.5.

2304.9.2.1 Simple span pattern.

All pieces shall be supported on their ends (i.e., by two supports).

2304.9.2.2 Two-span continuous pattern.

All pieces shall be supported by three supports, and all end joints shall occur in line on alternating supports. Supporting members shall be designed to accommodate the load redistribution caused by this pattern.

2304.9.2.3 Combination simple and two-span continuous pattern.

Courses in end spans shall be alternating simple-span pattern and two-span continuous pattern. End joints shall be staggered in adjacent courses and shall bear on supports.

2304.9.2.4 Cantilevered pieces intermixed pattern.

The decking shall extend across a minimum of three spans. Pieces in each starter course and every third course shall be simple span pattern. Pieces in other courses shall be cantilevered over the supports with end joints at alternating quarter or third points of the spans. Each piece shall bear on at least one support.

2304.9.2.5 Controlled random pattern.

The decking shall extend across a minimum of three spans. End joints of pieces within 6 inches (152 mm) of the end joints of the adjacent pieces in either direction shall be separated by at least two intervening courses. In the end bays, each piece shall bear on at least one support. Where an end joint occurs in an end bay, the next piece in the same course shall continue over the first inner support for at least 24 inches (610 mm). The details of the controlled random pattern shall be as specified for each decking material in Section 2304.9.3.3, 2304.9.4.3 or 2304.9.5.3.

Decking that cantilevers beyond a support for a horizontal distance greater than 18 inches (457 mm), 24 inches (610 mm) or 36 inches (914 mm) for 2-inch (51 mm), 3-inch (76 mm) and 4-inch (102 mm) nominal thickness decking, respectively, shall comply with the following:

1.	The maximum cantilevered length shall be 30 percent of the length of the first adjacent interior span.

2.	A structural fascia shall be fastened to each decking piece to maintain a continuous, straight line.

3.	There shall be no end joints in the decking between the cantilevered end of the decking and the centerline of the first adjacent interior span.

2304.9.3 Mechanically laminated decking.

Mechanically laminated decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.3.1 through 2304.9.3.3.

2304.9.3.1 General.

Mechanically laminated decking consists of square-edged dimension lumber laminations set on edge and nailed to the adjacent pieces and to the supports.

2304.9.3.2 Nailing.

The length of nails connecting laminations shall be not less than two and one-half times the net thickness of each lamination. Where decking supports are 48 inches (1219 mm) on center or less, side nails shall be installed not more than 30 inches (762 mm) on center alternating between top and bottom edges, and staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. Where supports are spaced more than 48 inches (1219 mm) on center, side nails shall be installed not more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center alternating between top and bottom edges and staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. For mechanically laminated decking constructed with laminations of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal thickness, nailing in accordance with Table 2304.9.3.2 shall be permitted. Two side nails shall be installed at each end of butt-jointed pieces.

Laminations shall be toenailed to supports with 20d or larger common nails. Where the supports are 48 inches (1219 mm) on center or less, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to alternate supports; where supports are spaced more than 48 inches (1219 mm) on center, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to every support. For mechanically laminated decking constructed with laminations of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal thickness, toenailing at supports in accordance with Table 2304.9.3.2 shall be permitted.

TABLE 2304.9.3.2

FASTENING SCHEDULE FOR MECHANICALLY LAMINATED DECKING USING LAMINATIONS OF 2-INCH NOMINAL THICKNESS

MINIMUM NAIL SIZE
(Length × diameter)
	MAXIMUM SPACING BETWEEN FACE NAILSa, b (inches)	NUMBER OF TOENAILS INTO SUPPORTSc
Decking supports ≤ 48 inches o.c.	Decking supports > 48 inches o.c.
4″ × 0.192″	30	18	1
4″ × 0.162″	24	14	2
4″ × 0.148″	22	13	2
31/2″ × 0.162″	20	12	2
31/2″ × 0.148″	19	11	2
31/2″ × 0.135″	17	10	2
3″ × 0.148″	11	7	2
3″ × 0.128″	9	5	2
23/4″ × 0.148″	10	6	2
23/4″ × 0.131″	9	6	3
23/4″ × 0.120″	8	5	3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Nails shall be driven perpendicular to the lamination face, alternating between top and bottom edges.

b.	Where nails penetrate through two laminations and into the third, they shall be staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. Otherwise, nails shall be staggered one-half of the spacing in adjacent laminations.

c.	Where supports are 48 inches (1219 mm) on center or less, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to alternate supports; where supports are spaced more than 48 inches (1219 mm) on center, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to every support.

2304.9.3.3 Controlled random pattern.

There shall be a minimum distance of 24 inches (610 mm) between end joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and second courses shall bear on at least two supports with end joints in these two courses occurring on alternate supports. A maximum of seven intervening courses shall be permitted before this pattern is repeated.

2304.9.4 Two-inch sawn tongue-and-groove decking.

Two-inch (51 mm) sawn tongue-and-groove decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.4.1 through 2304.9.4.3.

2304.9.4.1 General.

Two-inch (51 mm) decking shall have a maximum moisture content of 15 percent. Decking shall be machined with a single tongue-and-groove pattern. Each decking piece shall be nailed to each support.

2304.9.4.2 Nailing.

Each piece of decking shall be toe-nailed at each support with one 16d common nail through the tongue and face-nailed with one 16d common nail.

2304.9.4.3 Controlled random pattern.

There shall be a minimum distance of 24 inches (610 mm) between end joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and second courses shall bear on at least two supports with end joints in these two courses occurring on alternate supports. A maximum of seven intervening courses shall be permitted before this pattern is repeated.

2304.9.5 Three- and four-inch sawn tongue-and-groove decking.

Three- and four-inch (76 mm and 102 mm) sawn tongue-and-groove decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.5.1 through 2304.9.5.3.

2304.9.5.1 General.

Three-inch (76 mm) and four-inch (102 mm) decking shall have a maximum moisture content of 19 percent. Decking shall be machined with a double tongue-and-groove pattern. Decking pieces shall be interconnected and nailed to the supports.

2304.9.5.2 Nailing.

Each piece shall be toenailed at each support with one 40d common nail and face-nailed with one 60d common nail. Courses shall be spiked to each other with 8-inch (203 mm) spikes at maximum intervals of 30 inches (762 mm) through predrilled edge holes penetrating to a depth of approximately 4 inches (102 mm). One spike shall be installed at a distance not exceeding 10 inches (254 mm) from the end of each piece.

2304.9.5.3 Controlled random pattern.

There shall be a minimum distance of 48 inches (1219 mm) between end joints in adjacent courses. Pieces not bearing on a support are permitted to be located in interior bays provided the adjacent pieces in the same course continue over the support for at least 24 inches (610 mm). This condition shall not occur more than once in every six courses in each interior bay.

2304.10 Connectors and fasteners.

Connectors and fasteners shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.10.1 through 2304.10.7.

2304.10.1 Fastener requirements.

Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section 2301.2. The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in Table 2304.10.1.

TABLE 2304.10.1 FASTENING SCHEDULE

DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTS	NUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENER	SPACING AND LOCATION
Roof
1. Blocking between ceiling joists, rafters or trusses
to top plate or other framing below
	4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Each end, toenail
Blocking between rafters or truss not at the wall
top plate, to rafter or truss
	2-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″)
2-3″ × 0.131″ nails
2-3″ 14 gage staples	Each end, toenail
2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails
3-3″ 14 gage staples	End nail
Flat blocking to truss and web filler	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″) @ 6″ o.c.
3″ × 0.131″ nails @ 6″ o.c.
3″ × 14 gage staples @ 6″ o.c	Face nail
2. Ceiling joists to top plate	4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Each joist, toenail
3. Ceiling joist not attached to parallel rafter, laps
over partitions (no thrust)
(see Section 2301.2)	3-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131" nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	Face nail
4. Ceiling joist attached to parallel rafter (heel joint) (see Section 2301.2)	Per Section 2301.2	Face nail
5. Collar tie to rafter	3-10d common (3″ × 0.148″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	Face nail
6. Rafter or roof truss to top plate
(See Section 2301.2)
	3-10 common (3″ × 0.148″); or
3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131 nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	2 toenails on one side and 1 toenail
on opposite side of rafter or trussc

7. Roof rafters to ridge valley or hip rafters; or roof
rafter to 2-inch ridge beam
	2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″);
or 3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown; or	End nail
3-10d common (3″ × 0.148″); or
4-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Toenail
Wall
8. Stud to stud (not at braced wall panels)	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)	24″ o.c. face nail
10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	16″ o.c. face nail
9. Stud to stud and abutting studs at intersecting wall
corners (at braced wall panels)
	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)	16″ o.c. face nail
16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	12″ o.c. face nail
10. Built-up header (2″ to 2″ header)	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)	16″ o.c. each edge, face nail
16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″)	12″ o.c. each edge, face nail
11. Continuous header to stud	4-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
5-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″)	Toenail
12. Top plate to top plate	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)	16″ o.c. face nail
10d box (3″ × 0.128″);
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	12″ o.c. face nail
13. Top plate to top plate, at end joints	8-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
12-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
12-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
12-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
12-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Each side of end joint, face nail
(minimum 24″ lap splice length
each side of end joint)
14. Bottom plate to joist, rim joist, band joist or blocking
(not at braced wall panels)
	16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)	16″ o.c. face nail
16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″);
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	12″ o.c. face nail
15. Bottom plate to joist, rim joist, band joist or blocking at braced wall panels	2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	16″ o.c. face nail
16. Stud to top or bottom plate	3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
4-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	Toenail
2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	End nail
17. Reserved		
18. Top plates, laps at corners and intersections	2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	Face nail
19. 1″ brace to each stud and plate	3-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
2-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″);
or 2-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
2-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
2-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Face nail
20. 1″ × 6″ sheathing to each bearing	3-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
2-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
2-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
2-13/4″ 16 gage staples, 1″ crown
	Face nail
21. 1″ × 8″ and wider sheathing to each bearing	3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
3-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
2-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-13/4″ 16 gage staples, 1″ crown
	Face nail
3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-13/4″ 16 gage staples, 1″ crown

Wider than 1″ × 8″;
3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-13/4″ 16 gage staples, 1″ crown
Floor
22. Joist to sill, top plate, or girder	4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
3-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or floor
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Toenail
23. Rim joist, band joist, or blocking to top plate, sill or
other framing below
	4-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″)	4″ o.c., toenail
8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	6″ o.c., toenail
24. 1″ × 6″ subfloor or less to each joist	3-8d box (21/2″ × 0.113″); or
2-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
2-13/4″ 16 gage staples 1″ crown
	Face nail
25. 2″ subfloor to joist or girder	3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)
	Blind and face nail
26. 2″ planks (plank & beam – floor & roof)	3-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
2-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″)
	Each bearing, face nail
27. Built-up girders and beams, 2″ lumber layers	20d common (4″ × 0.192″)	32″ o.c., face nail at top and bottom
staggered on opposite sides

10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	24″ o.c., face nail at top and bottom
staggered on opposite sides

And:
 2-20d common (4″ × 0.192″); or
 3-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
 3-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
 3-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Ends and at each splice, face nail
28. Ledger strip supporting joists or rafters	3-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
4-16d box (31/2″ × 0.135″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown	Each joist or rafter, face nail
29. Joist to band joist or rim joist	3-16d common (31/2″ × 0.162″); or
4-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
4-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
4-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	End nail
30. Bridging or blocking to joist, rafter or truss	2-8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
2-10d box (3″ × 0.128″); or
2-3″ × 0.131″ nails; or
2-3″ 14 gage staples, 7/16″ crown
	Each end, toenail
Wood structural panels (WSP), subfloor, roof and interior wall sheathing to framing and particleboard wall sheathing to framinga
	Edges
(inches)
	Intermediate supports
(inches)

31. 3/8″ – 1/2″	6d common or deformed (2″ × 0.113″); or
23/8″ × 0.113″ (subfloor and wall)
	6	12
8d common or deformed (21/2″ × 0.131″ × 0.281″ head) (roof); or
RSRS-01 (23/8″ × 0.113″) nail (roof)d
	6e	6e
13/4″ 16 gage staple, 7/16″ crown
(subfloor and wall)
	4	8
23/8″ × 0.113″ × 0.266″ head nail (roof)	3f	3f
13/4″ 16 gage staple, 7/16″ crown (roof)	3f	3f
32. 19/32″ – 3/4″	8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
deformed (2″ × 0.113″) (subfloor and wall)
	6	12
8d common or deformed (21/2″ × 0.131″ × 0.281″ head) (roof); or
RSRS-01 (23/8″ × 0.113″) nail (roof)d
	6e	6e
23/8″ × 0.113″ × 0.266″ head nail; or
2″ 16 gage staple, 7/16″ crown
	4	8
33. 7/8″ – 11/4″	10d common (3″ × 0.148″); or
deformed (21/2″ × 0.131″ × 0.281″ head)
	6	12
Other exterior wall sheathing
34. 1/2″ fiberboard sheathingb	11/2″ × 0.120″, galvanized roofing nail
(7/16″ head diameter); or
11/4″ 16 gage staple with 7/16″ or 1″ crown	3	6
35. 25/32″ fiberboard sheathingb	13/4″ × 0.120″ galvanized roofing nail
(7/16″ diameter head); or
11/2″ 16 gage staple with 7/16″ or 1″ crown	3	6
Wood structural panels, combination subfloor underlayment to framing
36. 3/4″ and less	8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
deformed (2″ × 0.113″); or
deformed 2″ × 0.120″	6	12
37. 7/8″ – 1″	8d common (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
deformed (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
deformed 21/2″ × 0.120″	6	12
38. 11/8″ – 11/4″	10d common (3″ × 0.148″); or
deformed (21/2″ × 0.131″); or
deformed 21/2″ × 0.120″	6	12
Panel siding to framing
39. 1/2″ or less	6d corrosion-resistant siding
(17/8″ × 0.106″); or
6d corrosion-resistant casing (2″ × 0.099″)	6	12
40. 5/8″	8d corrosion-resistant siding
(23/8″ × 0.128″); or
8d corrosion-resistant casing
(21/2″ × 0.113″)
	6	12
Interior paneling
41. 1/4″	4d casing (11/2″ × 0.080″); or
4d finish (11/2″ × 0.072″)
	6	12
42. 3/8″	6d casing (2″ × 0.099″); or
6d finish (2″ × 0.092″) (Panel supports at 24 inches)
	6	12

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Nails spaced at 6 inches at intermediate supports where spans are 48 inches or more. For nailing of wood structural panel and particleboard diaphragms and shear walls, refer to Section 2305. Nails for wall sheathing are permitted to be common, box or casing.

b.	Spacing shall be 6 inches on center on the edges and 12 inches on center at intermediate supports for nonstructural applications. Panel supports at 16 inches (20 inches if strength axis in the long direction of the panel, unless otherwise marked).

c.	Where a rafter is fastened to an adjacent parallel ceiling joist in accordance with this schedule and the ceiling joist is fastened to the top plate in accordance with this schedule, the number of toenails in the rafter shall be permitted to be reduced by one nail.

d.	RSRS-01 is a Roof Sheathing Ring Shank nail meeting the specifications in ASTM F1667.

e.	Tabulated fastener requirements apply where the ultimate design wind speed is less than 140 mph. For wood structural panel roof sheathing attached to gable end roof framing and to intermediate supports within 48 inches of roof edges and ridges, nails shall be spaced at 4 inches on center where the ultimate design wind speed is greater than 130 mph in Exposure B or greater than 110 mph in Exposure C. Spacing exceeding 6 inches on center at intermediate supports shall be permitted where the fastening is designed per the AWC NDS.

f.	Fastening is only permitted where the ultimate design wind speed is less than or equal to 110 mph.

g.	Nails and staples are carbon steel meeting the specifications of ASTM F1667. Connections using nails and staples of other materials, such as stainless steel, shall be designed by acceptable engineering practice or approved under Section 104.11.

2304.10.2 Sheathing fasteners.

Sheathing nails or other approved sheathing connectors shall be driven so that their head or crown is flush with the surface of the sheathing.

2304.10.3 Joist hangers and framing anchors.

Connections depending on joist hangers or framing anchors, ties and other mechanical fastenings not otherwise covered are permitted where approved. The vertical load-bearing capacity, torsional moment capacity and deflection characteristics of joist hangers shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D7147.

2304.10.4 Other fasteners.

Clips, staples, glues and other approved methods of fastening are permitted where approved.

2304.10.5 Fasteners and connectors in contact with preservative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, and connectors in contact with preservative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood shall be in accordance with Sections 2304.10.5.1 through 2304.10.5.4. The coating weights for zinc-coated fasteners shall be in accordance with ASTM A153. Stainless steel driven fasteners shall be in accordance with the material requirements of ASTM F1667.

2304.10.5.1 Fasteners and connectors for preservative-treated wood.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, in contact with preservative-treated wood shall be of hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Staples shall be of stainless steel. Fasteners other than nails, staples, timber rivets, wood screws and lag screws shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B695, Class 55 minimum. Connectors that are used in exterior applications and in contact with preservative-treated wood shall have coating types and weights in accordance with the treated wood or connector manufacturer’s recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer's recommendations, a minimum of ASTM A653, Type G185 zinc-coated galvanized steel, or equivalent, shall be used.

Exception: Plain carbon steel fasteners, including nuts and washers, in SBX/DOT and zinc borate preservative-treated wood in an interior, dry environment shall be permitted.

2304.10.5.2 Fastenings for wood foundations.

Fastenings, including nuts and washers, for wood foundations shall be as required in AWC PWF.

2304.10.5.3 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant-treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations shall be of hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Staples shall be of stainless steel. Fasteners other than nails, staples, timber rivets, wood screws and lag screws shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B695, Class 55 minimum.

2304.10.5.4 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior applications.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior locations shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, Section 2304.10.5.3 shall apply.

2304.10.6 Load path.

Where wall framing members are not continuous from the foundation sill to the roof, the members shall be secured to ensure a continuous load path. Where required, sheet metal clamps, ties or clips shall be formed of galvanized steel or other approved corrosion-resistant material not less than 0.0329-inch (0.836 mm) base metal thickness.

2304.10.7 Framing requirements.

Wood columns and posts shall be framed to provide full end bearing. Alternatively, column-and-post end connections shall be designed to resist the full compressive loads, neglecting end-bearing capacity. Column-and-post end connections shall be fastened to resist lateral and net induced uplift forces.

2304.11 Heavy timber construction.

Where a structure, portion thereof or individual structural elements are required to be of heavy timber by provisions of this code, the building elements therein shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.11.1 through 2304.11.4. Minimum dimensions of heavy timber shall comply as applicable in Table 2304.11 based on roofs or floors supported and the configuration of each structural element, or as applicable in Sections 2304.11.2 through 2304.11.4. Lumber decking shall also be in accordance with Section 2304.9.

TABLE 2304.11

MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF HEAVY TIMBER STRUCTURAL MEMBERS

		MINIMUM NOMINAL
SOLID SAWN SIZE
	MINIMUM GLUED-
LAMINATED NET SIZE
	MINIMUM STRUCTURAL
COMPOSITE LUMBER NET SIZE

SUPPORTING	HEAVY TIMBER
STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS
	Width (inches)	Depth (inches)	Width (inches)	Depth (inches)	Width (inches)	Depth (inches)
Floor loads only
or combined floor
and roof loads	Columns;
Framed sawn or glued-laminated
timber arches that spring from the
floor line;
Framed timber trusses	8	8	63/4	81/4	7	71/2
Wood beams and girders	6	10	5	101/2	51/4	91/2
Roof loads only	Columns (roof and ceiling loads);
Lower half of: wood-frame
or glued-laminated arches
that spring from the floor
line or from grade	6	8	5	81/4	51/4	71/2
Upper half of: wood-frame
or glued-laminated arches
that spring from the floor
line or from grade
	6	6	5	6	51/4	51/2
Framed timber trusses and other
roof framing;a
Framed or glued-laminated
arches that spring from the top
of walls or wall abutments	4b	6	3b	67/8	31/2b	51/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Spaced members shall be permitted to be composed of two or more pieces not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in thickness where blocked solidly throughout their intervening spaces or where spaces are tightly closed by a continuous wood cover plate of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal in thickness secured to the underside of the members. Splice plates shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in thickness.

b.	Where protected by approved automatic sprinklers under the roof deck, framing members shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in width.

2304.11.1 Details of heavy timber structural members.

Heavy timber structural members shall be detailed and constructed in accordance with Sections 2304.11.1.1 through 2304.11.1.3.

2304.11.1.1 Columns.

Minimum dimensions of columns shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Columns shall be continuous or superimposed throughout all stories and connected in an approved manner. Girders and beams at column connections shall be closely fitted around columns and adjoining ends shall be cross tied to each other, or intertied by caps or ties, to transfer horizontal loads across joints. Wood bolsters shall not be placed on tops of columns unless the columns support roof loads only. Where traditional heavy timber detailing is used, connections shall be permitted to be by means of reinforced concrete or metal caps with brackets, or shall be connected by properly designed steel or iron caps, with pintles and base plates, or by timber splice plates affixed to the columns by metal connectors housed within the contact faces, or by other approved methods.

2304.11.1.2 Floor framing.

Minimum dimensions of floor framing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Approved wall plate boxes or hangers shall be provided where wood beams, girders or trusses rest on masonry or concrete walls. Where intermediate beams are used to support a floor, they shall rest on top of girders, or shall be supported by an approved metal hanger into which the ends of the beams shall be closely fitted. Where traditional heavy timber detailing is used, these connections shall be permitted to be supported by ledgers or blocks securely fastened to the sides of the girders.

2304.11.1.3 Roof framing.

Minimum dimensions of roof framing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Every roof girder and at least every alternate roof beam shall be anchored to its supporting member; forces shall be as required in Chapter 16.

2304.11.2 Partitions and walls.

Partitions and walls shall comply with Section 2304.11.2.1 or 2304.11.2.2.

2304.11.2.1 Exterior walls.

Exterior walls shall be permitted to be cross-laminated timber meeting the requirements of Section 2303.1.4.

2304.11.2.2 Interior walls and partitions.

Interior walls and partitions shall be of solid wood construction formed by not less than two layers of 1-inch (25 mm) matched boards or laminated construction 4 inches (102 mm) thick, or of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

2304.11.3 Floors.

Floors shall be without concealed spaces. Wood floors shall be constructed in accordance with Section 2304.11.3.1 or 2304.11.3.2.

2304.11.3.1 Cross-laminated timber floors.

Cross-laminated timber shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in actual thickness. Cross-laminated timber shall be continuous from support to support and mechanically fastened to one another. Cross-laminated timber shall be permitted to be connected to walls without a shrinkage gap providing swelling or shrinking is considered in the design. Corbelling of masonry walls under the floor shall be permitted to be used.

2304.11.3.2 Sawn or glued-laminated plank floors.

Sawn or glued-laminated plank floors shall be one of the following:

1.	Sawn or glued-laminated planks, splined or tongue-and-groove, of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in thickness covered with 1-inch (25 mm) nominal dimension tongue-and-groove flooring, laid crosswise or diagonally, 15/32-inch (12 mm) wood structural panel or 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) particleboard.

2.	Planks not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in width set on edge close together and well spiked and covered with 1-inch (25 mm) nominal dimension flooring or 15/32-inch (12 mm) wood structural panel or 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) particleboard.

The lumber shall be laid so that no continuous line of joints will occur except at points of support. Floors shall not extend closer than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) to walls. Such 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) space shall be covered by a molding fastened to the wall and so arranged that it will not obstruct the swelling or shrinkage movements of the floor. Corbelling of masonry walls under the floor shall be permitted to be used in place of molding.

2304.11.4 Roof decks.

Roofs shall be without concealed spaces and roof decks shall be constructed in accordance with Section 2304.11.4.1 or 2304.11.4.2. Other types of decking shall be permitted to be used where equivalent fire resistance and structural properties are being provided. Where supported by a wall, roof decks shall be anchored to walls to resist forces determined in accordance with Chapter 16. Such anchors shall consist of steel bolts, lags, screws or approved hardware of sufficient strength to resist prescribed forces.

2304.11.4.1 Cross-laminated timber roofs.

Cross-laminated timber roofs shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in actual thickness and shall be continuous from support to support and mechanically fastened to one another.

2304.11.4.2 Sawn, wood structural panel or glued-laminated plank roofs.

Sawn, wood structural panel or glued-laminated plank roofs shall be one of the following:

1.	Sawn or glued laminated, splined or tongue-and-groove plank, not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal in thickness.

2.	11/8-inch-thick (29 mm) wood structural panel (exterior glue).

3.	Planks not less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in width, set on edge close together and laid as required for floors.

2304.12 Protection against decay and termites.

Wood shall be protected from decay and termites in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.12.1 through 2304.12.6.

2304.12.1 Locations requiring water-borne preservatives or naturally durable wood.

Wood used above ground in the locations specified in Sections 2304.12.1.1 through 2304.12.1.5 shall be naturally durable wood or preservative-treated wood using water-borne preservatives, in accordance with AWPA U1 for above-ground use.

2304.12.1.1 Joists, girders and subfloor.

Wood joists or wood structural floors that are closer than 18 inches (457 mm) or wood girders that are closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to the exposed ground in crawl spaces or unexcavated areas located within the perimeter of the building foundation shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.1.2 Wood supported by exterior foundation walls.

Wood framing members, including wood sheathing, that are in contact with exterior foundation walls and are less than 8 inches (203 mm) from exposed earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.1.3 Exterior walls below grade.

Wood framing members and furring strips in direct contact with the interior of exterior masonry or concrete walls below grade shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.1.4 Sleepers and sills.

Sleepers and sills on a concrete or masonry slab that is in direct contact with earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.1.5 Wood siding.

Clearance between wood siding and earth on the exterior of a building shall not be less than 6 inches (152 mm) or less than 2 inches (51 mm) vertical from concrete steps, porch slabs, patio slabs and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather except where siding, sheathing and wall framing are of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.2 Other locations.

Wood used in the locations specified in Sections 2304.12.2.1 through 2304.12.2.9 shall be naturally durable wood or preservative-treated wood in accordance with AWPA U1. Preservative-treated wood used in interior locations shall be protected with two coats of urethane, shellac, latex epoxy or varnish unless water-borne preservatives are used. Prior to application of the protective finish, the wood shall be dried in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

2304.12.2.1 Girder ends.

The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or concrete walls shall be provided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) airspace on top, sides and end, unless naturally durable or preservative-treated wood is used.

2304.12.2.2 Posts or columns.

Posts or columns supporting permanent structures and supported by a concrete or masonry slab or footing that is in direct contact with the earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

Exception: Posts or columns that meet all of the following:

1.	Are not exposed to the weather, or are protected by a roof, eave, overhang or other covering if exposed to the weather.

2.	Are supported by concrete piers or metal pedestals projecting at least 1 inch (25 mm) above the slab or deck and are separated from the concrete pier by an impervious moisture barrier.

3.	Are located at least 8 inches (203 mm) above exposed earth.

2304.12.2.3 Supporting member for permanent appurtenances.

Naturally durable or preservative-treated wood shall be utilized for those portions of wood members that form the structural supports of buildings, balconies, porches or similar permanent building appurtenances where such members are exposed to the weather without adequate protection from a roof, eave, overhang or other covering to prevent moisture or water accumulation on the surface or at joints between members.

Exception: When a building is located in a geo-graphical region where experience has demonstrated that climatic conditions preclude the need to use durable materials where the structure is exposed to the weather.

2304.12.2.4 Laminated timbers.

The portions of glued-laminated timbers that form the structural supports of a building or other structure and are exposed to weather and not fully protected from moisture by a roof, eave or similar covering shall be pressure treated with preservative or be manufactured from naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.2.5 Supporting members for permeable floors and roofs.

Wood structural members that support moisture-permeable floors or roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs, shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood unless separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier. The impervious moisture barrier system protecting the structure-supporting floors shall provide positive drainage of water that infiltrates the moisture-permeable floor topping.

2304.12.2.6 Ventilation required beneath balcony or elevated walking surfaces.

In new construction, enclosed framing in exterior balconies and elevated walking surfaces that have weather-exposed surfaces shall be provided with openings that provide a net free cross ventilation area not less than 1/150 of the area of each separate space.

2304.12.2.7 Wood in contact with the ground or fresh water.

Wood used in contact with exposed earth shall be naturally durable for both decay and termite resistance or preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil or fresh water use.

Exception: Untreated wood is permitted where such wood is continuously and entirely below the ground-water level or submerged in fresh water.

2304.12.2.7.1 Posts or columns.

Posts and columns that are supporting permanent structures and embedded in concrete that is exposed to the weather or in direct contact with the earth shall be of preservative-treated wood.

2304.12.2.7.2 Decks, fences, patios, planters, or other wooden building components.

Decks, fences, patios, planters, or other wooden building components that directly abut the sidewall of the foundation or structure shall be constructed so as to provide:

1.	Eighteen-inch (457 mm) clearance beneath or,

2.	Six-inch (152 mm) clearance between the top of the component and the exterior wall covering or,

3.	Have components that are easily removable by screws or hinges to allow access for inspection of the foundation sidewall and treatment for termites.

2304.12.2.8 Termite protection.

Wood floor framing in the locations specified in Section 2304.12 and exposed framing of exterior decks or balconies shall be of naturally durable species (termite resistant) or preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for the species, product preservative and end use or provided with approved methods of termite protection.

2304.12.2.9 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs.

Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use.

2304.12.3 Attic ventilation.

For attic ventilation, see Section 1203.2.

2304.12.4 Under-floor ventilation (crawl space).

For under-floor ventilation (crawl space), see Section 1203.4.

2304.12.5 Foam-plastic insulation.
2304.12.5.1

The provisions of Section 2603.8 shall apply to the installation of foam plastic insulation in close proximity to the ground.

Exception: Materials which are of naturally durable wood or are pressure treated for ground contact, and which are installed with at least 6 inches (152 mm) clear space from the structure to allow for inspection and treatment for termites.

In order to reduce chances of termite infestation, no wood, vegetation, stumps, dead roots, cardboard, trash, or other cellulose-containing material shall be buried on the building lot within 15 feet (4.6 m) of any building or the position of any building proposed to be built.

2304.12.6 Preparation of building site and removal of debris.
2304.12.6.1

All building sites shall be graded to provide drainage under all portions of the building not occupied by basements.

2304.12.6.2

The foundation and the area encompassed within 1 foot (305 mm) therein shall have all vegetation, stumps, dead roots, cardboard, trash, and foreign material removed and the fill material shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to assure adequate support of the foundation.

2304.12.6.3

After all work is completed, loose wood and debris shall be completely removed from under the building and within 1 foot (305 mm) thereof. All wood forms and supports shall be completely removed. This includes, but is not limited to: wooden grade stakes, forms, contraction spacers, tub trap boxes, plumbing supports, bracing, shoring, forms, or other cellulose-containing material placed in any location where such materials are not clearly visible and readily removable prior to completion of the work. Wood shall not be stored in contact with the ground under any building.

2304.13 Long-term loading.

Wood members supporting concrete, masonry or similar materials shall be checked for the effects of long-term loading using the provisions of the ANSI/AWC NDS. The total deflection, including the effects of long-term loading, shall be limited in accordance with Section 1604.3.1 for these supported materials.

Exception: Horizontal wood members supporting masonry or concrete nonstructural floor or roof surfacing not more than 4 inches (102 mm) thick need not be checked for long-term loading.

SECTION 2305
GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR
LATERAL FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEMS
2305.1 General.

Structures using wood-frame shear walls or wood-frame diaphragms to resist wind or other lateral loads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS and the applicable provisions of Sections 2305, 2306 and 2307.

2305.1.1 Openings in shear panels.

Openings in shear panels that materially affect their strength shall be detailed on the plans and shall have their edges adequately reinforced to transfer all shearing stresses.

2305.2 Diaphragm deflection.

The deflection of wood-frame diaphragms shall be determined in accordance with AWC SDPWS. The deflection (Δdia) of a blocked wood structural panel diaphragm uniformly fastened throughout with staples is permitted to be calculated in accordance with Equation 23-1.

1.	If not uniformly fastened, the constant 0.188 (For SI: 1/1627) in the third term shall be modified by an approved method.

(Equation 23-1)

where:

A = Area of chord cross section, in square inches (mm2).

E = Modulus of elasticity of diaphragm chords, in pounds per square inch (N/mm2).

en = Staple slip, in inches (mm) [see Table 2305.2(1)].

Gt = Panel rigidity through the thickness, in pounds per inch (N/mm) of panel width or depth [see Table 2305.2(2)].

L = Diaphragm length (dimension perpendicular to the direction of the applied load), in feet (mm).

v = Maximum induced unit shear, in pounds per linear foot (plf) (N/mm).

W = Diaphragm width (in the direction of applied force), in feet (mm).

Δdia = The calculated maximum midspan diaphragm deflection determined by elastic analysis, in inches (mm).

X = Distance from chord splice to nearest support, in feet (mm)

Δc = Diaphragm chord splice slip at the induced unit shear, in inches (mm)

TABLE 2305.2(1)

en VALUES (inches) FOR USE IN CALCULATING DIAPHRAGM AND SHEAR WALL DEFLECTION DUE TO FASTENER SLIP (Structural I)a, c

LOAD PER FASTENERb
(pounds)
	FASTENER DESIGNATIONS
14-Ga staple × 2 inches long
60	0.011
80	0.018
100	0.028
120	0.04
140	0.053
160	0.068

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 4.448 N.

a.	Increase en values 20 percent for plywood grades other than Structural I.

b.	Load per fastener = maximum shear per foot divided by the number of fasteners per foot at interior panel edges.

c.	Decrease en values 50 percent for seasoned lumber (moisture content < 19 percent).

TABLE 2305.2(2)

VALUES OF Gt FOR USE IN CALCULATING DEFLECTION OF WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEAR WALLS AND DIAPHRAGMS

PANEL
TYPE
	SPAN
RATING
	VALUES OF Gt (lb/in. panel depth or width)
Structural Sheathing	Structural I
Plywood		Plywood	
3-ply	4-ply	5-plya	OSB	3-ply	4-ply	5-plya	OSB
Sheathing	24/0	25,000	32,500	37,500	77,500	32,500	42,500	41,500	77,500
24/16	27,000	35,000	40,500	83,500	35,000	45,500	44,500	83,500
32/16	27,000	35,000	40,500	83,500	35,000	45,500	44,500	83,500
40/20	28,500	37,000	43,000	88,500	37,000	48,000	47,500	88,500
48/24	31,000	40,500	46,500	96,000	40,500	52,500	51,000	96,000
Single Floor	16 o.c.	27,000	35,000	40,500	83,500	35,000	45,500	44,500	83,500
20 o.c.	28,000	36,500	42,000	87,000	36,500	47,500	46,000	87,000
24 o.c.	30,000	39,000	45,000	93,000	39,000	50,500	49,500	93,000
32 o.c.	36,000	47,000	54,000	110,000	47,000	61,000	59,500	110,000
48 o.c.	50,500	65,500	76,000	155,000	65,500	85,000	83,500	155,000
		Structural Sheathing	Structural I
Thickness
(in.)
	A-A,
A-C
	Marine	All Other
Grades
	A-A,
A-C
	Marine	All Other
Grades

Sanded Plywood	1/4	24,000	31,000	24,000	31,000	31,000	31,000
11/32	25,500	33,000	25,500	33,000	33,000	33,000
3/8	26,000	34,000	26,000	34,000	34,000	34,000
15/32	38,000	49,500	38,000	49,500	49,500	49,500
1/2	38,500	50,000	38,500	50,000	50,000	50,000
19/32	49,000	63,500	49,000	63,500	63,500	63,500
5/8	49,500	64,500	49,500	64,500	64,500	64,500
23/32	50,500	65,500	50,500	65,500	65,500	65,500
3/4	51,000	66,500	51,000	66,500	66,500	66,500
7/8	52,500	68,500	52,500	68,500	68,500	68,500
1	73,500	95,500	73,500	95,500	95,500	95,500
11/8	75,000	97,500	75,000	97,500	97,500	97,500

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound/inch = 0.1751 N/mm.

a.	5-ply applies to plywood with five or more layers. For 5-ply plywood with three layers, use values for 4-ply panels.

2305.3 Shear wall deflection.

The deflection of wood-frame shear walls shall be determined in accordance with AWC SDPWS. The deflection (Δsw) of a blocked wood structural panel shear wall uniformly fastened throughout with staples is permitted to be calculated in accordance with Equation 23-2.

(Equation 23-2)

where:

A = Area of end post cross section in square inches (mm2).

b = Shear wall length, in feet (mm).

da = Total vertical elongation of wall anchorage system (including fastener slip, device elongation, rod elongation, etc.) at the induced unit shear in the shear wall (v).

E = Modulus of elasticity of end posts, in pounds per square inch (N/mm2).

en = Staple slip, in inches (mm) [see Table 2305.2(1)].

Gt = Panel rigidity through the thickness, in pounds per inch (N/mm) of panel width or depth [see Table 2305.2(2)].

h = Shear wall height, in feet (mm).

v = Induced unit shear, in pounds per linear foot (N/mm).

Δsw = Maximum shear wall deflection determined by elastic analysis, in inches (mm).

SECTION 2306
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN
2306.1 Allowable stress design.

The design and construction of wood elements in structures using allowable stress design shall be in accordance with the following applicable standards:

American Wood Council.
NDS	National Design Specification for Wood Construction
SDPWS	Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic
American Institute of Timber Construction.
AITC 104	Typical Construction Details
AITC 110	Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated Timber
AITC 113	Standard for Dimensions of Structural Glued Laminated Timber
AITC 119	Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Hardwood Species
AITC 200	Inspection Manual
American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers.
ASABE EP 484.2	Diaphragm Design of Metal-clad, Post-Frame Rectangular Buildings
ASABE EP 486.2	Shallow Post Foundation Design
ASABE 559.1	Design Requirements and Bending Properties for Mechanically Laminated Columns
APA—The Engineered Wood Association.
ANSI 117	Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species
ANSI A190.1	Structural Glued Laminated Timber
Panel Design Specification
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 1—Design & Fabrication of Plywood Curved Panel
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 2—Design & Fabrication of Glued Plywood-lumber Beams
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 3—Design & Fabrication of Plywood Stressed-skin Panels
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 4—Design & Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich Panels
Plywood Design Specification Supplement 5—Design & Fabrication of All-plywood Beams
EWS APA T300	Glulam Connection Details
EWS APA S560	Field Notching and Drilling of Glued Laminated Timber Beams
EWS APA S475	Glued Laminated Beam Design Tables
EWS APA X450	Glulam in Residential Building Construction Guide
EWS APA X440	Product and Application Guide: Glulam
EWS APA R540	Builders Tips: Proper Storage and Handling of Glulam Beams
Truss Plate Institute, Inc.
TPI 1	National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction
2306.1.1 Joists and rafters.

The design of rafter spans is permitted to be in accordance with the AWC STJR.

2306.1.2 Plank and beam flooring.

The design of plank and beam flooring is permitted to be in accordance with the AWC Wood Construction Data No. 4.

2306.1.3 Treated wood stress adjustments.

The allowable unit stresses for preservative-treated wood need no adjustment for treatment, but are subject to other adjustments.

The allowable unit stresses for fire-retardant-treated wood, including fastener values, shall be developed from an approved method of investigation that considers the effects of anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment and the redrying process. Other adjustments are applicable except that the impact load duration shall not apply.

2306.1.4 Lumber decking.

The capacity of lumber decking arranged according to the patterns described in Section 2304.9.2 shall be the lesser of the capacities determined for moment and deflection according to the formulas in Table 2306.1.4.

TABLE 2306.1.4

ALLOWABLE LOADS FOR LUMBER DECKING

PATTERN	ALLOWABLE AREA LOADa
Moment	Deflection
Simple span	
	

Two-span continuous	
	

Combination simple- and
two-span continuous
	
	

Cantilevered pieces
intermixed
	
	

Controlled random layup
Mechanically laminated
decking
	
	

2-inch decking	
	

3-inch and 4-inch decking	
	

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	wb = Allowable total uniform load limited by moment.

wΔ = Allowable total uniform load limited by deflection.

d = Actual decking thickness.

l = Span of decking.

Fb′ = Allowable bending stress adjusted by applicable factors.

E′ = Modulus of elasticity adjusted by applicable factors.

2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms.

Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall be permitted. The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.

TABLE 2306.2(1)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL DIAPHRAGMS UTILIZING STAPLES WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH, OR SOUTHERN PINEa FOR WIND LOADINGf

PANEL
GRADE
	STAPLE LENGTH
AND GAGEd
	MINIMUM
FASTENER
PENETRATION
IN FRAMING
(inches)
	MINIMUM
NOMINAL
PANEL
THICKNESS
(inch)
	MINIMUM NOMINAL
WIDTH OF
FRAMING
MEMBERS AT
ADJOINING PANEL
EDGES AND
BOUNDARIESe
(inches)
	BLOCKED
DIAPHRAGMS
	UNBLOCKED
DIAPHRAGMS

Fastener spacing (inches) at
diaphragm boundaries (all cases) at continuous
panel edges parallel to load (Cases 3, 4), and at all
panel edges (Cases 5, 6)b
	Fasteners spaced 6 max. at
supported edgesb

6	4	21/2c	2c	Case 1 (No
unblocked edges or
continuous joints
parallel to load)
	All other
configurations
(Cases 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6)

Fastener spacing (inches) at other panel edges
(Cases 1, 2, 3 and 4)b

6	6	4	3
Structural I grades	11/2 16 gage	1	3/8	2	175	235	350	400	155	115
3	200	265	395	450	175	130
15/32	2	175	235	350	400	155	120
3	200	265	395	450	175	130
Sheathing, single
floor and other
grades covered in
DOC PS 1 and PS 2	11/2 16 gage	1	3/8	2	160	210	315	360	140	105
3	180	235	355	400	160	120
7/16	2	165	225	335	380	150	110
3	190	250	375	425	165	125
15/32	2	160	210	315	360	140	105
3	180	235	355	405	160	120
19/32	2	175	235	350	400	155	115
3	200	265	395	450	175	130

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b.	Space fasteners maximum 12 inches on center along intermediate framing members (6 inches on center where supports are spaced 48 inches on center).

c.	Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 3 inches nominal or wider.

d.	Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

e.	The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or adjoining panel edges shall be 2 inches.

f.	For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

TABLE 2306.2(2)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS UTILIZING MULTIPLE ROWS OF STAPLES (HIGH-LOAD DIAPHRAGMS) WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINEa FOR WIND LOADINGb, h

PANEL GRADEc	STAPLE
GAGEf
	MINIMUM
FASTENER
PENETRATION
IN FRAMING
(inches)	MINIMUM
NOMINAL
PANEL
THICKNESS
(inch)	MINIMUM NOMINAL
WIDTH OF FRAMING
MEMBER AT
ADJOINING PANEL
EDGES AND
BOUNDARIESe
	LINES OF
FASTENERS
	BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS
Cases 1 and 2d
Fastener Spacing Per Line at
Boundaries
(inches)

4	21/2	2
Fastener Spacing Per Line at
Other Panel Edges (inches)

6	4	4	3	3	2
Structural I grades	14 gage
staples
	2	15/32	3	2	600	600	860	960	1,060	1,200
4	3	860	900	1,160	1,295	1,295	1,400
19/32	3	2	600	600	875	960	1,075	1,200
4	3	875	900	1,175	1,440	1,475	1,795
Sheathing single
floor and other
grades covered in
DOC PS 1 and PS 2	14 gage
staples
	2	15/32	3	2	540	540	735	865	915	1,080
4	3	735	810	1,005	1,105	1,105	1,195
19/32	3	2	600	600	865	960	1,065	1,200
4	3	865	900	1,130	1,430	1,370	1,485
23/32	4	3	865	900	1,130	1,490	1,430	1,545

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of framing lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples, find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b.	Fastening along intermediate framing members: Space fasteners a maximum of 12 inches on center, except 6 inches on center for spans greater than 32 inches.

c.	Panels conforming to PS 1 or PS 2.

d.	This table gives shear values for Cases 1 and 2 as shown in Table 2306.2(1). The values shown are applicable to Cases 3, 4, 5 and 6 as shown in Table 2306.2(1), providing fasteners at all continuous panel edges are spaced in accordance with the boundary fastener spacing.

e.	The minimum nominal depth of framing members shall be 3 inches nominal. The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or adjoining panel edges shall be 2 inches.

f.	Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch, and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

g.	Reserved.

h.	For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

2306.2.1 Gypsum board diaphragm ceilings.

Gypsum board diaphragm ceilings shall be in accordance with Section 2508.6.

2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls.

Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall be permitted. The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC SDPWS.

TABLE 2306.3(1)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (POUNDS PER FOOT) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEAR WALLS UTILIZING STAPLES WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINEa FOR WIND LOADINGb, f, i

PANEL GRADE	MINIMUM NOMINAL
PANEL THICKNESS
(inch)	MINIMUM
FASTENER
PENETRATION IN
FRAMING (inches)
	PANELS APPLIED DIRECT TO FRAMING	PANELS APPLIED OVER 1/2" OR 5/8"
GYPSUM SHEATHING

Staple sizeh	Fastener spacing at panel
edges (inches)
	Staple sizeh	Fastener spacing at panel
edges (inches)

6	4	3	2d	6	4	3	2d
Structural I
sheathing
	3/8	1	11/2 16
Gage
	155	235	315	400	2 16 Gage	155	235	310	400
7/16	170	260	345	440	155	235	310	400
15/32	185	280	375	475	155	235	300	400
Sheathing,
plywood sidinge
except Group 5
Species,
ANSI/APA PRP 210
siding
	5/16c or 1/4c	1	11/2 16
Gage
	145	220	295	375	2 16 Gage	110	165	220	285
3/8	140	210	280	360	140	210	280	360
7/16	155	230	310	395	140	210	280	360
15/32	170	255	335	430	140	210	280	360
19/32	13/4 16
Gage
	185	280	375	475	—	—	—	—	—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b.	Panel edges backed with 2-inch nominal or wider framing. Install panels either horizontally or vertically. Space fasteners maximum 6 inches on center along intermediate framing members for 3/8-inch and 7/16-inch panels installed on studs spaced 24 inches on center. For other conditions and panel thickness, space fasteners maximum 12 inches on center on intermediate supports.

c.	3/8-inch panel thickness or siding with a span rating of 16 inches on center is the minimum recommended where applied directly to framing as exterior siding. For grooved panel siding, the nominal panel thickness is the thickness of the panel measured at the point of fastening.

d.	Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 3 inches nominal or wider.

e.	Values apply to all-veneer plywood. Thickness at point of fastening on panel edges governs shear values.

f.	Where panels are applied on both faces of a wall and fastener spacing is less than 6 inches on center on either side, panel joints shall be offset to fall on different framing members, or framing shall be 3 inches nominal or thicker at adjoining panel edges.

g.	Reserved.

h.	Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

i.	For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

TABLE 2306.3(2)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (plf) FOR WIND LOADING ON SHEAR WALLS OF FIBERBOARD SHEATHING BOARD CONSTRUCTION UTILIZING STAPLES FOR TYPE V CONSTRUCTION ONLYa, b, c, d

THICKNESS AND GRADE	FASTENER SIZE	ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUE
(pounds per linear foot)
STAPLE SPACING AT PANEL EDGES (inches)a
4	3	2
1/2″ or 25/32″ Structural	16 gage galvanized staple, 7/16″ crown, 13/4 inch long	150	200	225
16 gage galvanized staple, 1″ crown, 13/4 inch long	220	290	325

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	Fiberboard sheathing shall not be used to brace concrete or masonry walls.

b.	Panel edges shall be backed with 2-inch or wider framing of Douglas Fir-Larch or Southern Pine. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of framing lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples, multiply the shear value from the table above by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

c.	Values shown are for fiberboard sheathing on one side only with long panel dimension either parallel or perpendicular to studs.

d.	Fastener shall be spaced 6 inches on center along intermediate framing members.

e.	Reserved.

TABLE 2306.3(3)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES FOR WIND FORCES FOR SHEAR WALLS OF LATH AND PLASTER OR GYPSUM BOARD WOOD FRAMED WALL ASSEMBLIES UTILIZING STAPLES

TYPE OF MATERIAL	THICKNESS
OF MATERIAL
	WALL
CONSTRUCTION
	STAPLE SPACINGb
MAXIMUM (inches)
	SHEAR
VALUEa, c
(plf)	MINIMUM STAPLE SIZEf, g
1. Expanded metal or woven wire
lath and Portland cement plaster
	7/8″	Unblocked	6	180	No. 16 gage galv. staple, 7/8″ legs
2. Gypsum lath, plain or
perforated
	3/8″ lath and
1/2″ plaster
	Unblocked	5	100	No. 16 gage galv. staple, 11/8″ long
3. Gypsum sheating	1/2″ × 2′ × 8′	Unblocked	4	75	No. 16 gage galv. staple, 13/4″ long
1/2″ × 4′	Blockedd
Unblocked
	4
7
	175
100

4. Gypsum board, gypsum veneer
base or water-resistant gypsum
backing board	1/2″	Unblockedd	7	75	No. 16 gage galv. staple, 11/2″ long
Unblockedd	4	110
Unblocked	7	100
Unblocked	4	125
Blockede	7	125
Blockede	4	150
5/8″	Unblockedd	7	115	No. 16 gage galv. staple, 15/8″ long
4	145
Blockede	7	145
4	175
Blockede
Two-ply
	Base ply: 9
Face ply: 7
	250	No. 16 gage galv. staple 15/8″ long
No. 15 gage galv. staple, 21/4″ long

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	These shear walls shall not be used to resist loads imposed by masonry or concrete walls (see AWC SDPWS). Values shown are for short-term loading due to wind loading. Values shown shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b.	Applies to fastening at studs, top and bottom plates and blocking.

c.	Except as noted, shear values are based on a maximum framing spacing of 16 inches on center.

d.	Maximum framing spacing of 24 inches on center.

e.	All edges are blocked, and edge fastening is provided at all supports and all panel edges.

f.	Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16 inch, measured outside the legs, and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

g.	Staples for the attachment of gypsum lath and woven-wire lath shall have a minimum crown width of 3/4 inch, measured outside the legs.

SECTION 2307
LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN
2307.1 Load and resistance factor design.

The design and construction of wood elements and structures using load and resistance factor design shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS and AWC SDPWS.

SECTION 2308
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION

RESERVED

SECTION 2309
WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION MANUAL
2309.1 Wood Frame Construction Manual.

Structural design in accordance with the AWC WFCM shall be permitted for buildings assigned to Risk Category I or II subject to the limitations of Section 1.1.3 of the AWC WFCM and the load assumptions contained therein. Structural elements beyond these limitations shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

SECTION 2310 through 2313


RESERVED

SECTION 2314
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES
2314.1 Design.

Wood members and their fastenings shall be designed to comply with ASCE 7 by methods based on rational analysis or approved laboratory testing procedures, both performed in accordance with fundamental principles of theoretical and applied mechanics.

2314.2 Workmanship.

Wood members shall be framed, anchored, tied and braced to develop the strength and rigidity necessary for the purposes for which they are used and to resist the loads imposed as set forth in this code. Wood construction shall be in conformance with the tolerances, quality and methods of construction as prescribed by the standards in Chapter 35 of this code.

2314.3 Fabrication.
2314.3.1

Preparation, fabrication and installation of wood members and the glues, connectors and mechanical devices for fastening shall conform to good engineering practice.

2314.3.2

Any person desiring to manufacture or fabricate wood truss assemblies shall obtain a certificate of competency from the authority having jurisdiction.

2314.4

The following standards, as set forth in Chapter 35 of this code, are hereby adopted for the design and quality of wood members and their fastenings:

2314.4.1

American Hardboard Products Association, 887-B Wilmette Road, Palatine, IL 60067 AHA.

1.	Basic Hardboard ANSI/AHA A135.4–1982.

2.	Prefinished Hardboard Paneling ANSI/AHA A135.5–1982.

3.	Hardboard Siding ANSI/AHA A135.6–1990.

4.	Cellulosic Fiberboard ANSI/AHA A194.1–1985.

5.	Recommended Product and Application Specification—Structural Insulating Roof Deck, I.B. Spec. No. 1.

6.	Recommended Product and Application Specification—1/2-inch Fiberboard Nail-Base-Sheathing I.B. Spec. No. 2.

7.	Recommended Product and Application Specification—1/2-inch Intermediate Fiberboard Sheathing I.B. Spec. No. 3.

2314.4.2

American Institute of Timber Construction, 333 West Hampden Avenue, Englewood, CO 80110 AITC.

1.	Typical Construction Details, AITC 104.

2.	Code of Suggested Practices, AITC 106.

3.	Standard for Heavy Timber Construction, AITC 108.

4.	Standard for Preservative Treatment for Structural Glued Laminated Timber, AITC 109.

5.	Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated Timber, AITC 110.

6.	Standard for Tongue and Groove Heavy Timber Roof Decking, AITC 112.

7.	Standard for Dimensions of Glued Laminated Structural Members, AITC 113.

8.	Standard Specifications for Hardwood Glued Laminated Timber, AITC 119.

9.	Technical Report No. 7, Calculation of Fire Resistance of Glued Laminated Timber.

2314.4.3

APA The Engineered Wood Association (formerly APA American Plywood Association), 7011 South 19th Street, Tacoma, WA 98466.

1.	APA Design Construction Guide, E30.

2.	Plywood Design Specification Y510J.

3.	Plywood Design Specification—Design and Fabrication of Plywood Beams, Supplement No. 1 S811.

4.	Plywood Design Specification—Design and Fabrication of Plywood Beams, Supplement No. 2 S812.

5.	Plywood Design Specification-Design and Fabrication of Plywood Stressed—Skin Panels, Supplement No. 3 U813.

6.	Plywood Design Specifications—Design and Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich Panels Supplement No. 4 U814.

7.	Plywood Design Specifications—Design and Fabrication of All-Plywood Beams, Supplement No. 5 H815.

8.	Plywood Folded Plate, Laboratory Report 21 V910.

9.	APA Design/Construction Guide Diaphragms L350.

10.	Performance Standards and Policies for Structural-Use Panels PRP-108.

11.	303 Siding Manufacturing Specifications B840.

12.	Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species, ANSI 117.

13.	Structural Glued Laminated Timber, ANSI A190.1.

2314.4.4

ASTM International, 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103-1187 ASTM.

1.	Standard Test Methods for Mechanical Fasteners in Wood, ASTM D1761.

2.	Accelerated Weathering on Fire-Retardant Treated Wood for Fire Testing, ASTM D2898.

3.	Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials, ASTM E84.

4.	Hygroscopic Properties of Fire-Retardant Wood and Wood-Base Products, ASTM D3201.

5.	Standard Specifications for Adhesives for Field-Gluing Plywood to Lumber Framing for Floor Systems, ASTM D3498.

2314.4.5

American Wood Preservers Association, P.O. Box 361784, Birmingham, AL 35236-1784.

1.	AWPA Use Category Systems Standard U1.

2.	AWPA Standard M4 Care of Pressure Treated Wood Products.

2314.4.6

National Institute for Standards and Technology Standard Development Services Section, Standards Application and Analysis Division, Washington, D.C. 20234 NIST.

1.	Mat-Formed Particleboard CS236.

2.	Structural Plywood PS1.

3.	American Softwood Lumber Standard PS20.

4.	Performance Standard for Wood Structural Panels PS2{*}.

{*} All wood structural panels except oriented strand boards used as floor sheathing in interior applications or plywood shall have product approval and shall be tested in accordance with High-Velocity Hurricane Zone Testing Protocols.

2314.4.7

American Wood Council, 222 Catoctin Circle SE, Suite 201, Leesburg, VA 20175.

1.	ANSI/AWC NDS—2018: National Design Specification for Wood Construction with 2018 NDS Supplement.

2.	AWC Wood Structural Design Data.

3.	AWC ST JR—2015: Span Tables for Joists and Rafters.

4.	AWC 2015 Design Values for Joists and Rafters.

5.	AWC WCD No. 1—Wood Construction Data No. 1, Details for Conventional Wood Frame Construction.

6.	AWC WCD No. 4—Wood Construction Data No. 4, Plank-and-Beam Framing for Residential Building.

7.	AWC WCD No. 5—Wood Construction Data No. 5, Heavy Timber Construction.

8.	AWC WCD No. 6—Wood Construction Data No. 6, Design of Wood Frame Structures for Permanence.

9.	ANSI/AWC PWF–2015: Permanent Wood Foundation (PWF) Design Specification.

10.	ANSI/AWC WFCM–2018: Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

11.	ANSI/AWC SDPWS-2015: Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic.

2314.4.8

Timber Company, Inc., 2402 Daniels Street, Madison, WI 53704.

TECO Performance Standards and Policies for Structural use Panels. PRP-133.

2314.4.9

Truss Plate Institute, 218 N. Lee Street, Suite 312, Alexandria, VA 22314.

1.	National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction (excluding Chapter 2).

2.	Building Component Safety Information (BCSI 1) Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses. [A joint publication with the Wood Truss Council of America (WTCA).]

2314.4.10

Reserved.

SECTION 2315
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
QUALITY
2315.1 Identification.

Reserved.

2315.1.1

Reserved.

2315.1.2

Reserved.

2315.1.3

Wood shingles and/or shakes shall be identified by the grademark of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency.

2315.1.4

Reserved.

2315.1.5

Reserved.

2315.1.6

Reserved.

2315.1.7

Reserved.

2315.1.8

Reserved.

2315.1.9

Reserved.

2315.1.10

Reserved.

2315.1.11

All wood-based structural panels, including those made of fiberboard, hardboard and particleboard shall have product approval. Product approval shall be given upon certification by an approved independent testing laboratory that the product:

1.	Complies with the applicable standards set forth above.

2.	Complies with the manufacturer’s published design properties before and after a wet-dry, wet-dry cycle.

3.	When tested dry, maintains a safety factor of 2:1 and when tested after the cycles specified in Section 2315.1.11(2) above maintains a safety factor of 1.5:1. Testing shall be as specified in the testing protocol.

2315.2

When wood structural panels are used as floor sheathing in interior applications, the panel sheathing shall be rated for Exposure 1 or Exterior in accordance with PS 1 or PS 2.

2315.3

All lumber 2 inches (51 mm) or less in thickness shall contain not more than 19-percent moisture at the time of permanent incorporation in a building or structure and/or at the time of treatment with a wood preservative.

2315.4 Grade and species.
2315.4.1

All structural wood members not limited by other sections of this chapter shall be of sufficient size and capacity to carry all loads as required by the high-velocity hurricane provisions of Chapter 16 without exceeding the allowable design stresses specified in the National Design Specification for Wood Construction and in compliance with Section 2317.

2315.4.2

Reserved.

SECTION 2316
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SIZES

RESERVED

SECTION 2317
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
UNIT STRESSES
2317.1 General.
2317.1.1

Lumber used for joists, rafters, trusses, columns, beams and/or other structural members shall be of no less strength than No. 2 grade of Southern Pine, Douglas Fir-Larch, Hem-Fir or Spruce-Pine-Fir. Joists and rafters shall be sized according to AF&PA Span Tables for Joists and Rafters adopted in Section 2314.4.

2317.1.2

Lumber used for studs in exterior walls and interior bearing walls shall be of no less strength than stud grade of Southern Pine, Douglas Fir-Larch, Hem-Fir or Spruce-Pine-Fir and capable of resisting all loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). The unbraced height of the wall shall be no more than 8 feet 6 inches (2.6 m) (including top and bottom plates). Heights may be increased where justified by rational analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2317.1.3

Reserved.

2317.1.4

The designer shall specify on the design drawings the size, spacing, species and grade of all load supporting members.

2317.2

Allowable stress design value may be modified for repetitive, duration, etc., factors where design is by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design or where such modified values are reflected in the tables of the standards in Section 2314.4.

SECTION 2318
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
VERTICAL FRAMING
2318.1 Studs in bearing and exterior walls.

Studs in walls framing over 8 feet 6 inches (2.6 m) (including top and bottom plates) or supporting floor and roof loads shall be designed by rational analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.1 Minimum size.

Studs shall be not less than nominal 2 × 6 for exterior walls or 2 × 4 for interior bearing or load resisting walls unless designed by rational analysis by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.2 Spacing.

Studs shall be spaced not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center unless designed by rational analysis as a system of columns and beams by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.3 Placing.
2318.1.3.1

Studs in exterior and bearing walls shall be placed with the longer dimension perpendicular to the wall.

2318.1.3.2

Studs in exterior walls and in bearing walls shall be supported by foundation plates, sills, or girders or floor framing directly over supporting walls or girders. Stud bearing walls when perpendicular to supporting joists may be offset from supporting walls or girders not more than the depth of the joists unless such joists are designed for the extra loading conditions.

2318.1.3.3

Stud walls framing into base plates of exterior walls and interior bearing walls resting on masonry or concrete shall be anchored past the plate to the masonry or concrete, or shall be anchored to a sill plate which is anchored in accordance with Section 2318.1.4.1 when the net wind uplift is up to 500 pounds per foot (7297 N/m).

2318.1.4 Sills and/or base plates.
2318.1.4.1

Sills and/or base plates, where provided in contact with masonry or concrete, shall be of an approved durable species or be treated with an approved preservative and shall be attached to the masonry or concrete with 1/2-inch (13 mm) diameter bolts with oversized washer spaced not over 2 feet (610 mm) apart and embedded not less than 7 inches (178 mm) into a grout filled cell of masonry or into concrete. Base plates shall be placed in a recess 3/4 inch (19 mm) deep and the width of the base plate at the edge of a concrete slab, beam/slab or any other type of construction which uses a masonry surface or concrete slab, or be provided with an alternate waterstop method as approved by the building official. Alternate methods of anchorage may be designed by rational analysis by a registered professional engineer or a registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.4.2

Where the base plate of a bearing wall is supported on joists or trusses running perpendicular to the wall and the studs from the wall above do not fall directly over a joist or truss, a double base plate or a single base plate supported by a minimum 2 × 4 inset ribbon shall be used to support the upper stud wall.

2318.1.5 Top plates.
2318.1.5.1

The top plate of stud bearing walls shall be doubled and lapped at each intersection of walls and partitions.

2318.1.5.2

Joints shall be lapped not less than 4 feet (1219 mm).

2318.1.6 Corners.

Corners of stud walls and partitions shall be framed solid by not less than three studs.

2318.1.7 Splicing.

Studs, other than end-jointed lumber, shall be spliced only at points where lateral support is provided.

2318.1.8 Framing types.
2318.1.8.1

Wood framing may be any one, or a combination, of the following types: platform, balloon, plank and beam or pole type.

2318.1.8.2

Exterior stud walls of two-story buildings shall be balloon-framed with studs continuous from foundation to second floor ceiling and with second floor joists supported as indicated in Section 2319.3.3. Gable endwalls in wood frame buildings shall be balloon framed with studs continuous from foundation to roof.

Exception: Platform framing is allowed in buildings over one story in height provided an additional mandatory inspection for floor level connectors is made before the framing/firestopping inspection. Gable endwalls shall be balloon framed with studs continuous from top floor to roof.

2318.1.9 Notching.
2318.1.9.1

Studs that carry loads in excess of 75 percent of their capacity shall not be notched or cut.

2318.1.9.2

Studs that carry loads 75 percent or less of their capacity may be notched to one-third of the depth without limit of the number of consecutive studs.

2318.1.10 Pipes in walls.
2318.1.10.1

Stud walls and partitions containing pipes shall be framed to give proper clearance for the piping.

2318.1.10.2

Where walls and partitions containing piping are parallel to floor joists, the joists shall be doubled and may be spaced to allow vertical passage of pipes.

2318.1.10.3

Where vertical pipe positions necessitate the cutting of plates, a metal tie not less than 1 inch by 1/8 inch (25 mm by 3 mm) shall be placed on each side of the plate across the opening and nailed with not less than two 16d or three 8d nails at each end.

2318.1.11 Headers.
2318.1.11.1

All headers in bearing walls shall be designed by rational analysis.

2318.1.11.2

Headers or lintels over stud wall openings shall have not less than nominal 2-inch (51 mm) bearings.

2318.1.12 Studs joining masonry or reinforced concrete walls.

Where stud walls or partitions join masonry or concrete walls, such studs shall be secured against lateral movement by bolting to the masonry or concrete with 1/2- inch (13 mm) diameter anchor bolts with oversized washers spaced not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) apart and embedded not less than 5 inches (127 mm) into a grout filled cell or into concrete or as designed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design using rational analysis.

2318.1.13 Wind bracing.

Exterior stud walls shall be effectively wind-braced in accordance with Section 2322.3. Such bracing shall be designed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.14

The intermixing of wall framing described in this chapter with other types of structural wall systems as provided in this code shall not be permitted unless such wall framing and connections are designed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.1.15

Reserved.

2318.2 Interior nonbearing partitions.

Reserved.

2318.3 Columns and posts.
2318.3.1

Columns and posts shall be framed to true end bearing, shall be securely anchored against lateral and vertical forces, and shall be designed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.3.2

Reserved.

2318.3.3

Columns and posts shall be spliced only in regions where lateral support is adequately provided about both axes and is designed by rational analysis. Such design shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2318.3.4

Design dimensions of columns and posts shall not be reduced by notching, cutting or boring.

SECTION 2319
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
HORIZONTAL FRAMING
2319.1 Size.
2319.1.1

The minimum size of joists and rafters shall be as set forth in Section 2317.

2319.1.2

The design of horizontal framing other than joists and rafters shall be as set forth in Section 2317.1.1.

2319.1.3

Reserved.

2319.2 Spacing.

Reserved.

2319.3 Bearing.
2319.3.1

Joists and rafters shall have not less than 3 inches of bearing, on wood, metal, grout-filled masonry or concrete, except as provided in Sections 2319.3.2, 2319.3.3 and 2319.3.4.

2319.3.2 Masonry and concrete.
2319.3.2.1

Joists and rafters may bear on and be anchored by steel strap anchor embedded into a grout-filled cell of the masonry or reinforced concrete, as described in Section 2321.5.1, to a wood plate provided such wood plate is of an approved durable species or pressure treated with an approved preservative and such plate shall be not less than 2 inch by 4 inch (51 mm by 102 mm) and attached in accordance with Section 2318.1.4.1. The net uplift on the plate shall be limited to 300 pounds per foot (4378 N/m).

2319.3.2.2

Joists and rafters may bear on a product approved channel-shaped metal saddle and fastened to the masonry by a steel strap anchor embedded into a grout-filled cell of the masonry or concrete.

2319.3.2.3

Joists and rafters may bear on masonry, provided that each joist or rafter in contact with masonry is of an approved durable species or pressure treated with an approved preservative and anchored as in Section 2319.3.2.2 above.

2319.3.3

Floor joists may butt into a header beam if effectively toenailed and if an approved metal hanger providing not less than 3 inches (76 mm) of bearing transmits the vertical load to the top of the header, provided, however, that approved devices or other approved means of support may be used in lieu of such bearing. All hangers and devices shall have product approval.

2319.3.4

Ceiling joists may butt into a header beam, as set forth for floor joists, or approved devices or other approved means of support may be used in lieu of such bearing. All devices shall have product approval.

2319.3.5

In lieu of the above, bearing and anchorage may be designed by rational analysis by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2319.4 Splicing.

Horizontal members shall not be spliced between supports except that properly designed splices or approved end-jointed lumber may be used.

2319.5 Notching and boring.
2319.5.1

Unless local unit stresses are calculated on the basis of reduced size, wood members in bending shall not be cut, notched or bored except as provided in Sections 2319.5.1.1 and 2319.5.1.2.

2319.5.1.1

Notches may be cut in the top or bottom not deeper than one-sixth of the depth not longer than one-third of the depth of the member and shall not be located in the middle one-third of the span. Where members are notched at the ends, over bearing points, the notch depth shall not exceed one-fourth the member depth.

2319.5.1.2

Holes may be bored in the middle one-third of the depth and length and not larger than one-sixth of the depth. Space between any two holes in the same joist shall be not less than the depth of the joist.

2319.5.2

Where necessary to run service pipes in the space between the ceiling and floor larger than can be accommodated by the above provision, such ceilings shall be furred or provision made for headers or beams and/or for changing direction of the joists where the design permits.

2319.6 Openings.
2319.6.1

Joists shall be doubled adjacent to openings where more than one joist is cut out or shall be so increased in size or number as may be needed to meet the stress requirements.

2319.6.2

Headers shall be of the same size as the joists and where supporting more than one joist shall be double members.

2319.6.3

Headers shall be supported by approved metal hangers or ledgers or other approved members.

2319.7 Wood entering masonry or reinforced concrete.
2319.7.1

Wood joists, beams or girders which frame into masonry or reinforced concrete shall have a minimum of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) air space at the top, end and sides or shall be preservative pressure treated or of an approved durable species.

2319.7.2

Where masonry extends above such wood members, joists shall be fire-cut so the top edge does not enter the masonry more than 1 inch (25 mm) or shall be provided with wall plate boxes of self-releasing type or approved hangers.

2319.7.3

Reserved.

2319.8 Floor joists.

Reserved.

2319.9 Ceiling joists.
2319.9.1

In buildings with pitched roofs the ceiling joists, where practicable, shall be nailed to the rafters and shall be designed to carry all imposed loads including but not limited to lateral thrust.

2319.9.2

Ceiling joists spanning more than 10 feet (3 m) shall be laterally supported at midspan.

2319.9.3

Ceiling joists shall not be used to support rafter loads unless the joists and connections are properly designed for the total load being imposed.

2319.10 Roof framing.

The permit documents shall include roof framing plans showing spacing and spans of all roof members indicating any fabricated elements to be designed and furnished by others and shall include the details for support and bearing of the roof structural system, for the permanent cross/lateral/diagonal bracing and anchorage required to resist dead, live and wind loads as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). The framing plans shall also indicate the uplift forces applied on the roof, sheathing type, thickness and nailing requirements for the sheathing. The roof framing plans shall be prepared by, and bear the sign and seal of, a registered professional engineer or registered architect of record proficient in structural design.

2319.11 Roof joists.

Roof joists may cantilever over exterior walls as limited by the allowable stress, but the length of such cantilever shall not exceed one-half the length of the portion of the joist inside the building; and where the cantilever of tail joists exceeds 3 feet (914 mm), the roof joist acting as a header shall be doubled.

2319.12 Roof rafters.
2319.12.1

Hip rafters, valley rafters and ridge boards shall be provided and shall be not less in size than the largest rafter framing thereto nor less than required to support the loads.

2319.12.2 Collar ties.
2319.12.2.1

Collar ties and their connections shall be provided to resist the thrust of rafters and shall be designed by a registered engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2319.12.2.2

Collar ties shall not be required if the ridge is designed as a supporting beam. Such design shall be done by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2319.12.2.3

Ceiling joists may serve as collar ties when properly designed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2319.12.3

The actual roof and ceiling dead loads may be used to resist uplift loads, but the maximum combined dead load used to resist uplift loads shall not exceed 10 pounds per square foot (479 Pa).

2319.13 Heavy timber construction.

Heavy timber construction of floors or roofs shall comply with the standards in Section 2314.4. All heavy timber construction shall be designed by methods based on rational analysis performed in accordance with ASCE 7 to withstand the loads required in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2319.14 Vertically laminated beams.

Vertically laminated built-up beams shall be designed and made up of members continuous from bearing to bearing.

2319.15 Glued-laminated members.

Glued-laminated members shall be designed to comply with applicable AITC standards adopted by this code.

2319.16 Stair stringers.

Reserved.

2319.17 Wood trusses.
2319.17.1 Trussed rafters.

Trussed rafters shall be designed by methods admitting of rational analysis by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design based on the standards set forth in Section 2314.4.

2319.17.1.1

Where steel is used for connecting wood members, such connectors shall be not less than 20 U.S. gage and shall be protected with a zinc coating conforming to ASTM A924 as set forth in Chapter 35 of this code. Connectors shall have product approval or shall be designed by methods admitting of rational analysis by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design.

2319.17.1.2

Where a ceiling is to be attached directly to the underside of trusses, the trusses shall be laterally braced with continuous 1-inch by 4-inch (25 mm by 102 mm) members nailed with 8d common nails to the upper side of the bottom chord at panel points but not to exceed 10 feet (3 m) apart. This lateral bracing shall be restrained at each end and at 20-foot (6 m) intervals. Drywall may be considered a rigid ceiling in enclosed areas where it is protected from the elements. The drywall ceiling is not to be considered a ceiling diaphragm.

2319.17.1.3

Where a ceiling is to be attached to wood stripping which is nailed to the underside of the bottom chord of trusses with two-8d common nails at each intersection, stripping shall be not less than 1 inch by 3 inches (25 mm by 76 mm) spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) apart. Wood stripping may be replaced by furring channels. Furring channels shall be a minimum of 7/8-inch (22 mm) hat-shaped channels weighing 287 pounds per 1000 lineal feet (41.4 kg per 100 m) with minimum based steel of 0.0179 inch (0.445 mm) and complying with ASTM C645 attached to trusses with minimum two #6 11/4-inch (32 mm) screws per intersection. Said stripping or metal furring channels may serve also as the lateral bracing of the truss bottom chord so as to minimize the effects of buckling of the bottom chord when subjected to compressive stresses under reverse load conditions. In addition, the rigid ceiling that is created by this 1-inch by 3-inch (25 mm by 76 mm) stripping or metal furring channels must also be restrained from lateral movements, in accordance with the details provided by the architect or professional engineer of record.

Exception: Where fire-rated design assembly does not allow for this specific installation, see Section 2319.17.1.2.

2319.17.1.4

Where a ceiling is attached to wood members suspended beneath trusses, the provisions of Section 2319.1 shall apply.

2319.17.2 Prefabricated wood trusses.

Prefabricated wood trusses shall comply with this section.

2319.17.2.1 Design.
2319.17.2.1.1

Prefabricated wood trusses shall be designed by a registered professional engineer (delegated engineer) and fabricated in accordance with the National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction of the Truss Plate Institute (TPI). The truss system designer (delegated engineer) shall prepare the truss system shop drawings. Such shop drawings shall be submitted to the building official for review and approval. The shop drawings shall meet the following requirements:

1.	All shop drawings shall be in conformity with the architect or engineer of record framing plans unless prior written approval is obtained from the architect or engineer of record. If reframing is approved, the architect or engineer of record shall resubmit revised framing plans to the building official after receiving updated plans from the delegated engineer showing all adjustments necessary to safely transmit all applied loads to the foundation.

2.	Permanent bracing of individual truss members may be required on certain members of the trusses to prevent the members from buckling in the plane normal to the trusses (buckling in the narrow direction). This bracing shall be designed for both upward and downward loads and shall be shown on the individual truss drawings (truss engineering usually shown on 81/2-inch by 11-inch (216 mm by 279 mm) sheets (“A” size drawings). The design of this bracing shall be the responsibility of the delegated engineer. The contractor shall be responsible for seeing that this bracing is properly installed. This bracing may be in the form of (but not limited to) “T” bracing of an individual member, or lateral bracing of a series of members common to a number of trusses. Where lateral bracing is used, this bracing shall be restrained against lateral movement, in accordance with details provided by the delegated engineer or by the architect or professional engineer of record. All details and sections required to show the size and connections of all secondary members will be supplied on the delegated engineering plans and shall show all framing, connections and bracing on one or more primary plans of minimum size 24 inches by 36 inches (610 mm by 914 mm).

3.	A size 81/2-inches by 11-inches (216 mm by 279 mm) cut sheets showing individual member design shall also be furnished to the architect or engineer of record so that all gravity and uplift loads shown on these cut sheets can be transferred to the primary plans.

4.	The size and location of all plates at each joint shall be shown on the truss design drawings.

5.	The connection between trusses shall be detailed in the shop drawings. Hip sets shall be detailed in a manner to indicate all connections according to engineering drawings for the attachment of skewed members.

6.	Truss design drawings shall indicate the support and minimum bearing of the roof structural system, the permanent cross/lateral bracing, bracing to transfer member buckling forces to the structure and all bracing and anchorage required to resist uplift and lateral forces.

7.	Flat and floor trusses must be clearly marked so that they will be installed right side up. These marks must remain after the flooring, sheathing and insulation have been installed.

The intent of the above requirements is to provide all information on framing, connections and bracing on one composite set of plans approved by the architect or engineer of record to aid in the review, approval and field inspections for the portion of the property.

2319.17.2.1.2

Trusses shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), uniformly distributed live, dead and concentrated loads, and such loads shall be indicated on the roof framing plans and the truss design drawings. Where a girder or truss is subjected to concentrated loads or any unusual loading condition, such conditions must be clearly indicated on the roof framing plans and on the truss design drawings. Where truss members have been cut, shifted or altered in any manner to meet construction needs or for any other reason, additional drawings and additional calculations must be prepared, signed and sealed by the truss designer (a Florida-delegated engineer). Such additional drawings and calculations must be approved by the engineer or architect of record and must be submitted to the building official for review and approval.

2319.17.2.1.3

Roof trusses shall be designed for a minimum live load of 30 psf (1436 Pa), a minimum dead load of 15 psf (718 Pa) on the top chord, and a minimum dead load of 10 psf (479 Pa) on the bottom chord; and wind loads in accordance with Chapter 16 of this code. Where the roof design is such that water is not directed to the interior of the roof and there are no parapets or other roof edge drainage obstructions, roof trusses with slopes of 11/2:12 or greater may be designed for a live load of 20 psf (958 Pa) and a minimum total load of 45 psf (2155 Pa). Adjustment of the allowable design stress for load duration shall be in accordance with National Design Specification for Wood Construction.

2319.17.2.1.4

The allowable deflection under live load for trusses shall not exceed span/360 for plastered ceilings, span/240 for unplastered finished ceilings, or span/180 for trusses without a ceiling.

2319.17.2.1.5

Flat roof trusses shall be designed for not less than the loads set forth in Section 2319.17.2.1.3 above, except that the dead load on the top chord may be taken as 10 psf (479 Pa) in lieu of 15 psf (718 Pa), and the total load reduced to 50 psf (2394 Pa). Adjustment of the allowable design stress for load duration shall be in accordance with National Design Specification for Wood Construction.

2319.17.2.1.6

Where gable end trusses are permitted in this code, they shall be designed for a minimum live load of 30 psf (1436 Pa) and a minimum dead load of 15 psf (718 Pa) on the top chord. The minimum load of 10 psf (479 Pa) on the bottom chord may be omitted where continuous support is provided. In addition, the gable end trusses shall be designed to sustain wind load as specified in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) but not less than 30 psf (1436 Pa) perpendicular to the plane of the truss. Such trusses shall use a rationally designed system to resist lateral wind loads and be anchored to the substructure at intervals no greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center to resist the uplift forces and shall be designed to transfer the loads to the substructure. The design of the system used to resist the lateral loads imposed on the truss shall be prepared by the engineer or architect of record.

2319.17.2.1.7

When girders exceed two members and when girder reactions exceed the capacity of standard connectors or hangers, these reactions shall be shown on the drawings and the connection must be designed, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer or registered architect proficient in structural design and such design shall be included as part of the shop drawings.

2319.17.2.1.8

All trusses shall be properly braced to act as a system. Such bracing shall be included as part of the design document.

2319.17.2.2 Materials and specifications.
2319.17.2.2.1

Trusses shall be fabricated applying the design values listed in the standard Design Values for Wood Construction of the American Forest and Paper Association.

2319.17.2.2.2

Top and bottom chords shall be of No. 2 Grade or better. Web members shall be of No. 3 Grade or better. A chord member is defined as the entire top or bottom truss member which may consist of shorter spliced pieces.

2319.17.2.2.3

For trusses spanning 20 feet (6 m) or less, the minimum percentage of grade-marked members among top and bottom chords shall be 50 percent.

2319.17.2.2.4

For trusses spanning more than 20 feet (6 m) the minimum percentage of grade-marked members among top and bottom chords shall be 75 percent, and there shall be a minimum of one marked web on each truss.

2319.17.2.2.5

All lumber shall be 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 mm) nominal or larger, and no 2-inch (51 mm) nominal member shall be less in size than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

2319.17.2.2.6

The moisture content of all lumber used in wood truss fabrication shall not exceed 19 percent.

2319.17.2.2.7

Connector plates shall be not less than 20 gauge galvanized steel meeting ASTM A653/A653M or A924/A924M, and shall be identified by the manufacturer’s stamp. The size and location of all plates shall be shown on the truss design drawings. Connectors shall have product approval.

2319.17.2.2.8

All connector plates over 3 inches (76 mm) and 25 percent of 3 inches (76 mm) or less, as per TPI standards, shall bear the name, logo or other markings, which clearly identify the manufacturer. Semiannually, plate manufacturers shall certify compliance with the provisions of Section 6 of the Truss Plate Institute, TPI, National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction, with respect to the grade of steel, thickness or gauge of material, and galvanizing to ASTM G60 as a minimum. This certification requirement shall be satisfied by submitting by an approved independent laboratory to the certification agency.

2319.17.2.3 Fabrication.
2319.17.2.3.1

Manufacturers of prefabricated wood truss assemblies shall obtain a valid certificate of competency from the authority having jurisdiction.

2319.17.2.3.2

Each truss shall bear the fabricators stamp on a web member and 75 percent shall be placed so as to be clearly visible after erection and before placement of ceiling.

2319.17.2.3.3

Multiple member girder trusses shall be predrilled at the truss plant for connection bolts only. Hanger bolt holes shall be drilled on-site, on a location indicated on approved drawings.

2319.17.2.3.4

Each manufacturer or fabricator shall retain the services of applicable organizations among those listed below for monthly inspections of the lumber grade used in fabrication. Following each inspection, a report shall be submitted by the inspection agency to the authority having jurisdiction. All inspection agencies providing any type of inspection services shall be approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

For Pine: Southern Pine Inspection Bureau or Timber Products grading agencies with appropriate jurisdiction.

For Douglas Fir, Hem-Fir or Fir-Larch: Western Wood Products Association or West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau. Timber Products Inspection Inc., or other grading agencies with appropriate jurisdiction.

2319.17.2.3.5

In addition, the fabricator shall employ an approved testing laboratory to conduct inspections of fabrication compliance. Such inspections shall be made unannounced and at random at least once a month. Following each inspection, a report on approved forms shall be submitted by the laboratory to the authority having jurisdiction and such reports shall bear the date, signature and seal of the supervising Florida-registered architect or professional engineer.

2319.17.2.3.6

When there is evidence of noncompliance with the provisions for fabrication set forth in this paragraph or with the approved plans, the authority having jurisdiction may require the inspection laboratory to make additional job-site or plant inspections.

2319.17.2.3.7

The authority having jurisdiction may require load testing on noncomplying wood trusses. The test results shall be reported to the authority having jurisdiction.

2319.17.2.3.8

Failure of units tested or receipt of inspection reports indicating fabrication not in accordance with approved truss design drawings, or failure to submit required inspection and/or test reports, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the certificate of competency of the manufacturer or fabricator.

2319.17.2.4 Truss erection.
2319.17.2.4.1

Reserved.

2319.17.2.4.2

Reserved.

2319.17.2.4.3

Reserved.

2319.17.2.4.4

At gable ends, this diaphragm shall be designed to transmit lateral loads imposed on the gable to roof diaphragms and/or ceiling diaphragms where available. Where the wall supporting the gable is not designed to withstand lateral loads independent of the gable (by using shear walls or other methods), anchorage of the gable to the wall shall be designed to transmit the loads from the wall to the bracing and the bracing designed to transmit the lateral loads from the gable and wall to the roof diaphragms and/or ceiling diaphragms where available. Ceiling diaphragms that provide lateral support at gable walls shall be designed by the architect or professional engineer of record, and shall have continuous bottom chord bracing, end restraints, intermediate restraints and conditions so as to sufficiently transfer the lateral loads at the top of the gable endwalls to the intersecting shear walls. In no case shall the rigid ceiling, as defined in Section 2319.17.1.2, be used as an integral part of the system needed for lateral bracing of the gable endwalls.

2319.17.2.4.5

Reserved.

SECTION 2320
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FIRESTOPS

RESERVED

SECTION 2321
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ANCHORAGE
2321.1

Anchorage shall be continuous from the foundation to the roof and shall satisfy the uplift requirements of Section 1620.

2321.2 Joists.
2321.2.1

Fire-cuts into a masonry wall shall be anchored to the concrete beam on which they bear.

2321.2.2

Such anchors shall be spaced not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) apart and shall be placed at opposite ends across the building on the same run of joists.

2321.3

Joists shall be nailed to bearing plates, where such plates occur, to each other where continuous at a lap and to the studs where such studs are contiguous; and ceiling joists shall be nailed to roof rafters where contiguous.

2321.4

Every roof rafter and/or roof joist shall be anchored to the beam or studs on which they bear, and roof rafters opposing at a ridge shall be anchored across the ridge as set forth in Section 2321.6.

2321.5 Anchorage to concrete.
2321.5.1

Anchorage designed to resist uplift forces, securing wood to concrete shall be steel straps embedded in the concrete a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) with hooking devices to top steel of tie beam designed to withstand the uplift forces set forth by the design professional. Straps shall be approved under the criteria set by the certification agency. All anchors and related fasteners shall be galvanized.

2321.5.2

As an alternate to using the straps described in this section, the building official may approve other anchorage submitted by a Florida-registered professional engineer or a Florida-registered architect, proficient in structural design, provided that the information set forth in Section 2321.7, Items 1, 2 and 3, submitted in connection with such anchors and such anchors and the proposed assembly otherwise comply with the requirements of this code.

2321.6 Anchorage to wood.
2321.6.1

Anchorage designed to resist uplift forces, securing wood to wood, shall be steel straps nailed to each member and shall be designed to resist uplift forces set forth by the design professional. Straps shall be approved under the criteria set by the certification agency. All anchors and relative nails shall be galvanized.

2321.6.2

As an alternate to using straps described in this section, the building official may approve other anchorage submitted by a Florida-registered architect or a Florida-registered professional engineer, proficient in structural design, provided that the information set forth in Section 2321.7, Items 1, 2 and 3 submitted in connection with such anchors and such anchors and the proposed assembly otherwise comply with the requirements of this code.

2321.7 Testing of anchoring.

Anchoring required by Sections 2321.5 and 2321.6 shall be tested under the following criteria:

1.	Concrete to wood straps: Minimum design uplift load 700 pounds (3114 N), with four 16d nails with upper end bent over truss chord and nailed. Nails shall be clinched. Anchors shall have devices to hook into upper tie beam steel and embedded a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) in concrete.

2.	Wood to wood straps: Minimum design uplift 700 pounds (3114 N) with four 16d nails in each member.

3.	Other anchors: Minimum design uplift 700 pounds (3114 N).

4.	The criteria stated in Section 2321.7, Items 1, 2 and 3 above, are minimum requirements for product approval for the certification agency. Anchor design and uplift forces shall be submitted to the certification agency for approval together with sufficient documentation and test data to verify performance. A product approval shall be maintained at the job site for the inspector to compare with the uplift force requirements of the design professional as shown on approved plans.

SECTION 2322
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SHEATHING
2322.1 Floor sheathing.
2322.1.1

Reserved.

2322.1.2

Reserved.

2322.1.3

Square-edged or spaced subflooring may be used only under a finish floor having a strength equal to or greater than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) tongue-and-groove wood strip flooring; and under finish floors of less strength, a tongue-and-groove or plywood subfloor shall be required.

2322.1.4

Lumber subflooring shall be not less than 5/8 inch (17 mm) thick when joists are spaced no more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center nor less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick when joists are spaced no more than 24-inches (610 mm) on center. End joints shall be on joists, joints shall be staggered and parallel to the joists, and ends at walls and similar places shall be supported by a ribbon or by blocking.

2322.1.5

Plywood subfloors of C-D grade or underlayment grade bonded to wood joist using adhesives meeting the requirements of ASTM D3498 shall be applied as indicated in Section 2322.1.6.

2322.1.6

Plywood subflooring shall be continuous over two or more spans with face grain perpendicular to the supports. The allowable spans shall not exceed those set forth in Table 2322.1.6.

TABLE 2322.1.6

PLYWOOD SUBFLOOR1

PANEL SPAN RATING2	MAXIMUM PLYWOOD SPAN (IN.)3
32/16	164
40/20	204
48/24	24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

NOTES:

1.	These values apply for sheathing C-D and C-C grades only. Spans shall be limited to values shown, and reduced for the possible effects of concentrated loads.

2.	Span ratings shall appear on all panels.

3.	Plywood edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking unless 1/4-inch minimum thickness underlay is installed or 1/2 inch of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is installed or unless finish floor is 1-inch nominal wood strip. Allowable uniform load based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 100 pounds per square foot.

4.	May be inches if nominal 1 inch wood strip finish floor is laid at right angles to joists.

2322.1.6.1

Plywood panels shall be nailed to supports with 6d common nails when up to 1/2 inch thick (13 mm), 8d common nails when 19/32 to 3/4 inch (15 to 19 mm) thick and 10d common nails or 8d ring shank when 11/8 inches (29 mm) thick.

2322.1.6.2

Nail spacing shall be 6-inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges and 10-inches (254 mm) on center at intermediate supports.

2322.1.7

Reserved.

2322.1.8

Flooring shall be nailed with 8d common nails up to 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick, and 10d common nails or 8d ring shank nails when greater than 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick up to 11/8 inches (29 mm) thick.

2322.1.8.1

Nails shall be hand driven 8d common nails [0.131-inch (3.3 mm) diameter by 21/2 inches (63.5 mm) long with 0.281 inch (7.1 mm) diameter full round head)] or power driven 8d nails of the same dimensions (0.131-inch diameter by 21/2 inches long with 0.281-inch diameter full round head). Nails of a smaller diameter or length may be used only when approved by an architect or professional engineer and only when the spacing is reduced accordingly.

2322.1.8.2

Nails shall be hand driven 10d common nails [0.148-inch (3.8 mm) diameter by 3 inches (76 mm) long with 0.312-inch (7.9 mm) diameter full round head] or power driven 10d nails of the same dimensions [0.148-inch (3.8m) diameter by 3 inches (76 mm) long with 0.312-inch (7.9 mm) diameter full round head]. Nails of a smaller diameter or length may be used only when approved by an architect or professional engineer and only when the spacing is reduced accordingly.

2322.1.9

Nail spacing shall be 6-inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges and 10-inches (254 mm) on center at intermediate supports.

2322.1.10

Flooring shall be nailed with 8d common nails not less than two in each board at each support.

2322.1.11

Floors for heavy timber buildings shall be sheathed as specified for mill floors, Section 2319.13.

2322.1.12

Flooring shall not extend closer than 1/2 inch (13 mm) from masonry walls.

2322.1.13

Reserved.

Table 2322.1.13 Allowable Span for Plywood Combination Subfloor Underlayment (Single Floor Panels). Reserved.

2322.1.14

Reserved.

2322.1.15

Reserved.

2322.1.16 Diaphragm boundaries.

All floor sheathing acting as a diaphragm shall be attached to a minimum 2-inch-thick (51 mm) nominal nailer with its depth equal to or one size greater than the intersecting top chord. The nailer shall be connected to the wall to resist the gravity loads from the floor, wind pressure/suction from the exterior wall and the diaphragm forces. The floor sheathing shall be attached to the nailer to resist the wind pressure/suction from the exterior wall and the diaphragm forces.

2322.2 Roof sheathing.
2322.2.1

Wood roof sheathing shall be boards or shall be plywood.

2322.2.2

Board roof sheathing shall have a net thickness of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) when the span is not more than 28 inches (711 mm) or 5/8 inch (17 mm) when the span is not more than 24 inches (610 mm), shall have staggered joints and shall be nailed with 8d common nails not less than two in each 6-inch (152 mm) board nor three in each 8-inch (203 mm) board at each support.

2322.2.3

Plywood roof sheathing shall be rated for Exposure 1, and shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 7, to have a minimum nominal thickness of no less than 19/32 inch (15 mm) and shall be continuous over two or more spans with face grain perpendicular to supports. Roof sheathing panels shall be provided with a minimum of 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) edgewise blocking at all horizontal panel joints with edge spacing in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications, for a distance at least 4 feet (1219 mm) from each gable end. The allowable spans shall not exceed those set forth in Table 2322.2.3.

TABLE 2322.2.3

ALLOWABLE SPAN FOR PLYWOOD ROOF SHEATHING1

PANEL SPAN
RATING2
	MAXIMUM SPAN IF BLOCK
OR OTHER EDGE
SUPPORTS (IN.)	MAXIMUM SPAN
WITHOUT EDGE
SUPPORT (IN.)
32/16	24	24
40/20	40	32
48/24	48	36

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

NOTES:

1.	Values apply to sheathing grade, C-C and C-D panels.

2.	Span Rating appears on all C-C and C-D panels.

2322.2.4

Plywood panels shall be nailed to supports with 8d ring shank nails.

2322.2.5

Nails and nail spacing shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 7 and shall be spaced no more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges and at intermediate supports. Nails shall be minimum hand driven 8d ring shank or power driven 8d ring shank nails of the following minimum dimensions: (a) 0.113-inch (2.9 mm) nominal shank diameter, (b) ring diameter of 0.012 inch (0.3 mm) over shank diameter, (c) 16 to 20 rings per inch, (d) 0.280-inch (7.1 mm) full round head diameter, (e) 2-inch (60.3 mm) nail length.

2322.2.5.1

Other products with unique fastening methods may be substituted for these nailing requirements as approved by the building official and verified by testing.

2322.2.6

Roof sheathing for heavy timber construction shall comply with Section 2319.13 of this code.

2322.2.7 Diaphragm boundaries.

All roof sheathing acting as a diaphragm shall be attached to a minimum 2-inch (51 mm) thick nominal member with its depth equal to or one size greater than the intersecting top chord. This shall be achieved with a continuous structural subfascia, fascia or blocking at 4-inches (102 mm) on center with nails as required for the appropriate thickness of sheathing.

2322.2.8

When existing roofs are reroofed to the point that the existing roofing is removed down to the sheathing, the existing roof sheathing shall be renailed with 8d common nails [0.131-inch (3.3 mm) diameter by 21/2 inches (63.5 mm) long with 0.281-inch (7.9 mm) diameter full round head]. Nail spacing shall be 6-inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges, 6-inches (152 mm) on center at intermediate supports and, where applicable, 4-inches (102 mm) on center over gable ends and subfascia. Existing fasteners may be used to achieve such minimum spacing.

2322.3 Storm sheathing.

Exterior stud walls shall be sheathed to resist the racking load of wind as set forth in Section 1620 and the concentrated loads that result from hurricane-generated wind-borne debris as set forth in Section 1626 of this code and shall be, at a minimum, any of the following types:

1.	Tightly fitted, diagonally placed boards not less than 5/8- inch (17 mm) thickness, nailed with three 8d common nails to each support for 1-inch by 6-inch (25 mm by 152 mm) boards and four 8d common nails for 1-inch by 8-inch (25 mm by 203 mm) boards.

2.	Wall sheathing shall be plywood, or product approved structural panel, rated Exposure 1 with a minimum thickness of 19/32 inch (15 mm) and shall be applied to studs spaced not more than 16-inches (406 mm) on center. Wall sheathing shall be continuous over three or more supports and shall be nailed to such supports with 8d common nails. Nail spacing shall not exceed 6-inches (152 mm) on center at panel edges and all intermediate supports. Nail spacing shall be 4-inches (102 mm) on center at corner studs, in all cases.

3.	When plywood panel, or product approved structural panel sheathing is used, building paper and diagonal wall bracing can be omitted.

4.	When siding such as shingles nailed only to plywood or product approved structural panel sheathing, the panel shall be applied with face grain across studs.

2322.4 Exterior wall cladding.
2322.4.1

Plywood, if protected with stucco, may serve for both sheathing and exterior cladding provided:

1.	The panel thickness shall be not less than 19/32 inch (15 mm) and Texture 1-11 panels, and the supporting studs shall be spaced not more than 16-inches (406 mm) on center.

2.	All joints shall be backed solidly with 2-inch (51 mm) nominal blocking or studs or the joints shall be lapped horizontally or otherwise watertight.

3.	Nailing shall be as set forth in Section 2322.3, Item 2.

2322.4.2

Where storm sheathing is provided in accordance with Section 2322.3, exterior cladding may be one of the following:

1.	Wood siding shall be installed according to its product approval.

2.	Wood shingles or shakes attached to the storm sheathing, and/or to nailing boards or shingle backer securely attached to the storm sheathing. The minimum thickness of wood shingles or shakes between nailing boards shall be 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

3.	Hardboard of siding quality for exterior use shall be applied in accordance with the product approval.

SECTION 2323
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FURRING

RESERVED

SECTION 2324
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CONNECTORS
2324.1

The allowable loads on all types of connectors shall be as set forth in the standards listed in Section 2314.4 and Table 2324.1.

TABLE 2324.1

NAIL CONNECTION FOR WOOD MEMBERS

CONNECTION	COMMON NAILS	NUMBER OR SPACING
Joists to sill or girder, toe nail	16d	2
Bridging to joist, toe nail	8d	2 each end
1-inch × 6-inch subfloor or less to each joist, face nail	8d	2
Over 1-inch × 6-inch subfloor to each joist, face nail	8d	3 + 1 for each size increase
2-inches subfloor to joist or girder, blind and face nail	16d	2
Sole plate to joist or blocking, face nail	16d	16 inches o.c.
Top or sole plate to stud, end nailed	16d	2
Stud to sole plate, toe nail	3d	3 or 2 16d
Doubled studs, face nail	16d	24 inches o.c.
Doubled top plates, face nail	16d	16 inches o.c.
Top plates, laps and intersections, face nail	16d	2
Continuous header, two pieces	16	16 inches o.c. along each edge
Ceiling joists to plate, toe nail	16d	2
Continuous header to stud, toe nail	16d	3
Ceiling joists, laps over partitions, face nail	16d	3
Ceiling joists to parallel rafters, face nail	16d	3
Rafter plate, toe nail	16d	3
1-inch × 6-inch sheathing or less, to each bearing, face nail	8d	2
Over 1-inch × 6-inch sheathing, to each bearing, face nail	8d	3 + 1 for each size increase
Built-up corner studs, face nail	16d	30 inches o.c.
Built-up girders and beams	20d	32 inches o.c. At top and bottom and staggered,
2 at ends and at each splice

2-inch planks	16d	2 each bearing

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

NOTE: In spacing specifications, o.c. means “on-center.”

2324.2

Nails, bolts and other metal connectors that are used in locations exposed to the weather shall be galvanized or otherwise corrosion resistant.

2324.3

In general, nails shall penetrate the second member a distance equal to the thickness of the member being nailed thereto. There shall be not less than two nails in any connection.

2324.4

Except for wood-based structural-use panels and other laminated members manufactured under technical control and rigid inspection, gluing shall not be considered an acceptable connector in lieu of the connectors herein specified.

2324.5

Safe loads and design practice for types of connectors not mentioned or fully covered herein shall be determined by the building official before approval.

SECTION 2325
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WOOD SUPPORTING MASONRY
2325.1

Wood shall not support masonry or concrete except as permitted in Section 2325.2.

2325.2

Wood foundation piles may be used to support concrete or masonry.

2325.3

Reserved.

SECTION 2326
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PROTECTION OF WOOD
2326.1

Reserved.

2326.2

Reserved.

2326.3 Ventilation.

Reserved.

2326.4 Debris.
2326.4.1

Reserved.

2326.4.2

In buildings or portions thereof having wood first-floor systems, all wood forms which have been used in placing concrete, if within the ground or less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the ground, shall be removed before the building is occupied or used for any purpose.

2326.4.3

Loose or casual wood shall not be stored in direct contact with the ground under any building, and this space must be thoroughly cleaned of all wood and debris.

2326.5 Termite protection.

Reserved.

2326.6 Existing buildings.

Reserved.

2326.6.1

The building official shall inspect existing buildings having wood-stud exterior walls for which application for a permit for exterior wall coverings is made and shall have the authority to order the uncovering of structural elements for inspection and to require necessary repairs as a part of such approval for a permit, or may order demolition.

SECTION 2327
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FIRE-RETARDANT WOOD

RESERVED

SECTION 2328
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WOOD FENCES
2328.1

Wood fences, so located on a property that by zoning regulations they cannot be used as a wall of a building, shall be constructed to meet the minimum specifications in Sections 2328.2 and 2328.3.

2328.2

Fences not exceeding 6 feet (1829 mm) in height, shall be constructed to meet the following minimum requirements: from nominal 4-inch by 4-inch by 8-feet-long (102 mm by 102 mm by 2438 mm) posts No. 2 grade or better spaced 4-feet (1219 mm) on center, and embedded 2 feet (610 mm) into a concrete footing 10 inches (254 mm) in diameter and 2-feet (610 mm) deep.

2328.3

Fences not exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm) or 4 feet (1219 mm) in height shall be constructed as provided in Section 2328.2, except that the spacing of posts may be increased to 5-feet (1524 mm) and 6-feet (1829 mm) on center for these heights, respectively.

SECTION 2329
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
FIRE-RETARDANT-TREATED SHAKES AND
SHINGLES

RESERVED

SECTION 2330
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WOOD BLOCKING
2330.1 General.
2330.1.1

Blocking is defined as wood pieces attached to the roof deck or to each other for the purpose of securing roof membrane or accessories.

2330.1.2

Wood blocking attachment for buildings greater than 40 feet (12.2 m) in height must be designed by a registered architect or professional engineer.

2330.1.3

Wood blocking attachment for lightweight insulating concrete, gypsum concrete, cementitious wood fiber and cellular concrete decks shall be designed by a registered architect or professional engineer. The decks themselves shall not be used as a wood blocking attachment substrate.

2330.1.4

Wood blocking shall not be less than nominal 2 inches by 6 inches (51 mm by mm). The maximum unsupported overhang shall be 2 inches (51 mm). When the maximum overhang is employed, a nominal 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by mm) blocking shall be installed.

2330.1.5

In recover applications, wood blocking may be reduced to nominal 1 inch (25 mm), providing the attachment is secured in compliance with this code.

2330.1.6

Sound wood blocking may be reused in a recover or reroof application, providing the attachment is secured in compliance with the requirements of this code.

2330.1.7

A fastener shall be placed within 3 inches (761 mm) of the end of each section of wood blocking and a 1/4-inch (6 mm) gap shall be left between each section of wood blocking. No piece of wood shall have less than two fasteners.

2330.1.8

Fasteners other than nails shall be predrilled prior to attachment and countersunk to be flush with the surface of the wood blocking.

2330.1.9

Wood shall be protected according to Section 2326.

2330.1.10

Powder actuated fasteners shall not be used in wood blocking attachment.

2330.2 Attachment to masonry block and concrete.
2330.2.1

Prior to the installation of wood blocking to standard weight masonry block, the two top courses shall be solidly filled with concrete or a tie beam shall be provided as required by this code.

2330.2.2

The fastener’s average withdrawal resistance per lineal foot shall be not less than 250 pounds per foot (3649 N/m) after the application of a 4:1 safety factor.

2330.2.3

The pullover value of the proposed fastener through the wood blocking shall be not less than 125 percent of the design load of the proposed fastener. If less, a larger bearing washer shall be added to the fastener assembly to meet this requirement. Wood blocking thickness shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) if a bearing washer is required.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-24]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 24
GLASS AND GLAZING
SECTION 2401
GENERAL
2401.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of glass, light-transmitting ceramic and light-transmitting plastic panels for exterior and interior use in both vertical and sloped applications in buildings and structures. Light-transmitting plastic glazing shall also meet the applicable requirements of Chapter 26.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall also comply with the provisions of Sections 2410 through 2415, excluding Section 2405.5.

2401.2 Glazing replacement.

The installation of replacement glass shall be as required for new installations.

SECTION 2402
DEFINITIONS
2402.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

DALLE GLASS.

DECORATIVE GLASS.

SECTION 2403
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR GLASS
2403.1 Identification.

Each pane shall bear the manufacturer’s mark designating the type and thickness of the glass or glazing material. The identification shall not be omitted unless approved and an affidavit is furnished by the glazing contractor certifying that each light is glazed in accordance with approved construction documents that comply with the provisions of this chapter. Safety glazing shall be identified in accordance with Section 2406.3.

Each pane of tempered glass, except tempered spandrel glass, shall be permanently identified by the manufacturer. The identification mark shall be acid etched, sand blasted, ceramic fired, laser etched, embossed or of a type that, once applied, cannot be removed without being destroyed.

Tempered spandrel glass shall be provided with a removable paper marking by the manufacturer.

2403.2 Glass supports.

Where one or more sides of any pane of glass are not firmly supported, or are subjected to unusual load conditions, detailed construction documents, detailed shop drawings and analysis or test data ensuring safe performance for the specific installation shall be prepared by a registered design professional.

2403.3 Glass framing.

To be considered firmly supported, the framing members for each individual pane of glass shall be designed so that the deflection of the edge of the glass perpendicular to the glass pane does not exceed 1/175 of the glass edge length where the glass edge length is not more than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm) or 1/240 of the glass edge length + 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) where the glass edge length is greater than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm), when subjected to the larger of the positive or negative load where loads are combined as specified in Section 1605.

2403.4 Interior glazed areas.

Where interior glazing is installed adjacent to a walking surface, the differential deflection of two adjacent unsupported edges shall be not greater than the thickness of the panels when a force of 50 pounds per linear foot (plf) (730 N/m) is applied horizontally to one panel at any point up to 42 inches (1067 mm) above the walking surface.

2403.5 Louvered windows or jalousies.

Float, wired and patterned glass in louvered windows and jalousies shall be no thinner than nominal 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) and no longer than 48 inches (1219 mm). Exposed glass edges shall be smooth.

Wired glass with wire exposed on longitudinal edges shall not be used in louvered windows or jalousies.

Where other glass types are used, the design shall be submitted to the building official for approval.

SECTION 2404
WIND AND DEAD LOADS ON GLASS
2404.1 Vertical glass.

Glass sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, curtain and window walls, doors and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the wind loads due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, in Section 1609 for components and cladding. The load resistance of glass under uniform load shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E1300.

The design of vertical glazing shall be based on Equation 24-1.

(Equation 24-1)

where:

Fgw = Wind load on the glass due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, computed in accordance with Section 1609.

Fga = Short duration load on the glass as determined in accordance with ASTM E1300.

2404.2 Sloped glass.

Glass sloped more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from vertical in skylights, sunrooms, sloped roofs and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the most critical combinations of loads determined by Equations 24-2, 24-3 and 24-4.

(Equation 24-2)

(Equation 24-3)

(Equation 24-4)

where:

D = Glass dead load, psf (kN/m2).

For glass sloped 30 degrees (0.52 rad) or less from horizontal,

= 13 tg (For SI: 0.0245 tg).

For glass sloped more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from horizontal,

= 13 tg cos θ (For SI: 0.0245 tg cos θ).

Fg = Total load, psf (kN/m2) on glass.

tg = Total glass thickness, inches (mm) of glass panes and plies.

Wi = Inward wind force, psf (kN/m2) due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, as calculated in Section 1609.

Wo = Outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, as calculated in Section 1609.

θ = Angle of slope from horizontal.

Exception: The performance grade rating of unit skylights and tubular daylighting devices shall be determined in accordance with Section 2405.5.

The design of sloped glazing shall be based on Equation 24-5.

(Equation 24-5)

where:

Fg = Total load on the glass as determined by Equations 24-2, 24-3 and 24-4.

Fga = Short duration load resistance of the glass as determined in accordance with ASTM E1300 for Equations 24-2 and 24-3; or the long duration load resistance of the glass as determined in accordance with ASTM E1300 for Equation 24-4.

2404.3 Wired, patterned and sandblasted glass.
2404.3.1 Vertical wired glass.

Wired glass sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, curtain and window walls, doors and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the wind loads in Section 1609 for components and cladding according to the following equation:

(Equation 24-6)

where:

Fgw = Wind load on the glass due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, computed in accordance with Section 1609.

Fge = Nonfactored load from ASTM E1300 using a thickness designation for monolithic glass that is not greater than the thickness of wired glass.

2404.3.2 Sloped wired glass.

Wired glass sloped more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from vertical in skylights, sunspaces, sloped roofs and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the most critical of the combinations of loads from Section 2404.2.

For Equations 24-2 and 24-3:

(Equation 24-7)

For Equation 24-4:

(Equation 24-8)

where:

Fg = Total load on the glass as determined by Equations 24-2, 24-3 and 24-4.

Fge = Nonfactored load in accordance with ASTM E1300.

2404.3.3 Vertical patterned glass.

Patterned glass sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, curtain and window walls, doors and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the wind loads in Section 1609 for components and cladding according to Equation 24-9.

(Equation 24-9)

where:

Fgw = Wind load on the glass due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, computed in accordance with Section 1609.

Fge = Nonfactored load in accordance with ASTM E1300. The value for patterned glass shall be based on the thinnest part of the glass. Interpolation between nonfactored load charts in ASTM E1300 shall be permitted.

2404.3.4 Sloped patterned glass.

Patterned glass sloped more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from vertical in skylights, sunspaces, sloped roofs and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the most critical of the combinations of loads from Section 2404.2.

For Equations 24-2 and 24-3:

(Equation 24-10)

For Equation 24-4:

(Equation 24-11)

where:

Fg = Total load on the glass as determined by Equations 24-2, 24-3 and 24-4.

Fge = Nonfactored load in accordance with ASTM E1300. The value for patterned glass shall be based on the thinnest part of the glass. Interpolation between the nonfactored load charts in ASTM E1300 shall be permitted.

2404.3.5 Vertical sandblasted glass.

Sandblasted glass sloped 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or less from vertical in windows, curtain and window walls, doors, and other exterior applications shall be designed to resist the wind loads in Section 1609 for components and cladding according to Equation 24-12.

(Equation 24-12)

where:

Fg = Wind load on the glass due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, computed in accordance with Section 1609.

Fge = Nonfactored load in accordance with ASTM E1300. The value for sandblasted glass is for moderate levels of sandblasting.

2404.4 Other designs.

For designs outside the scope of this section, an analysis or test data for the specific installation shall be prepared by a registered design professional.

SECTION 2405
SLOPED GLAZING AND SKYLIGHTS
2405.1 Scope.

This section applies to the installation of glass and other transparent, translucent or opaque glazing material installed at a slope of more than 15 degrees (0.26 rad) from the vertical plane, including glazing materials in skylights, roofs and sloped walls.

2405.2 Allowable glazing materials and limitations.

Sloped glazing shall be any of the following materials, subject to the listed limitations.

1.	For monolithic glazing systems, the glazing material of the single light or layer shall be laminated glass with a minimum 30-mil (0.76 mm) polyvinyl butyral (or equivalent) interlayer, wired glass, light-transmitting plastic materials meeting the requirements of Section 2606, heat-strengthened glass or fully tempered glass.

2.	For multiple-layer glazing systems, each light or layer shall consist of any of the glazing materials specified in Item 1 above.

Annealed glass is permitted to be used as specified in Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 2405.3.3.

Laminated glass and plastic materials described in Items 1 and 2 shall not require the screening or height restrictions provided in Section 2405.3.

For additional requirements for plastic skylights, see Section 2610. Glass-block construction shall conform to the requirements of Section 2110.1.

2405.3 Screening.

Broken glass retention screens, where required, shall:

1.	Be capable of supporting twice the weight of the glazing;

2.	Be firmly and substantially fastened to the framing members; and

3.	Be installed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the glass.

The screens shall be constructed of a noncombustible material not thinner than No. 12 B&S gage (0.0808 inch) with mesh not larger than 1 inch by 1 inch (25 mm by 25 mm). In a corrosive atmosphere, structurally equivalent noncorrosive screen materials shall be used.

2405.3.1 Screens under monolithic glazing.

Heat-strengthened glass and fully tempered glass shall have screens installed below the full area of the glazing material.

2405.3.2 Screens under multiple-layer glazing.

Heat-strengthened glass, fully tempered glass and wired glass used as the bottom glass layer shall have screens installed below the full area of the glazing material.

2405.3.3 Screening not required for monolithic and multiple-layer sloped glazing systems.

In monolithic and multiple-layer sloped glazing systems, the following apply:

1.	Fully tempered glass shall be permitted to be installed without retention screens where glazed between intervening floors at a slope of 30 degrees (0.52 rad) or less from the vertical plane, and having the highest point of the glass 10 feet (3048 mm) or less above the walking surface.

2.	Retention screens shall not be required below any glazing material, including annealed glass, where the walking surface below the glazing material is permanently protected from the risk of falling glass or the area below the glazing material is not a walking surface.

3.	Retention screens shall not be required below any glazing material, including annealed glass, in the sloped glazing systems of commercial or detached noncombustible greenhouses used exclusively for growing plants and not open to the public, provided that the height of the greenhouse at the ridge does not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) above grade.

4.	Retention screens shall not be required in individual dwelling units in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 where fully tempered glass is used as single glazing or as both panes in an insulating glass unit, and all of the following conditions are met:

4.1.	Each pane of the glass is 16 square feet (1.5 m2) or less in area.

4.2.	The highest point of the glass is 12 feet (3658 mm) or less above any walking surface or other accessible area.

4.3.	The glass thickness is 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) or less.

5.	Retention screens shall not be required for laminated glass with a 15-mil (0.38 mm) polyvinyl butyral (or equivalent) interlayer used in individual dwelling units in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4, where both of the following conditions are met:

5.1.	Each pane of glass is 16 square feet (1.5 m2) or less in area.

5.2.	The highest point of the glass is 12 feet (3658 mm) or less above a walking surface or other accessible area.

2405.3.4 Screens not required.

For all other types of glazing complying with Section 2405.2, retention screens shall not be required.

2405.4 Framing.

In Type I and II construction, sloped glazing and skylight frames shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. In structures where acid fumes deleterious to metal are incidental to the use of the buildings, approved pressure-treated wood or other approved noncorrosive materials are permitted to be used for sash and frames. Framing supporting sloped glazing and skylights shall be designed to resist the tributary roof loads in Chapter 16. Skylights set at an angle of less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the horizontal plane shall be mounted at least 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the roof on a curb constructed as required for the frame. Skylights shall not be installed in the plane of the roof where the roof pitch is less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the horizontal.

Exception: Installation of a skylight without a curb shall be permitted on roofs with a minimum slope of 14 degrees (three units vertical in 12 units horizontal) in Group R-3 occupancies. All unit skylights installed in a roof with a pitch flatter than 14 degrees (0.25 rad) shall be mounted at least 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the roof on a curb constructed as required for the frame unless otherwise specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2405.5 Unit skylights and tubular daylighting devices.

Unit skylights and tubular daylighting devices shall be tested and labeled as complying with AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S./A440. The label shall state the name of the manufacturer, the approved labeling agency, the product designation and the performance grade rating as specified in AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440. Where the product manufacturer has chosen to have the performance grade of the skylight rated separately for positive and negative design pressure, then the label shall state both performance grade ratings as specified in AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 and the skylight shall comply with Section 2405.5.2. Where the skylight is not rated separately for positive and negative pressure, then the performance grade rating shown on the label shall be the performance grade rating determined in accordance with AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 for both positive and negative design pressure and the skylight shall conform to Section 2405.5.1.

2405.5.1 Skylights rated for the same performance grade for both positive and negative design pressure.

The design of skylights shall be based on Equation 24-13.

(Equation 24-13)

where:

Fg = Maximum load on the skylight determined from Equations 24-2 through 24-4 in Section 2404.2.

PG = Performance grade rating of the skylight.

2405.5.2 Skylights rated for separate performance grades for positive and negative design pressure.

The design of skylights rated for performance grade for both positive and negative design pressures shall be based on Equations 24-14 and 24-15.

(Equation 24-14)

(Equation 24-15)

where:

PGPos = Performance grade rating of the skylight under positive design pressure;

PGNeg = Performance grade rating of the skylight under negative design pressure; and

Fgi and Fgo are determined in accordance with the following:

For 0.6Wo ≥ D,

where:

Wo = Outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, as calculated in Section 1609.

D = The dead weight of the glazing, psf (kN/m2) as determined in Section 2404.2 for glass, or by the weight of the plastic, psf (kN/m2) for plastic glazing.

Fgi = Maximum load on the skylight determined from Equations 24-3 and 24-4 in Section 2404.2.

Fgo= Maximum load on the skylight determined from Equation 24-2.

For 0.6 Wo < D,

where:

Wo = The outward wind force, psf (kN/m2) due to ultimate design wind speed, Vult, as calculated in Section 1609.

D = The dead weight of the glazing, psf (kN/m2) as determined in Section 2404.2 for glass, or by the weight of the plastic for plastic glazing.

Fgi = Maximum load on the skylight determined from Equations 24-2 through 24-4 in Section 2404.2.

Fgo= 0.

SECTION 2406
SAFETY GLAZING
2406.1 Human impact loads.

Individual glazed areas, including glass mirrors, in hazardous locations as defined in Section 2406.4 shall comply with Sections 2406.1.1 through 2406.1.4.

Exception: Mirrors and other glass panels mounted or hung on a surface that provides a continuous backing support.

2406.1.1 Impact test.

Except as provided in Sections 2406.1.2 through 2406.1.4, all glazing shall pass the impact test requirements of Section 2406.2.

2406.1.2 Plastic glazing.

Plastic glazing shall meet the weathering requirements of ANSI Z97.1.

2406.1.3 Glass block.

Glass-block walls shall comply with Section 2101.2.5.

2406.1.4 Louvered windows and jalousies.

Louvered windows and jalousies shall comply with Section 2403.5.

2406.2 Impact test.

Where required by other sections of this code, glazing shall be tested in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Category II, unless otherwise indicated in Table 2406.2(1).

Exception: Glazing not in doors or enclosures for hot tubs, whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs and showers shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with ANSI Z97.1. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Class A, unless otherwise indicated in Table 2406.2(2).

TABLE 2406.2(1)

MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING CPSC 16 CFR PART 1201

EXPOSED SURFACE
AREA OF ONE SIDE OF
ONE LITE	GLAZING IN
STORM OR
COMBINATION
DOORS
(Category class)	GLAZING IN DOORS
(Category class)
	GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
SECTION 2406.4.3
(Category class)
	GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
SECTION 2406.4.2
(Category class)
	DOORS AND
ENCLOSURES
REGULATED BY
SECTION 2406.4.5
(Category class)	SLIDING GLASS
DOORS PATIO TYPE
(Category class)
9 square feet or less	I	I	No requirement	I	II	II
More than 9 square feet	II	II	II	II	II	II

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

TABLE 2406.2(2)

MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING ANSI Z97.1

EXPOSED SURFACE AREA OF ONE
SIDE OF ONE LITE
	GLAZED PANELS REGULATED BY
SECTION 2406.4.3 (Category class)
	GLAZED PANELS REGULATED BY
SECTION 2406.4.2 (Category class)
	DOORS AND ENCLOSURES
REGULATED BY SECTION 2406.4.5a
(Category class)
9 square feet or less	No requirement	B	A
More than 9 square feet	A	A	A

For SI: square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Use is only permitted by the exception to Section 2406.2.

2406.3 Identification of safety glazing.

Except as indicated in Section 2406.3.1, each pane of safety glazing installed in hazardous locations shall be identified by a manufacturer’s designation specifying who applied the designation, the manufacturer or installer and the safety glazing standard with which it complies, as well as the information specified in Section 2403.1. The designation shall be acid etched, sand blasted, ceramic fired, laser etched, embossed or of a type that once applied, cannot be removed without being destroyed. A label meeting the requirements of this section shall be permitted in lieu of the manufacturer’s designation.

Exceptions:

1.	For other than tempered glass, manufacturer’s designations are not required, provided the building official approves the use of a certificate, affidavit or other evidence confirming compliance with this code.

2.	Tempered spandrel glass is permitted to be identified by the manufacturer with a removable paper designation.

2406.3.1 Multipane assemblies.

Multipane glazed assemblies having individual panes not exceeding 1 square foot (0.09 m2) in exposed areas shall have at least one pane in the assembly marked as indicated in Section 2406.3. Other panes in the assembly shall be marked “CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201” or “ANSI Z97.1,” as appropriate.

2406.4 Hazardous locations.

The locations specified in Sections 2406.4.1 through 2406.4.7 shall be considered specific hazardous locations requiring safety glazing materials.

2406.4.1 Glazing in doors.

Glazing in all fixed and operable panels of swinging, sliding and bifold doors shall be considered a hazardous location.

Exceptions:

1.	Glazed openings of a size through which a 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) sphere is unable to pass.

2.	Decorative glazing.

3.	Glazing materials used as curved glazed panels in revolving doors.

4.	Commercial refrigerated cabinet glazed doors.

2406.4.2 Glazing adjacent to doors.

Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel adjacent to a door where the nearest vertical edge of the glazing is within a 24-inch (610 mm) arc of either vertical edge of the door in a closed position and where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the walking surface shall be considered a hazardous location.

Exceptions:

1.	Decorative glazing.

2.	Where there is an intervening wall or other permanent barrier between the door and glazing.

3.	Where access through the door is to a closet or storage area 3 feet (914 mm) or less in depth. Glazing in this application shall comply with Section 2406.4.3.

4.	Glazing in walls on the latch side of and perpendicular to the plane of the door in a closed position in one- and two-family dwellings or within dwelling units in Group R-2.

2406.4.3 Glazing in windows.

Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel that meets all of the following conditions shall be considered a hazardous location:

1.	The exposed area of an individual pane is greater than 9 square feet (0.84 m2).

2.	The bottom edge of the glazing is less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor.

3.	The top edge of the glazing is greater than 36 inches (914 mm) above the floor.

4.	One or more walking surface(s) are within 36 inches (914 mm), measured horizontally and in a straight line, of the plane of the glazing.

Exceptions:

1.	Decorative glazing.

2.	Where a horizontal rail is installed on the accessible side(s) of the glazing 34 to 38 inches (864 to 965 mm) above the walking surface. The rail shall be capable of withstanding a horizontal load of 50 pounds per linear foot (730 N/m) without contacting the glass and be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm) in cross-sectional height.

3.	Outboard panes in insulating glass units or multiple glazing where the bottom exposed edge of the glass is 25 feet (7620 mm) or more above any grade, roof, walking surface or other horizontal or sloped (within 45 degrees of horizontal) (0.79 rad) surface adjacent to the glass exterior.

2406.4.4 Glazing in guards and railings.

Glazing in guards and railings, including structural baluster panels and nonstructural in-fill panels, regardless of area or height above a walking surface shall be considered a hazardous location.

2406.4.5 Glazing and wet surfaces.

Glazing in walls, enclosures or fences containing or facing hot tubs, spas, whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs, showers and indoor or outdoor swimming pools where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) measured vertically above any standing or walking surface shall be considered a hazardous location. This shall apply to single glazing and all panes in multiple glazing.

Exceptions:

1.	Glazing that is more than 60 inches (1524 mm), measured horizontally and in a straight line, from the water’s edge of a bathtub, hot tub, spa, whirlpool or swimming pool.

2.	Outboard sacrificial panes in laminated insulating glass units in walls where the exterior of the unit is not exposed to any of the hazardous locations specified in Section 2406.4.

2406.4.6 Glazing adjacent to stairways and ramps.

Glazing where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the plane of the adjacent walking surface of stairways, landings between flights of stairs and ramps shall be considered a hazardous location.

Exceptions:

1.	The side of a stairway, landing or ramp that has a guard complying with the provisions of Sections 1015 and 1607.9, and the plane of the glass is greater than 18 inches (457 mm) from the railing.

2.	Glazing 36 inches (914 mm) or more measured horizontally from the walking surface.

2406.4.7 Glazing adjacent to the bottom stairway landing.

Glazing adjacent to the landing at the bottom of a stairway where the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the landing and within a 60-inch (1524 mm) horizontal arc that is less than 180 degrees (3.14 rad) from the bottom tread nosing shall be considered a hazardous location.

Exception: Glazing that is protected by a guard complying with Sections 1015 and 1607.9 where the plane of the glass is greater than 18 inches (457 mm) from the guard.

2406.5 Fire department access panels.

Fire department glass access panels shall be of tempered glass. For insulating glass units, all panes shall be tempered glass.

SECTION 2407
GLASS IN HANDRAILS AND GUARDS
2407.1 Materials.

Glass used in a handrail, guardrail or guard section shall be laminated glass constructed of fully tempered or heat-strengthened glass and shall comply with Category II or CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1. Glazing in railing in-fill panels shall be of an approved safety glazing material that conforms to the provisions of Section 2406.1.1. For all glazing types, the minimum nominal thickness shall be 1/4 inch (6.4 mm).

Exception: Single fully tempered glass complying with Category II of CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1 shall be permitted to be used in handrails and guardrails where there is no walking surface beneath them or the walking surface is permanently protected from the risk of falling glass.

2407.1.1 Loads.

The panels and their support system shall be designed to withstand the loads specified in Section 1607.9 using a safety factor of four.

2407.1.2 Structural glass baluster panels.

Guards with structural glass baluster panels shall be installed with an attached top rail or handrail. The top rail or handrail shall be supported by not fewer than three glass baluster panels, or shall be otherwise supported to remain in place should one glass baluster panel fail.

Exception: An attached top rail or handrail is not required where the glass baluster panels are laminated glass with two or more glass plies of equal thickness and of the same glass type. The panels shall be tested to remain in place as a barrier following impact or glass breakage in accordance with ASTM E2353.

2407.1.3 Parking garages.

Glazing materials shall not be installed in handrails or guards in parking garages except for pedestrian areas not exposed to impact from vehicles.

2407.1.4 Glazing in wind-borne debris regions.

Glazing installed in in-fill panels or balusters in wind-borne debris regions shall comply with the following:

2407.1.4.1 Balusters and in-fill panels.

Glass installed in exterior railing in-fill panels or balusters shall be laminated glass complying with Category II of CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1.

2407.1.4.2 Glass supporting top rail.

When the top rail is supported by glass, the assembly shall be tested according to the impact requirements of Section 1609.1.2 (HVHZ shall comply with Section 1618.4.6.4). The top rail shall remain in place after impact.

SECTION 2408
GLAZING IN ATHLETIC FACILITIES
2408.1 General.

Glazing in athletic facilities and similar uses subject to impact loads, which forms whole or partial wall sections or which is used as a door or part of a door, shall comply with this section.

2408.2 Racquetball and squash courts.
2408.2.1 Testing.

Test methods and loads for individual glazed areas in racquetball and squash courts subject to impact loads shall conform to those of CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201 or ANSI Z97.1 with impacts being applied at a height of 59 inches (1499 mm) above the playing surface to an actual or simulated glass wall installation with fixtures, fittings and methods of assembly identical to those used in practice.

Glass walls shall comply with the following conditions:

1.	A glass wall in a racquetball or squash court, or similar use subject to impact loads, shall remain intact following a test impact.

2.	The deflection of such walls shall be not greater than 11/2 inches (38 mm) at the point of impact for a drop height of 48 inches (1219 mm).

Glass doors shall comply with the following conditions:

1.	Glass doors shall remain intact following a test impact at the prescribed height in the center of the door.

2.	The relative deflection between the edge of a glass door and the adjacent wall shall not exceed the thickness of the wall plus 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) for a drop height of 48 inches (1219 mm).

2408.3 Gymnasiums and basketball courts.

Glazing in multipurpose gymnasiums, basketball courts and similar athletic facilities subject to human impact loads shall comply with Category II of CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201 or Class A of ANSI Z97.1.

SECTION 2409
GLASS IN WALKWAYS,
ELEVATOR HOISTWAYS AND ELEVATOR CARS
2409.1 Glass walkways.

Glass installed as a part of a floor/ceiling assembly as a walking surface and constructed with laminated glass shall comply with ASTM E2751 or with the load requirements specified in Chapter 16. Such assemblies shall comply with the fire-resistance rating and marking requirements of this code where applicable.

2409.2 Glass in elevator hoistway enclosures.

Glass in elevator hoistway enclosures and hoistway doors shall be laminated glass conforming to ANSI Z97.1 or CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.

2409.2.1 Fire-resistance-rated hoistways.

Glass installed in hoistways and hoistway doors where the hoistway is required to have a fire-resistance rating shall also comply with Section 716.

2409.2.2 Glass hoistway doors.

The glass in glass hoistway doors shall be not less than 60 percent of the total visible door panel surface area as seen from the landing side.

2409.3 Visions panels in elevator hoistway doors.

Glass in vision panels in elevator hoistway doors shall be permitted to be any transparent glazing material not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in thickness conforming to Class A in accordance with ANSI Z97.1 or Category II in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201. The area of any single vision panel shall be not less than 24 square inches (15 484 mm2) and the total area of one or more vision panels in any hoistway door shall be not more than 85 square inches (54 839 mm2).

2409.4 Glass in elevator cars.

Glass in elevator cars shall be in accordance with this section.

2409.4.1 Glass types.

Glass in elevator car enclosures, glass elevator car doors and glass used for lining walls and ceilings of elevator cars shall be laminated glass conforming to Class A in accordance with ANSI Z97.1 or Category II in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.

Exception: Tempered glass shall be permitted to be used for lining walls and ceilings of elevator cars provided:

1.	The glass is bonded to a nonpolymeric coating, sheeting or film backing having a physical integrity to hold the fragments when the glass breaks.

2.	The glass is not subjected to further treatment such as sandblasting; etching; heat treatment or painting that could alter the original properties of the glass.

3.	The glass is tested to the acceptance criteria for laminated glass as specified for Class A in accordance with ANSI Z97.l or Category II in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Part 1201.

2409.4.2 Surface area.

The glass in glass elevator car doors shall be not less than 60 percent of the total visible door panel surface area as seen from the car side of the doors.

SECTION 2410
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—GENERAL
2410.1

Exterior wall cladding, surfacing and glazing, where provided, shall be as set forth in Sections 2410 through 2415.

2410.2

Exterior wall cladding, surfacing and glazing shall be designed and constructed to sufficiently resist the full pressurization from the wind loads prescribed in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) and the concentrated loads that result from hurricane-generated wind-borne debris.

1.	Exterior wall cladding, surfacing and glazing, within the lowest 30 feet (9.1 m) of the exterior building walls shall be of sufficient strength to resist large missile impacts as outlined in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2.	Exterior wall cladding, surfacing and glazing located above the lowest 30 feet (9.1 mm) of the exterior building walls shall be of sufficient strength to resist small missile impacts as outlined in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

Exception: Exterior wall cladding, surfacing and glazing when protected by fixed, operable or portable shutters or screens which have product approval to resist full pressurization from wind loads as well as large and small missile impacts as outlined in the high-velocity hurricane provisions of Chapter 16, without deforming to the point where the substrate being protected is compromised.

2410.3 Workmanship.

Reserved.

2410.4

All exterior wall cladding, surfacing, garage doors, skylights, operative and inoperative windows shall have product approval.

SECTION 2411
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
WINDOWS, DOORS, GLASS AND GLAZING
2411.1 General.
2411.1.1

Windows, doors, glass and glazing shall be as set forth in this section.

2411.1.2

Glass shall comply with ASTM C1036 requirements for flat glass Type I and II and GSA DD-G-451c Standard for Glass, Flat and Corrugated, for Glazing Mirrors and Other Uses.

2411.1.3

Reserved.

2411.1.4

Reserved.

2411.1.5

Heat-strengthened and ceramic-coated spandrel glass shall comply with ASTM C1048.

2411.1.6

Reserved.

2411.1.7

Installed glass shall not be less than Single-Strength B quality unless otherwise approved by the building official, and where edges are exposed they shall be seamed or ground.

2411.1.8

Where a light of glass is of such height above grade that the top 50 percent or more is in a zone of greater wind load, the area of the entire light shall be limited as for the greater height above grade.

2411.1.9

Replacement of any glazing or part thereof shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building.

2411.1.10

Fixed glazing used as an exterior component shall require product approval. Comparative analysis in compliance with Section 2411.3.2.4 by a Florida-registered engineer or architect may be accepted when the actual pressure and geometry conditions differ from the conditions shown in the approval.

2411.1.11

Exterior lite of glass in an insulated glass unit shall be safety glazed.

Exceptions:

1.	Large missile impact-resistant glazed assemblies.

2.	Nonmissile impact units protected with shutters.

2411.2 Fixed glass in exterior walls.

2411.2.1 Limits of size of glass.
2411.2.1.1

The minimum thickness of annealed float glazing materials used in exterior walls shall be determined and shall not be less than as set forth in ASTM E1300.

2411.2.1.2

For glazing materials other than annealed float use the glazing material resistance factors used in ASTM E1300.

2411.2.1.3

Corrugated glass and other special glass shall be limited to spans determined by analysis and test to resist the loads set forth in Chapter 16 (High Wind Zones) based on fiber stresses not exceeding 4000 psi (27.58 MPa).

2411.2.1.4

Glass block shall have product approval.

2411.3 Doors and operative windows in exterior walls.
2411.3.1 Design and approval.
2411.3.1.1

The design and approval of sliding doors, swinging doors and operative windows in exterior walls, including the supporting members shall be based on the proposed use-height above grade in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2411.3.1.2

Maximum glass sizes shall comply with ASTM E1300.

2411.3.1.3

Reserved.

2411.3.1.4

The architect or professional engineer of record shall be required to specify the design wind pressure, determined in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), for all garage doors, skylights operative windows and fixed glazing. The design wind pressure for each component of the exterior building surface shall be incorporated into the building design drawing so as to allow the respective manufacturer to size the prefabricated assembly for the proper wind pressures.

2411.3.1.5

Exterior garage doors shall be designed and constructed to actively or passively lock in the closed position when subjected to a uniform lateral pressure in excess of 50 percent of the design wind pressure as prescribed in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2411.3.1.6

The architect or professional engineer of record shall be required to detail on the drawings submitted for permit, rough opening dimensions, supporting framework, method of attachment and waterproofing procedures for all garage doors, passage doors, skylights, operative and inoperative windows in exterior walls. Said framework and method of attachment shall be designed and constructed so as to sufficiently resist the design wind pressures as outlined in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

Exception: When detailed engineered shop drawings, along with the notices of product approval, produced by the manufacturer’s specialty engineer and approved by the architect or professional engineer of record, are admitted at the time of permit application, which completely identifies rough openings, supporting framework, method of attachment and waterproofing procedures are prepared and bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer.

2411.3.2 Tests.
2411.3.2.1

Operative window and door assemblies shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of this section, TAS 202 and the forced entry resistance requirements from AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440.

Exceptions:

1.	Door assemblies installed in nonhabitable areas, where the door assembly and area are designed to accept water infiltration, need not be tested for water infiltration.

2.	Door assemblies installed where the overhang (OH) ratio is equal to or more than 1 need not be tested for water infiltration. The overhang ratio shall be calculated by the following equation:

OH ratio = OH length/OH height

where:

OH length = The horizontal measure of how far an overhang over a door projects out from the door’s surface.

OH height = The vertical measure of the distance from the door’s sill to the bottom of the overhang over a door.

3.	Pass-through windows for serving from a single-family kitchen, where protected by a roof overhang of 5 feet (1.5 m) or more shall be exempted from the requirements of the water infiltration test.

2411.3.2.1.1

Glazed curtain wall, window wall and storefront systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of this section and the laboratory test requirements of the American Architectural Manufacturers Association (AAMA) Standard 501, following test load sequence and test load duration in TAS 202.

2411.3.2.2

Such assemblies with permanent muntin bars shall be tested with muntin bars in place.

2411.3.2.3

Such assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of test and approval.

2411.3.2.4

Structural wind load design pressures for window and door units other than the size tested in accordance with Section 2411.3.2.1 shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested unit provided such different pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis or validated by an additional test of the window or door unit to the different design pressure in accordance with Section 2411.3.2.1. All components of the alternate size unit shall be the same as the tested or labeled unit.

i.	Operable windows and glass doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

1.	For windows and doors (other than sliding or bi-fold), the frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

2.	For sliding or bi-fold doors, the panel area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the panel area of the tested approved unit and if the door stiles or interlocks do not meet Section 1616.3.1(6) the maximum allowed unit’s frame area shall be limited to 1.5 times the tested frame area.

3.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

4.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the proportional deflection and fiber stress of the intermediate members of the approved unit.

5.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the concentrated load at the juncture of the intermediate members and the frame of the approved unit.

6.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

7.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested per TAS 201 and TAS 203.

ii.	Nonoperable windows and glass doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

1.	The frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

2.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

3.	The maximum uniform load distribution (ULD) of any side shall be equal to the uniform load carried by the side divided by the length of the side.

4.	The ULD of any member shall not exceed the ULD of the corresponding member of the tested approved unit.

5.	The ULD of each member shall be calculated in accordance with standard engineering analysis.

6.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

7.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested per TAS 201 and 203.

2411.3.2.5

Reserved.

2411.3.2.6

Reserved.

2411.3.3 Construction details.

Construction details for fixed glass shall comply with the requirements of this paragraph except that structural glazing as defined in Section 202 need not comply with this section, but shall comply with Section 2415.

2411.3.3.1

Each light of fixed glass more than 3 feet (914 mm) in width shall have two approved setting blocks or approved suspension clamps. Setting blocks shall be Neoprene 70-90 Shore A durometer hardness or approved equal.

2411.3.3.2

Fixed glass lights shall be set in corrosion-resistant metal frames and shall comply with applicable requirements of Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) for wind loads, allowable stresses and load tests. Fixed glass lights may be set in wood, metal or concrete frames as permitted for the types of construction by Chapter 3 through Chapter 6.

2411.3.3.3

Wood shall have been preservative treated or shall be of a durable species as defined in Section 2304.12.

2411.3.3.4

Attachment shall be as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) and shall be corrosion resistant.

2411.3.3.5

Glass in fixed lights shall be securely and continuously supported at the perimeter of each sheet unless the design is based on one or more unsupported edges. Supporting members such as division bars and mullions shall be designed by rational analysis to support the wind pressures set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones). Supporting bars shall be attached at the ends to resist the loads set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2411.3.3.6

The depth of the glazing rabbet and depth of engagement in the rabbet, for fixed glass, shall be based on consideration of the dimensional reduction from deflection and the dimensional changes caused by temperature.

2411.3.3.7

Exterior lite of glass in an insulated glass unit shall be safety glazed.

Exceptions:

1.	Large missile impact-resistant glazed assemblies.

2.	Nonmissile impact units protected with shutters.

2411.3.4

Gaskets used in glazing systems shall comply with the following standards as applicable:

1.	ASTM C864, Dense Elastomeric Compression Seal Gaskets, Setting Blocks, and Spacers.

2.	ASTM C509, Elastomeric Cellular Preformed Gaskets and Sealing Material.

3.	ASTM C1115, Dense Elastomeric Silicone Rubber Gaskets and Accessories.

4.	ASTM E2203, Dense Thermoplastic Elastomers Used for Compression Seals, Gaskets, Setting Blocks, Spacers and Accessories.

2411.4 Glazed panel safeguards.

Reserved.

2411.5 Operable window safeguards.

Reserved.

2411.6 Interior locations.

Reserved.

2411.7 Safety glazing.

Reserved.

2411.8 Sloped glazing.

Reserved.

SECTION 2412
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GLASS VENEER
2412.1

Glass veneer shall be as set forth in this section.

2412.2 Dimension.

Glass veneer units shall be not less than 11/32 inch (8.7 mm) in thickness. No unit shall be larger in area than 10 square feet (0.93 m2) where 15 feet (4.6 m) or less above the grade directly below, nor larger than 6 square feet (0.56 m2) where more than 15 feet (4.6 m) above the grade directly below.

2412.3 Attachment.

Every glass veneer unit shall be attached to the backing with approved mastic cement and corrosion-resistant ties and shall be supported on shelf angles.

2412.3.1

Where more than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade, veneer shall be supported by shelf angles, and ties shall be used in both horizontal and vertical joints.

2412.3.2

Below a point 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade, glass veneer shall rest on shelf angles. Veneering shall not be supported on construction which is not an integral part of the wall, and over sidewalks shall be supported on a shelf angle not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) above grade.

2412.3.3

All edges of glass veneer shall be ground.

2412.4 Mastic.
2412.4.1

The mastic shall cover not less than one-half of the area of the unit after the unit has been set in place and shall be neither less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) nor more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in thickness.

2412.4.2

The mastic shall be insoluble in water and shall not lose its adhesive qualities when dry.

2412.4.3

Absorbent surfaces shall be sealed by a bonding coat before mastic is applied. The bonding coat shall be cohesive with the mastic.

2412.4.4

Glass veneer surfaces to which mastic is applied shall be clean and uncoated.

2412.4.5

Space between edges of glass veneer shall be filled uniformly with an approved-type pointing compound.

2412.5 Shelf angles and ties.
2412.5.1

Shelf angles shall be of corrosion resistant material capable of supporting four times the width of the supported veneer. The shelf angles shall be spaced vertically in alternate horizontal joints, but not more than 3 feet (914 mm) apart. Shelf angles shall be secured to the wall at intervals not exceeding 2 feet (610 mm) with corrosion-resistant bolts not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) diameter. Bolts shall be set in masonry and secured by lead shields.

2412.5.2

Ties shall be of corrosion-resistant metal as manufactured especially for holding glass-veneer sheets to masonry surfaces. There shall be not less than one such approved tie for each 2 square feet (0.19 m2) of veneer surface.

2412.6 Backing.

Exterior glass veneer shall be applied only upon masonry, concrete or stucco.

2412.7 Expansion joints.

Glass veneer units shall be separated from each other and from adjoining materials by an expansion joint at least 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in thickness. There shall be at least 1/64 inch (0.4 mm) clearance between bolts and the adjacent glass.

SECTION 2413
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
STORM SHUTTERS/EXTERNAL
PROTECTIVE DEVICES
2413.1 General.

Unless exterior wall components including but not limited to structural glazing, doors and windows of enclosed buildings have specific product approval to preserve the enclosed building envelope against impact loads as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), all such components shall be protected by product approved storm shutters.

2413.2

The storm shutters shall be designed and constructed to insure a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) separation at maximum deflection with components and frames of components they are to protect unless the components and frame are specifically designed to receive the load of storm shutters, and shall be designed to resist the wind pressures as set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) by methods admitting of rational analysis based on established principles of design. Storm shutter shall also be designed to comply with the impact load requirements included within Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2413.3

The storm shutter design calculations and detailed drawings, including attachment to the main structure, shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a qualified Florida-registered delegated engineer, or if qualified to prepare such design, by the engineer or architect of record, which architect or engineer shall be proficient in structural design. The architect or engineer of record shall, in all instances, review and approve documents prepared by the delegated engineer.

2413.4

Storm shutters shall be approved by the certification agency and shall bear the name of the company engraved in every section of the system.

2413.5

Deflection shall not exceed the limits set forth in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones).

2413.6

Reserved.

2413.6.1

Shutters used to protect openings above the first story of any building or structure must be permanently installed and closable from the inside of the building or structure unless such openings are accessible without the use of a ladder or lift, or shutters can be installed from the interior of the building or structure.

Exception: Group R3 detached single-family residences not exceeding two stories.

2413.7

Storm shutters must completely cover an opening in all directions.

2413.7.1

On any side of an opening, the maximum side clearance between the shutter and a wall or inset surface shall be 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Any distance in excess of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) shall require end closure or shutter overlap, where applicable.

2413.7.2

Shutter overlap shall be a minimum of 1.5 times the side clearance between the shutter and wall.

2413.7.3

End closures shall be designed to resist wind loads specified in Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones), based on rational analysis.

SECTION 2414
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
CURTAIN WALLS
2414.1 Scope.

This section prescribes requirements for curtain walls of buildings or structures regulated by this code.

2414.2 Definition.

A curtain wall is any prefabricated assembly of various components to enclose a building usually attached to and/or supported by the building frame other than a single door, or window, masonry units, poured in place concrete and siding of single membrane metal, wood or plastic.

2414.3

Curtain walls, as defined in Section 2414.2, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this section.

2414.4

Structural glazing in curtain walls shall also comply with the requirements of Section 2415.

2414.5 General.
2414.5.1

All structural elements of curtain wall systems and their attachments (including embedments) to the main structural frame shall be designed by and bear the seal of a qualified Florida-registered delegated engineer, or if qualified to prepare such design, by the engineer or architect of record, which architect or engineer shall be proficient in structural design. The engineer of record shall, in all instances, review and approve documents prepared by the delegated engineer.

2414.5.2

Curtain wall systems supported from more than two adjacent floors shall be designed to withstand all imposed loads without exceeding allowable stresses in the event of destruction or failure of any single span within the system. Documents for the main building permit shall include sufficient details describing the curtain wall system attachment to the main structure. This portion of the contract documents, if not prepared by the qualified engineer or architect of record, shall bear the signature and seal of the qualified Florida-registered delegated engineer charged with the responsibility for the design of the curtain wall system.

2414.5.3

Individual mullions acting as a continuous member shall transfer loads through supports from no more than three adjacent floors.

2414.5.4 Materials.

The materials used in any curtain wall shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code.

2414.6 Fire protection.

Reserved.

2414.7 Inspection.

Reserved.

SECTION 2415
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
STRUCTURAL GLAZING SYSTEMS
2415.1 Scope.

This section prescribes requirements for structural glazing systems of buildings or structures regulated by this code.

2415.2 Application.
2415.2.1

Structural glazing, as defined in Section 2414.2, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this section.

2415.2.2

Structural glazing systems used in curtain walls shall also comply with the requirements of Section 2414.

2415.3 Definition.

The terms used in this section shall be defined as set forth in Section 202.

2415.4 Standards.

Adhesives and sealants used in structural glazing systems shall comply with following standards:

ASTM C794, Test Method for Adhesion-In-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants.

ASTM C920, Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants.

ASTM D412, Test Methods for Rubber Properties in Tension.

ASTM D624, Test Method for Rubber Property–Tear Resistance.

ASTM D2240, Test Method for Rubber Property–Durometer Hardness. Federal Specifications TT-S-001543A and TT-S-00230C.

ASTM E331, Test Method for Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls and Doors.

ASTM E330, Test Method for Structural Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls and Doors.

2415.5 Design.
2415.5.1 General.

Structural glazing systems shall be designed by and bear the seal of a Florida-registered professional engineer.

2415.5.2 Materials.
2415.5.2.1 Identification.

All materials shall be clearly identified as to manufacturer and manufacturer’s product number.

2415.5.2.2 Adhesives and sealants.
2415.5.2.2.1

Only approved silicone elastomer adhesives and sealants shall be used for fastening glass lights and other panels to curtain wall framing.

2415.5.2.2.2

Such adhesives and sealants shall be of a polymer that is 100-percent silicone.

2415.5.2.2.3

Adhesives and sealants shall have been tested in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 2415.4.

2415.5.3 Manufacturer’s testing, recommendation and approval.
2415.5.3.1

Compatibility of all components and fabrication procedures of structural glazing systems shall be tested, approved and recommended in writing by the manufacturer of the adhesive; the manufacturer of the coating; whether it is anodized, baked or otherwise applied and the manufacturer of the glass panel.

2415.5.3.2

Manufacturer’s testing, recommendation and approval shall address, but shall not be limited in scope by the following sections.

2415.5.3.2.1

The compatibility of the sealant with metal, glazing materials, shims, spacers, setting blocks, backer rods, gaskets and other materials.

2415.5.3.2.2

Adhesion to the designated substrates and adhesion of the substrates to the base metal.

2415.5.3.2.3

The design and structural capability of silicone joints and cross sections.

2415.5.4 Structural requirements.
2415.5.4.1 Design of structural seals.
2415.5.4.1.1

The design stress of the structural silicone shall not exceed 20 psi (138 kPa) for materials having a minimum strength of 100 psi (690 kPa) at the weakest element in the line of stress.

2415.5.4.1.2

Such design stress shall also provide for a safety factor of not less than 5.0.

2415.5.4.1.3

Safety factors greater than 5.0 shall be specified by the engineer when required or recommended by the manufacturer.

2415.5.4.1.4

The silicone structural seal shall have a maximum modulus of elasticity to allow no more than 25-percent movement of the joint width at 20 psi (138 kPa) stress.

2415.5.4.1.5

In insulating glass units, the secondary silicone seal shall be designed to withstand a minimum of one-half the design negative wind load applicable to the outboard lights.

2415.5.4.2 Bonding limits.

Structural glazing shall be limited to adhesive bonding on one side or on two opposing sides of an infill glass lights or panel.

Exception: Three- or four-side bonding shall be permitted only when structural glazing units are shop fabricated and shop glazed.

2415.5.4.3 Job-site reglazing.
2415.5.4.3.1

Job-site replacement reglazing shall be permitted only when performed following a procedure approved in writing by the applicable structural silicone manufacturer.

2415.5.4.3.2

Replacement shall be performed only by individuals or firms approved or certified by the silicone manufacturer.

2415.6 Fire protection.

Reserved.

2415.7 Inspections, testing and recertification.
2415.7.1

A minimum of 1 percent of the structurally glazed panels shall be tested for load carrying capacity and sealant adhesion in accordance with Chapter 16 (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones) and ASTM E330.

2415.7.2

Structural glazed panels shall be inspected by a Florida-registered architect or professional engineer for conformance with the approved design and installation procedures determined by the authority having jurisdiction prior to the erection of such panels and after the seal curing period established by the silicone manufacturer.

2415.7.3

It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to verify the adhesion of the cured sealant periodically throughout the application to assure compliance with the manufacturer’s specifications and quality of application.

2415.7.4

Structural glazing systems on threshold buildings shall be recertified by the owner as specified by the authority having jurisdiction at six month intervals for the first year after installation. Subsequently, such systems shall be recertified every five years at regular intervals.

2415.7.5

Such recertifications shall determine the structural condition and adhesion capacity of the silicone sealant.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-25]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 25
GYPSUM BOARD, GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS AND PLASTER
SECTION 2501
GENERAL
2501.1 Scope.

Provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of gypsum board, gypsum panel products, lath, gypsum plaster, cement plaster and reinforced gypsum concrete.

2501.2 Performance.

Lathing, plastering, gypsum board and gypsum panel product construction shall be done in the manner and with the materials specified in this chapter and, when required for fire protection, shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.

2501.3 Other materials.

Other approved wall or ceiling coverings shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and the conditions of approval.

SECTION 2502
DEFINITIONS
2502.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

CEMENT PLASTER.

EXTERIOR SURFACES.

GYPSUM BOARD.

GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT.

GYPSUM PLASTER.

GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER.

INTERIOR SURFACES.

WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES.

WIRE BACKING.

SECTION 2503
INSPECTION
2503.1 Inspection.

Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be inspected in accordance with Section 110.3.5.

SECTION 2504
VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES
2504.1 Scope.

The following requirements shall be met where construction involves gypsum board, gypsum panel products or lath and plaster in vertical and horizontal assemblies.

2504.1.1 Wood framing.

Wood supports for lath, gypsum board or gypsum panel products, as well as wood stripping or furring, shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal thickness in the least dimension.

Exception: The minimum nominal dimension of wood furring strips installed over solid backing shall be not less than 1 inch by 2 inches (25 mm by 51 mm).

2504.1.2 Studless partitions.

The minimum thickness of vertically erected studless solid plaster partitions of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) and 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) rib metal lath, 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) gypsum lath, gypsum board or gypsum panel product shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

SECTION 2505
SHEAR WALL CONSTRUCTION
2505.1 Resistance to shear (wood framing).

Wood-frame shear walls sheathed with gypsum board, gypsum panel products or lath and plaster shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 2306.3 and are permitted to resist wind loads.

2505.2 Resistance to shear (steel framing).

Cold-formed steel-frame shear walls sheathed with gypsum board or gypsum panel products and constructed in accordance with the materials and provisions of Section 2211 are permitted to resist wind loads.

SECTION 2506
GYPSUM BOARD AND
GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT MATERIALS
2506.1 General.

Gypsum board, gypsum panel products and accessories shall be identified by the manufacturer’s designation to indicate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in this section and stored to protect such materials from the weather.

2506.2 Standards.

Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall conform to the appropriate standards listed in Table 2506.2 and Chapter 35 and, where required for fire protection, shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 7.

TABLE 2506.2

GYPSUM BOARD AND GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Accessories for gypsum board	ASTM C1047
Adhesives for fastening gypsum board	ASTM C557
Expandable foam adhesives for fastening gypsum wallboard	ASTM D6464
Cold-formed steel studs and track, structural	AISI S240
Cold-formed steel studs and track, nonstructural	AISI S220
Elastomeric joint sealants	ASTM C920
Factory-laminated gypsum panel products	ASTM C1766
Fiber-reinforced gypsum panels	ASTM C1278
Glass mat gypsum backing panel	ASTM C1178
Glass mat gypsum panel 5	ASTM C1658
Glass mat gypsum substrate	ASTM C1177
Joint reinforcing tape and compound	ASTM C474; C475
Nails for gypsum boards	ASTM C514, F547, F1667
Steel screws	ASTM C954; C1002
Standard specification for gypsum board	ASTM C1396
Testing gypsum and gypsum products	ASTM C22; C472; C473
2506.2.1 Other materials.

Metal suspension systems for acoustical and lay-in panel ceilings shall comply with ASTM C635 listed in Chapter 35.

SECTION 2507
LATHING AND PLASTERING
2507.1 General.

Lathing and plastering materials and accessories shall be marked by the manufacturer’s designation to indicate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in this section and stored in such a manner to protect them from the weather.

2507.2 Standards.

Lathing and plastering materials shall conform to the standards listed in Table 2507.2 and Chapter 35 and, where required for fire protection, shall also conform to the provisions of Chapter 7.

TABLE 2507.2 LATH, PLASTERING MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Accessories for gypsum veneer base	ASTM C1047
Blended cement	ASTM C595
Cold-formed steel studs and track, structural	AISI S240
Cold-formed steel studs and track, nonstructural	AISI S220
Exterior plaster bonding compounds	ASTM C932
Hydraulic cement	ASTM C1157; C1600
Gypsum casting and molding plaster	ASTM C59
Gypsum Keene’s cement	ASTM C61
Gypsum plaster	ASTM C28
Gypsum veneer plaster	ASTM C587
Interior bonding compounds, gypsum	ASTM C631
Lime plasters	ASTM C5; C206
Masonry cement	ASTM C91
Metal lath	ASTM C847
Plaster aggregates	
 Sand	ASTM C35; C897
 Perlite	ASTM C35
 Vermiculite	ASTM C35
Plastic cement	ASTM C1328
Portland cement	ASTM C150
Steel screws	ASTM C1002; C954
Welded wire lath	ASTM C933
Woven wire plaster base	ASTM C1032
SECTION 2508
GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION
2508.1 General.

Gypsum board, gypsum panel products and gypsum plaster construction shall be of the materials listed in Tables 2506.2 and 2507.2. These materials shall be assembled and installed in compliance with the appropriate standards listed in Tables 2508.1 and 2511.1.1 and Chapter 35.

TABLE 2508.1

INSTALLATION OF GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Gypsum board and gypsum panel
products
	GA-216; ASTM C840
Gypsum sheathing and gypsum panel
products
	ASTM C1280
Gypsum veneer base	ASTM C844
Interior lathing and furring	ASTM C841
Steel framing for gypsum board and
gypsum panel products
	ASTM C754; C1007
2508.2 Limitations.

Gypsum wallboard or gypsum plaster shall not be used in any exterior surface where such gypsum construction will be exposed directly to the weather. Gypsum wallboard shall not be used where there will be direct exposure to water or continuous high humidity conditions. Gypsum sheathing shall be installed on exterior surfaces in accordance with ASTM C1280.

2508.2.1 Weather protection.

Gypsum wallboard, gypsum lath or gypsum plaster shall not be installed until weather protection for the installation is provided.

2508.3 Single-ply application.

Edges and ends of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall occur on the framing members, except those edges and ends that are perpendicular to the framing members. Edges and ends of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be in moderate contact except in concealed spaces where fire-resistance-rated construction, shear resistance or diaphragm action is not required.

2508.3.1 Floating angles.

Fasteners at the top and bottom plates of vertical assemblies, or the edges and ends of horizontal assemblies perpendicular to supports, and at the wall line are permitted to be omitted except on shear resisting elements or fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Fasteners shall be applied in such a manner as not to fracture the face paper with the fastener head.

2508.4 Adhesives.

Gypsum board and gypsum panel products secured to framing with adhesives in ceiling assemblies shall be attached using an approved fastening schedule. Expandable foam adhesives for fastening gypsum wallboard shall conform to ASTM D6464. All other adhesives for the installation of gypsum wallboard shall conform to ASTM C557.

2508.5 Joint treatment.

Gypsum board and gypsum panel product fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall have joints and fasteners treated.

Exception: Joint and fastener treatment need not be provided where any of the following conditions occur:

1.	Where the gypsum board or the gypsum panel product is to receive a decorative finish such as wood paneling, battens, acoustical finishes or any similar application that would be equivalent to joint treatment.

2.	On single-layer systems where joints occur over wood framing members.

3.	Square edge or tongue-and-groove edge gypsum board (V-edge), gypsum panel products, gypsum backing board or gypsum sheathing.

4.	On multilayer systems where the joints of adjacent layers are offset.

5.	Assemblies tested without joint treatment.

2508.6 Horizontal gypsum board or gypsum panel product diaphragm ceilings.

Gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be permitted to be used on wood joists to create a horizontal diaphragm ceiling in accordance with Table 2508.6.

TABLE 2508.6

ALLOWABLE (ASD) SHEAR CAPACITY FOR HORIZONTAL WOOD-FRAME GYPSUM BOARD DIAPHRAGM CEILING ASSEMBLIES

MATERIAL	THICKNESS
OF MATERIAL
(MINIMUM) (inches)	SPACING
OF FRAMING
MEMBERS (inches)	SHEAR
VALUEa
(PLF OF CEILING)	MIMIMUM FASTENER SIZE
Gypsum board or gypsum panel product	1/2	16 o.c.	90	5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64-inch headc
Gypsum board or gypsum panel product	1/2	24 o.c.	70	5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64-inch headc

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.59 N/m.

a.	Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term wind loading. Values shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b.	Reserved.

c.	11/4-inch, No. 6 Type S or W screws are permitted to be substituted for the listed nails.

2508.6.1 Diaphragm proportions.

The maximum allowable diaphragm proportions shall be 11/2:1 between shear resisting elements. Rotation or cantilever conditions shall not be permitted.

2508.6.2 Installation.

Gypsum board or gypsum panel products used in a horizontal diaphragm ceiling shall be installed perpendicular to ceiling framing members. End joints of adjacent courses of gypsum board shall not occur on the same joist.

2508.6.3 Blocking of perimeter edges.

Perimeter edges shall be blocked using a wood member not less than 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) nominal dimension. Blocking material shall be installed flat over the top plate of the wall to provide a nailing surface not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in width for the attachment of the gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

2508.6.4 Fasteners.

Fasteners used for the attachment of gypsum board or gypsum panel products to a horizontal diaphragm ceiling shall be as defined in Table 2508.6. Fasteners shall be spaced not more than 7 inches (178 mm) on center at all supports, including perimeter blocking, and not more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) from the edges and ends of the gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

2508.6.5 Lateral force restrictions.

Gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall not be used in diaphragm ceilings to resist lateral forces imposed by masonry or concrete construction.

SECTION 2509
SHOWERS AND WATER CLOSETS
2509.1 Wet areas.

Showers and public toilet walls shall conform to Section 1210.2.

2509.2 Base for tile.

Materials used as a base for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall and ceiling panels in shower areas shall be of materials listed in Table 2509.2 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Water-resistant gypsum backing board shall be used as a base for tile in water closet compartment walls when installed in accordance with GA-216 or ASTM C840 and the manufacturer’s recommendations. Regular gypsum wallboard is permitted under tile or wall panels in other wall and ceiling areas when installed in accordance with GA-216 or ASTM C840.

TABLE 2509.2

BACKERBOARD MATERIALS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Glass mat gypsum backing panel	ASTM C1178
Fiber-reinforced gypsum panels	ASTM C1278
Nonasbestos fiber-cement backer
board
	ASTM C1288 or ISO 8336,
Category C

Nonasbestos fiber-mat reinforced
cementitious backer unit
	ASTM C1325
2509.3 Limitations.

Water-resistant gypsum backing board shall not be used in the following locations:

1.	Over a vapor retarder in shower or bathtub compartments.

2.	Where there will be direct exposure to water or in areas subject to continuous high humidity.

SECTION 2510
LATHING AND FURRING FOR CEMENT PLASTER
(STUCCO)
2510.1 General.

Exterior and interior cement plaster and lathing shall be done with the appropriate materials listed in Table 2507.2 and Chapter 35.

2510.2 Weather protection.

Materials shall be stored in such a manner as to protect them from the weather.

2510.3 Installation.

Installation of these materials shall be in compliance with ASTM C926 and ASTM C1063.

2510.4 Corrosion resistance.

Metal lath and lath attachments shall be of corrosion-resistant material.

2510.5 Backing.

Backing or a lath shall provide sufficient rigidity to permit plaster applications.

2510.5.1 Support of lath.

Where lath on vertical surfaces extends between rafters or other similar projecting members, solid backing shall be installed to provide support for lath and attachments.

2510.5.2 Use of gypsum backing board.

Gypsum backing for cement plaster shall be in accordance with Section 2510.5.2.1 or 2510.5.2.2.

2510.5.2.1 Gypsum board as a backing board.

Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard shall not be used as a backing for cement plaster.

Exception: Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard is permitted, with a water-resistive barrier, as a backing for self-furred metal lath or self-furred wire fabric lath and cement plaster where either of the following conditions occur:

1.	On horizontal supports of ceilings or roof soffits.

2.	On interior walls.

2510.5.2.2 Gypsum sheathing backing.

Gypsum sheathing is permitted as a backing for metal or wire fabric lath and cement plaster on walls. A water-resistive barrier shall be provided in accordance with Section 2510.6.

2510.5.3 Backing not required.

Wire backing is not required under expanded metal lath or paperbacked wire fabric lath.

2510.6 Water-resistive barriers.

Water-resistive barriers shall be installed as required in Section 1404.2 and, where applied over wood-based sheathing, shall comply with Section 2510.6.1 or Section 2510.6.2.

2510.6.1 Dry climates.

One of the following shall apply for dry (B) climate zones:

1.	The water-resistive barrier shall be two layers of 10-minute Grade D paper or have a water resistance equal to or greater than two layers of water-resistive barrier complying with ASTM E2556, Type I. The individual layers shall be installed independently such that each layer provides a separate continuous plane and any flashing, installed in accordance with Section 1405.4 and intended to drain to the water-resistive barrier, is directed between the layers.

2.	The water-resistive barrier shall be 60-minute Grade D paper or have a water resistance equal to or greater than one layer of water-resistive barrier complying with ASTM E2556, Type II. The water-resistive barrier shall be separated from the stucco by a layer of foam plastic insulating sheathing or other nonwater absorbing layer, or a drainage space.

2510.6.2 Moist or marine climates.

In moist (A) or marine (C) climate zones, water-resistive barrier shall comply with one of the following:

1.	In addition to complying with Item 1 or 2 of Section 2510.6.1, a space or drainage material not less than 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) in depth shall be applied to the exterior side of the water-resistive barrier.

2.	In addition to complying with Item 2 of Section2510.6.1, drainage on the exterior side of thewater-resistive barrier shall have a minimumdrainage efficiency of 90% as measured in accordance with ASTM E2273 or Annex A2 of ASTME2925.

2510.7 Preparation of masonry and concrete.

Surfaces shall be clean, free from efflorescence, sufficiently damp and rough for proper bond. If the surface is insufficiently rough, approved bonding agents or a Portland cement dash bond coat mixed in proportions of not more than two parts volume of sand to one part volume of Portland cement or plastic cement shall be applied. The dash bond coat shall be left undisturbed and shall be moist cured not less than 24 hours.

SECTION 2511
INTERIOR PLASTER
2511.1 General.

Plastering gypsum plaster or cement plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over metal lath or wire fabric lath and not less than two coats where applied over other bases permitted by this chapter.

Exception: Gypsum veneer plaster and cement plaster specifically designed and approved for one-coat applications.

2511.1.1 Installation.

Installation of lathing and plaster materials shall conform to Table 2511.1.1 and Section 2507.

TABLE 2511.1.1

INSTALLATION OF PLASTER CONSTRUCTION

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Cement plaster	ASTM C926
Gypsum plaster	ASTM C842
Gypsum veneer plaster	ASTM C843
Interior lathing and furring
(gypsum plaster)
	ASTM C841
Lathing and furring (cement plaster)	ASTM C1063
Steel framing	ASTM C754; C1007
2511.2 Limitations.

Plaster shall not be applied directly to fiber insulation board. Cement plaster shall not be applied directly to gypsum lath or gypsum plaster except as specified in Sections 2510.5.1 and 2510.5.2.

2511.3 Grounds.

Where installed, grounds shall ensure the minimum thickness of plaster as set forth in ASTM C842 and ASTM C926. Plaster thickness shall be measured from the face of lath and other bases.

2511.4 Interior masonry or concrete.

Condition of surfaces shall be as specified in Section 2510.7. Approved specially prepared gypsum plaster designed for application to concrete surfaces or approved acoustical plaster is permitted. The total thickness of base coat plaster applied to concrete ceilings shall be as set forth in ASTM C842 or ASTM C926. Should ceiling surfaces require more than the maximum thickness permitted in ASTM C842 or ASTM C926, metal lath or wire fabric lath shall be installed on such surfaces before plastering.

2511.5 Wet areas.

Showers and public toilet walls shall conform to Sections 1210.2 and 1210.3. When wood frame walls and partitions are covered on the interior with cement plaster or tile of similar material and are subject to water splash, the framing shall be protected with an approved moisture barrier.

SECTION 2512
EXTERIOR PLASTER
2512.1 General.

Plastering with cement plaster shall be not less than three coats when applied over metal lath or wire fabric lath or gypsum board backing as specified in Section 2510.5 and shall be not less than two coats when applied over masonry or concrete. If the plaster surface is to be completely covered by veneer or other facing material, or is completely concealed by another wall, plaster application need only be two coats, provided the total thickness is as set forth in ASTM C926.

2512.1.1 On-grade floor slab.

On wood frame or steel stud construction with an on-grade concrete floor slab system, exterior plaster shall be applied in such a manner as to cover, but not to extend below, the lath and paper. The application of lath, paper and flashing or drip screeds shall comply with ASTM C1063.

2512.1.2 Weep screeds.

A minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage), corrosion-resistant weep screed with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2 inches (89 mm) shall be provided at or below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with ASTM C926. The weep screed shall be placed a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth or 2 inches (51 mm) above paved areas and be of a type that will allow trapped water to drain to the exterior of the building. The water-resistive barrier shall lap the attachment flange. The exterior lath shall cover and terminate on the attachment flange of the weep screed.

2512.2 Plasticity agents.

Only approved plasticity agents and approved amounts thereof shall be added to Portland cement or blended cements. When plastic cement or masonry cement is used, no additional lime or plasticizers shall be added. Hydrated lime or the equivalent amount of lime putty used as a plasticizer is permitted to be added to cement plaster or cement and lime plaster in an amount not to exceed that set forth in ASTM C926.

2512.3 Limitations.

Gypsum plaster shall not be used on exterior surfaces.

2512.4 Cement plaster.

Plaster coats shall be protected from freezing for a period of not less than 24 hours after set has occurred. Plaster shall be applied when the ambient temperature is higher than 40°F (4°C), unless provisions are made to keep cement plaster work above 40°F (4°C) during application and 48 hours thereafter.

2512.5 Second-coat application.

The second coat shall be brought out to proper thickness, rodded and floated sufficiently rough to provide adequate bond for the finish coat. The second coat shall have no variation greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in any direction under a 5-foot (1524 mm) straight edge.

2512.6 Curing and interval.

First and second coats of cement plaster shall be applied and moist cured as set forth in ASTM C926 and Table 2512.6.

TABLE 2512.6

CEMENT PLASTERS

COAT	MINIMUM PERIOD
MOIST CURING
	MINIMUM INTERVAL
BETWEEN COATS

First	48 hoursa	48 hoursb
Second	48 hours	7 daysc
Finish	—	Note c

a.	The first two coats shall be as required for the first coats of exterior plaster, except that the moist-curing time period between the first and second coats shall be not less than 24 hours. Moist curing shall not be required where job and weather conditions are favorable to the retention of moisture in the cement plaster for the required time period.

b.	Twenty-four-hour minimum interval between coats of interior cement plaster. For alternative method of application, see Section 2512.8.

c.	Finish coat plaster is permitted to be applied to interior cement plaster base coats after a 48-hour period.

2512.7 Application to solid backings.

Where applied over gypsum backing as specified in Section 2510.5 or directly to unit masonry surfaces, the second coat is permitted to be applied as soon as the first coat has attained sufficient hardness.

2512.8 Alternate method of application.

The second coat is permitted to be applied as soon as the first coat has attained sufficient rigidity to receive the second coat.

2512.8.1 Admixtures.

When using this method of application, calcium aluminate cement up to 15 percent of the weight of the Portland cement is permitted to be added to the mix.

2512.8.2 Curing.

Curing of the first coat is permitted to be omitted and the second coat shall be cured as set forth in ASTM C926 and Table 2512.6.

2512.9 Finish coats.

Cement plaster finish coats shall be applied over base coats that have been in place for the time periods set forth in ASTM C926. The third or finish coat shall be applied with sufficient material and pressure to bond and to cover the brown coat and shall be of sufficient thickness to conceal the brown coat.

SECTION 2513
EXPOSED AGGREGATE PLASTER
2513.1 General.

Exposed natural or integrally colored aggregate is permitted to be partially embedded in a natural or colored bedding coat of cement plaster or gypsum plaster, subject to the provisions of this section.

2513.2 Aggregate.

The aggregate shall be applied manually or mechanically and shall consist of marble chips, pebbles or similar durable, moderately hard (three or more on the Mohs hardness scale), nonreactive materials.

2513.3 Bedding coat proportions.

The bedding coat for interior or exterior surfaces shall be composed of one part Portland cement and one part Type S lime; or one part blended cement and one part Type S lime; or masonry cement; or plastic cement and a maximum of three parts of graded white or natural sand by volume. The bedding coat for interior surfaces shall be composed of 100 pounds (45.4 kg) of neat gypsum plaster and a maximum of 200 pounds (90.8 kg) of graded white sand. A factory-prepared bedding coat for interior or exterior use is permitted. The bedding coat for exterior surfaces shall have a minimum compressive strength of 1,000 pounds per square inch (psi) (6895 kPa).

2513.4 Application.

The bedding coat is permitted to be applied directly over the first (scratch) coat of plaster, provided the ultimate overall thickness is a minimum of 7/8 inch (22 mm), including lath. Over concrete or masonry surfaces, the overall thickness shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).

2513.5 Bases.

Exposed aggregate plaster is permitted to be applied over concrete, masonry, cement plaster base coats or gypsum plaster base coats installed in accordance with Section 2511 or 2512.

2513.6 Preparation of masonry and concrete.

Masonry and concrete surfaces shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 2510.7.

2513.7 Curing of base coats.

Cement plaster base coats shall be cured in accordance with ASTM C926. Cement plaster bedding coats shall retain sufficient moisture for hydration (hardening) for 24 hours minimum or, where necessary, shall be kept damp for 24 hours by light water spraying.

SECTION 2514
REINFORCED GYPSUM CONCRETE
2514.1 General.

Reinforced gypsum concrete shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C317 and ASTM C956.

2514.2 Minimum thickness.

The minimum thickness of reinforced gypsum concrete shall be 2 inches (51 mm) except the minimum required thickness shall be reduced to 11/2 inches (38 mm), provided the following conditions are satisfied:

1.	The overall thickness, including the formboard, is not less than 2 inches (51 mm).

2.	The clear span of the gypsum concrete between supports does not exceed 33 inches (838 mm).

3.	Diaphragm action is not required.

4.	The design live load does not exceed 40 pounds per square foot (psf) (1915 Pa).

SECTION 2515
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
LATHING

RESERVED

SECTION 2516
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PLASTER

RESERVED

SECTION 2517
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
STUCCO

RESERVED

SECTION 2518
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
GYPSUM BOARD PRODUCTS AND
ACCESSORY ITEMS

RESERVED

SECTION 2519
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
SUSPENDED AND FURRED CEILINGS

RESERVED

SECTION 2520
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
ASBESTOS

RESERVED

SECTION 2521
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
TILE

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-26]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 26
PLASTIC
SECTION 2601
GENERAL
2601.1 Scope.

These provisions shall govern the materials, design, application, construction and installation of foam plastic, foam plastic insulation, plastic veneer, interior plastic finish and trim, light-transmitting plastics and plastic composites, including plastic lumber. See Chapter 14 for requirements for exterior wall finish and trim.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone shall also comply with the provisions of Section 2615.

SECTION 2602
DEFINITIONS
2602.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMER.

FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION.

LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS.

PLASTIC, APPROVED.

PLASTIC COMPOSITE.

PLASTIC GLAZING.

PLASTIC LUMBER.

THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL.

THERMOSETTING MATERIAL.

WOOD/PLASTIC COMPOSITE.

SECTION 2603
FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION
2603.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of foam plastic insulation in buildings and structures.

2603.1.1 Spray-applied foam plastic.

Single- and multiple-component spray-applied foam plastic insulation shall comply with the provisions of Section 2603 and ICC 1100-2018.

2603.2 Labeling and identification.

Packages and containers of foam plastic insulation and foam plastic insulation components delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer’s name, product listing, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

2603.3 Surface-burning characteristics.

Unless otherwise indicated in this section, foam plastic insulation and foam plastic cores of manufactured assemblies shall have a flame spread index of not more than 75 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested in the maximum thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Loose fill-type foam plastic insulation shall be tested as board stock for the flame spread and smoke-developed indexes.

Exceptions:

1.	Smoke-developed index for interior trim as provided for in Section 2604.2.

2.	In cold storage buildings, ice plants, food plants, food processing rooms and similar areas, foam plastic insulation where tested in a thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) shall be permitted in a thickness up to 10 inches (254 mm) where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in both the room and that part of the building in which the room is located.

3.	Foam plastic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or C roof-covering assembly provided the assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or UL 1256. The smoke-developed index shall not be limited for roof applications.

4.	Foam plastic insulation greater than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness shall have a maximum flame spread index of 75 and a smoke-developed index of 450 where tested at a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm), provided the end use is approved in accordance with Section 2603.9 using the thickness and density intended for use.

5.	Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes for foam plastic interior signs in covered and open mall buildings provided the signs comply with Section 402.6.4.

2603.4 Thermal barrier.

Except as provided for in Sections 2603.4.1 and 2603.9, foam plastic shall be separated from the interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier of 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard, heavy timber in accordance with Section 602.4 or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275. Combustible concealed spaces shall comply with Section 718.

2603.4.1 Thermal barrier not required.

The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is not required under the conditions set forth in Sections 2603.4.1.1 through 2603.4.1.14.

2603.4.1.1 Masonry or concrete construction.

A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastic installed in a masonry or concrete wall, floor or roof system where the foam plastic insulation is covered on each face by not less than 1-inch (25 mm) thickness of masonry or concrete.

2603.4.1.2 Cooler and freezer walls.

Foam plastic installed in a maximum thickness of 10 inches (254 mm) in cooler and freezer walls shall:

1.	Have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450, where tested in a minimum 4-inch (102 mm) thickness.

2.	Have flash ignition and self-ignition temperatures of not less than 600°F and 800°F (316°C and 427°C), respectively.

3.	Have a covering of not less than 0.032-inch (0.8 mm) aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness not less than 0.0160 inch (0.4 mm) at any point.

4.	Be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where the cooler or freezer is within a building, both the cooler or freezer and that part of the building in which it is located shall be sprinklered.

2603.4.1.3 Walk-in coolers.

In nonsprinklered buildings, foam plastic having a thickness that does not exceed 4 inches (102 mm) and a maximum flame spread index of 75 is permitted in walk-in coolers or freezer units where the aggregate floor area does not exceed 400 square feet (37 m2) and the foam plastic is covered by a metal facing not less than 0.032-inch-thick (0.81 mm) aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a minimum base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.41 mm). A thickness of up to 10 inches (254 mm) is permitted where protected by a thermal barrier.

2603.4.1.4 Exterior walls-one-story buildings.

For one-story buildings, foam plastic having a flame spread index of 25 or less, and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450, shall be permitted without thermal barriers in or on exterior walls in a thickness not more than 4 inches (102 mm) where the foam plastic is covered by a thickness of not less than 0.032-inch-thick (0.81 mm) aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.0160 inch (0.41 mm) and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2603.4.1.5 Roofing.

A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or C roof-covering assembly that is installed in accordance with the code and the manufacturer’s instructions and is either constructed as described in Item 1 or tested as described in Item 2.

1.	The roof assembly is separated from the interior of the building by wood structural panel sheathing not less than 0.47 inch (11.9 mm) in thickness bonded with exterior glue, with edges supported by blocking, tongue-and-groove joints, other approved type of edge support or an equivalent material.

2.	The assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or UL 1256.

2603.4.1.6 Attics and crawl spaces.

Within an attic or crawl space where entry is made only for service of utilities, foam plastic insulation shall be protected against ignition by 11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) mineral fiber insulation; 1/4-inch-thick (6.4 mm) wood structural panel, particleboard or hardboard; 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) gypsum wallboard, corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.4 mm); 11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) self-supported spray-applied cellulose insulation in attic spaces only or other approved material installed in such a manner that the foam plastic insulation is not exposed. The protective covering shall be consistent with the requirements for the type of construction.

2603.4.1.7 Doors not required to have a fire protection rating.

Where pivoted or side-hinged doors are permitted without a fire protection rating, foam plastic insulation, having a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450, shall be permitted as a core material where the door facing is of metal having a minimum thickness of 0.032-inch (0.8 mm) aluminum or steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.016 inch (0.4 mm) at any point.

2603.4.1.8 Exterior doors in buildings of Group R-2 or R-3.

In occupancies classified as Group R-2 or R-3, foam-filled exterior entrance doors to individual dwelling units that do not require a fire-resistance rating shall be faced with aluminum, steel, fiberglass, wood or other approved materials.

2603.4.1.9 Garage doors.

Where garage doors are permitted without a fire-resistance rating and foam plastic is used as a core material, the door facing shall be metal having a minimum thickness of 0.032-inch (0.8 mm) aluminum or 0.010-inch (0.25 mm) steel or the facing shall be minimum 0.125-inch-thick (3.2 mm) wood. Garage doors having facings other than those described above shall be tested in accordance with, and meet the acceptance criteria of, DASMA 107.

Exception: Garage doors using foam plastic insulation complying with Section 2603.3 in detached and attached garages associated with one- and two-family dwellings need not be provided with a thermal barrier.

2603.4.1.10 Siding backer board.

Foam plastic insulation of not more than 2,000 British thermal units per square feet (Btu/sq. ft.) (22.7 mJ/m2) as determined by NFPA 259 shall be permitted as a siding backer board with a maximum thickness of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm), provided it is separated from the interior of the building by not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of mineral fiber insulation or equivalent or where applied as insulation with re-siding over existing wall construction.

2603.4.1.11 Interior trim.

Foam plastic used as interior trim in accordance with Section 2604 shall be permitted without a thermal barrier.

2603.4.1.12 Interior signs.

Foam plastic used for interior signs in covered mall buildings in accordance with Section 402.6.4 shall be permitted without a thermal barrier. Foam plastic signs that are not affixed to interior building surfaces shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

2603.4.1.13 Type V construction.

Foam plastic spray applied to a sill plate, joist header and rim joist in Type V construction is subject to all of the following:

1.	The maximum thickness of the foam plastic shall be 31/4 inches (82.6 mm).

2.	The density of the foam plastic shall be in the range of 1.5 to 2.0 pcf (24 to 32 kg/m3).

3.	The foam plastic shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less and an accompanying smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

2603.4.1.14 Floors.

The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is not required to be installed on the walking surface of a structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation when the foam plastic is covered by a minimum nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) wood structural panel or approved equivalent. The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is required on the underside of the structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation when the underside of the structural floor system is exposed to the interior of the building.

Exception: Foam plastic used as part of an interior floor finish.

2603.5 Exterior walls of buildings of any height.

Exterior walls of buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction of any height shall comply with Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Exterior walls of cold storage buildings required to be constructed of noncombustible materials, where the building is more than one story in height, shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Exterior walls of buildings of Type V construction shall comply with Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4.

2603.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated walls.

Where the wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating, data based on tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall be provided to substantiate that the fire-resistance rating is maintained.

2603.5.2 Thermal barrier.

Any foam plastic insulation shall be separated from the building interior by a thermal barrier meeting the provisions of Section 2603.4, unless special approval is obtained on the basis of Section 2603.9.

Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

2603.5.3 Potential heat.

The potential heat of foam plastic insulation in any portion of the wall or panel shall not exceed the potential heat expressed in Btu per square feet (mJ/m2) of the foam plastic insulation contained in the wall assembly tested in accordance with Section 2603.5.5. The potential heat of the foam plastic insulation shall be determined by tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 259 and the results shall be expressed in Btu per square feet (mJ/m2).

Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

2603.5.4 Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes.

Foam plastic insulation, exterior coatings and facings shall be tested separately in the thickness intended for use, but not to exceed 4 inches (102 mm), and shall each have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

Exception: Prefabricated or factory-manufactured panels having minimum 0.020-inch (0.51 mm) aluminum facings and a total thickness of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) or less are permitted to be tested as an assembly where the foam plastic core is not exposed in the course of construction.

2603.5.5 Vertical and lateral fire propagation.

The exterior wall assembly shall be tested in accordance with and comply with the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285.

Exceptions:

1.	One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

2.	Wall assemblies where the foam plastic insulation is covered on each face by not less than 1-inch (25 mm) thickness of masonry or concrete and meeting one of the following:

2.1.	There is no airspace between the insulation and the concrete or masonry.

2.2.	The insulation has a flame spread index of not more than 25 as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and the maximum airspace between the insulation and the concrete or masonry is not more than 1 inch (25 mm).

2603.5.6 Label required.

The edge or face of each piece, package or container of foam plastic insulation shall bear the label of an approved agency. The label shall contain the manufacturer’s or distributor’s identification, model number, serial number or definitive information describing the product or materials’ performance characteristics and approved agency’s identification.

2603.5.7 Ignition.

Exterior walls shall not exhibit sustained flaming where tested in accordance with NFPA 268. Where a material is intended to be installed in more than one thickness, tests of the minimum and maximum thickness intended for use shall be performed.

Exception: Assemblies protected on the outside with one of the following:

1.	A thermal barrier complying with Section 2603.4.

2.	A minimum 1-inch (25 mm) thickness of concrete or masonry.

3.	Glass-fiber-reinforced concrete panels of a minimum thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

4.	Metal-faced panels having minimum 0.019-inch-thick (0.48 mm) aluminum or 0.016-inch-thick (0.41 mm) corrosion-resistant steel outer facings.

5.	A minimum 7/8-inch (22.2 mm) thickness of stucco complying with Section 2510.

6.	A minimum 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) thickness of fiber-cement lap, panel or shingle siding complying with Sections 1405.16 and 1405.16.1 or 1405.16.2.

2603.6 Roofing.

Foam plastic insulation meeting the requirements of Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4 shall be permitted as part of a roof-covering assembly, provided the assembly with the foam plastic insulation is a Class A, B or C roofing assembly where tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790.

2603.7 Foam plastic insulation in plenums as interior finish or interior trim.

Foam plastic insulation in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 50 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, and shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meet the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by a thermal barrier complying with Section 2603.4.

2.	Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by corrosion resistant steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.0160 inch (0.4 mm).

3.	Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by not less than a 1 inch (25 mm) thickness of masonry or concrete.

2603.8 Protection against termites.

Extruded and expanded polystyrene, polyisocyanurate and other foam plastics shall not be installed on the exterior face or under interior or exterior foundation walls or slab foundations located below grade. The clearance between foam plastics installed above grade and exposed earth shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings where the structural members of walls, floors, ceilings and roofs are entirely of noncombustible materials or preservative-treated wood.

2.	An approved method of protecting the foam plastic and structure from subterranean termite damage is provided.

3.	On the interior side of basement walls.

Figure 2603.8 Termite Infestation Probability Map. Reserved.

2603.9 Special approval.

Foam plastic shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 2603.4 or those of Section 2603.6 where specifically approved based on large-scale tests such as, but not limited to, NFPA 286 (with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1), FM 4880, UL 1040 or UL 1715. Such testing shall be related to the actual end-use configuration and be performed on the finished manufactured foam plastic assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use. Foam plastics that are used as interior finish on the basis of special tests shall also conform to the flame spread and smoke-developed requirements of Chapter 8. Assemblies tested shall include seams, joints and other typical details used in the installation of the assembly and shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

2603.10 Wind resistance.

Foam plastic insulation complying with ASTM C578 and ASTM C1289 and used as exterior wall sheathing on framed wall assemblies shall comply with ANSI/FS 100 for wind pressure resistance.

2603.11 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to masonry or concrete wall construction.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer’s installation instructions or an approved design. Foam sheathing shall be attached to masonry or concrete construction in accordance with the insulation manufacturer’s installation instructions or an approved design. Furring and furring attachments through foam sheathing shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16, including support of cladding weight as applicable. Fasteners used to attach cladding or furring through foam sheathing to masonry or concrete substrates shall be approved for application into masonry or concrete material and shall be installed in accordance with the fastener manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing and connection to a masonry or concrete substrate, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1408.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1405.

2603.12 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to cold-formed steel framing.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer’s approved installation instructions, including any limitations for use over foam plastic sheathing, or an approved design. Where used, furring and furring attachments shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to cold-formed steel framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Sections 2603.12.1 and 2603.12.2, or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1408.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1405.

2603.12.1 Direct attachment.

Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, cladding minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.12.1.

TABLE 2603.12.1

CLADDING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT ATTACHMENT OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa

CLADDING FASTENER
THROUGH FOAM
SHEATHING INTO:	CLADDING FASTENER
TYPE AND MINIMUM SIZEb
	CLADDING
FASTENER
VERTICAL SPACING
(inches)	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGc
(inches)

16″ o.c. fastener horizontal spacing	24″ o.c. fastener horizontal spacing
Cladding weight	Cladding weight
3 psf	11 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	25 psf
Cold-formed steel framing
(minimum penetration of
steel thickness plus
3 threads)	#8 screw into 33 mil
steel or thicker
	6	3	3	1.5	3	2	DR
8	3	2	0.5	3	1.5	DR
12	3	1.5	DR	3	0.75	DR
#10 screw into 33 mil
steel
	6	4	3	2	4	3	0.5
8	4	3	1	4	2	DR
12	4	2	DR	3	1	DR
#10 screw into 43 mil
steel or thicker
	6	4	4	3	4	4	2
8	4	4	2	4	3	1.5
12	4	3	1.5	4	3	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.

DR = design required; o.c. = on center.

a.	Cold-formed steel framing shall be minimum 33 ksi steel for 33 mil and 43 mil steel and 50 ksi steel for 54 mil steel or thicker.

b.	Screws shall comply with the requirements of AISI S240.

c.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 pounds per square inch in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

2603.12.2 Furred cladding attachment.

Where steel or wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.12.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative-treated wood in accordance with Section 2303.1.9 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance Section 2304.10.5. Steel furring shall have a minimum G60 galvanized coating.

TABLE 2603.12.2

FURRING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa

FURRING MATERIAL	FRAMING
MEMBER
	FASTENER TYPE
AND MINIMUM
SIZEb	MINIMUM
PENETRATION INTO
WALL FRAMING
(inches)	FASTENER
SPACING IN
FURRING
(inches)	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGd
(inches)

16″ o.c. furringe	24″ o.c. furringe
Cladding weight	Cladding weight
3 psf	11 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	25 psf
Minimum 33 mil
steel furring or minimum
1x wood furringc	33 mil cold-formed steel
stud
	#8 screw	Steel thickness plus
3 threads
	12	3	1.5	DR	3	0.5	DR
16	3	1	DR	2	DR	DR
24	2	DR	DR	2	DR	DR
#10 screw	Steel thickness plus
3 threads
	12	4	2	DR	4	1	DR
16	4	1.5	DR	3	DR	DR
24	3	DR	DR	2	DR	DR
43 mil or
thicker cold-formed steel
stud	#8 Screw	Steel thickness plus
3 threads
	12	3	1.5	DR	3	0.5	DR
16	3	1	DR	2	DR	DR
24	2	DR	DR	2	DR	DR
#10 screw	Steel thickness plus
3 threads
	12	4	3	1.5	4	3	DR
16	4	3	0.5	4	2	DR
24	4	2	DR	4	0.5	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 0.00689 MPa.

DR = design required: o.c. = on center.

a.	Wood furring shall be Spruce-Pine fir or any softwood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater. Cold-formed steel furring shall be minimum 33 ksi steel. Steel studs shall be minimum 33 ksi steel for 33 mil and 43 mil thickness and 50 ksi steel for 54 mil steel or thicker.

b.	Screws shall comply with the requirements of AISI S240.

c.	Where the required cladding fastener penetration into wood material exceeds 3/4 inch and is not more than 11/2 inches, a minimum 2-inch nominal wood furring shall be used or an approved design.

d.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 pounds per square inch in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

e.	Furring shall be spaced not more than 24 inches on center, in a vertical or horizontal orientation. In a vertical orientation, furring shall be located over wall studs and attached with the required fastener spacing. In a horizontal orientation, the indicated 8-inch and 12-inch fastener spacing in furring shall be achieved by use of two fasteners into studs at 16 inches and 24 inches on center, respectively.

2603.13 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to wood framing.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where used, furring and furring attachments shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Section 2603.13.1, Section 2603.13.2 or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1408.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1405.

2603.13.1 Direct attachment.

Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, cladding minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.13.1.

TABLE 2603.13.1

CLADDING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT ATTACHMENT OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa

Cladding
Fastener through
Foam Sheathing
into:
	
Cladding Fastener
Type and Minimum
Sizeb
	Cladding Fastener
Vertical Spacing
(inches)	Maximum Thickness of Foam Sheathingc
(inches)

16″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing	24″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing
Cladding Weight:	Cladding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Wood Framing
(minimum
11/4 inch penetration)
	0.113″
diameter nail
	6	2.00	1.45	0.75	DR	2.00	0.85	DR	DR
8	2.00	1.00	DR	DR	2.00	0.55	DR	DR
12	2.00	0.55	DR	DR	1.85	DR	DR	DR
0.120″
diameter nail
	6	3.00	1.70	0.90	0.55	3.00	1.05	0.50	DR
8	3.00	1.20	0.60	DR	3.00	0.70	DR	DR
12	3.00	0.70	DR	DR	2.15	DR	DR	DR
0.131″
diameter nail
	6	4.00	2.15	1.20	0.75	4.00	1.35	0.70	DR
8	4.00	1.55	0.80	DR	4.00	0.90	DR	DR
12	4.00	0.90	DR	DR	2.70	0.50	DR	DR
0.162″
diameter nail
	6	4.00	3.55	2.05	1.40	4.00	2.25	1.25	0.80
8	4.00	2.55	1.45	0.95	4.00	1.60	0.85	0.50
12	4.00	1.60	0.85	0.50	4.00	0.95	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kPa.

DR = design required; o.c. = on center.

a.	Wood framing shall be Spruce-Pine-Fir or any wood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater in accordance with AFPA/NDS.

b.	Nail fasteners shall comply with ASTM F1667, except nail length shall be permitted to exceed ASTM F1667 standard lengths.

c.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

2603.13.2 Furred cladding attachment.

Where wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.13.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative-treated wood in accordance with Section 2303.1.9 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance with Section 2304.10.5.

TABLE 2603.13.2

FURRING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHT a, b

Furring
Material
	Framing
Member
	Fastener Type
and Minimum
Size	Minimum Penetration
into Wall Framing
(inches)	
Fastener
Spacing in
Furring
(inches)	Maximum Thickness of Foam Sheathingd (inches)
16” o.c. Furringe	24” oc Furringe
Siding Weight:	Siding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Minimum 1x
Wood Furring
c	Minimum
2x Wood
Stud	0.131″ diameter nail	11/4	8	4.00	2.45	1.45	0.95	4.00	1.60	0.85	DR
12	4.00	1.60	0.85	DR	4.00	0.95	DR	DR
16	4.00	1.10	DR	DR	3.05	0.60	DR	DR
0.162″ diameter nail	11/4	8	4.00	4.00	2.45	1.60	4.00	2.75	1.45	0.85
12	4.00	2.75	1.45	0.85	4.00	1.65	0.75	DR
16	4.00	1.90	0.95	DR	4.00	1.05	DR	DR
No. 10 wood screw	1	12	4.00	2.30	1.20	0.70	4.00	1.40	0.60	DR
16	4.00	1.65	0.75	DR	4.00	0.90	DR	DR
24	4.00	0.90	DR	DR	2.85	DR	DR	DR
1/4″ lag screw	11/2	12	4.00	2.65	1.50	0.90	4.00	1.65	0.80	DR
16	4.00	1.95	0.95	0.50	4.00	1.10	DR	DR
24	4.00	1.10	DR	DR	3.25	0.50	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kPa.

DR = design required; o.c. = on center.

a.	Wood framing and furring shall be Spruce-Pine-Fir or any wood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater in accordance with AFPA/NDS.

b.	Nail fasteners shall comply with ASTM F1667, except nail length shall be permitted to exceed ASTM F1667 standard lengths.

c.	Where the required cladding fastener penetration into wood material exceeds 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) and is not more than 11/2 inches (38.1 mm), a minimum 2x wood furring shall be used or an approved design.

d.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

e.	Furring shall be spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center, in a vertical or horizontal orientation. In a vertical orientation, furring shall be located over wall studs and attached with the required fastener spacing. In a horizontal orientation, the indicated 8 inch (203.2 mm) and 12 inch (304.8 mm) fastener spacing in furring shall be achieved by use of two fasteners into studs at 16 inches (406.4 mm) and 24 inches (610 mm) on center, respectively.

SECTION 2604
INTERIOR FINISH AND TRIM
2604.1 General.

Plastic materials installed as interior finish or trim shall comply with Chapter 8. Foam plastics shall only be installed as interior finish where approved in accordance with the special provisions of Section 2603.9. Foam plastics that are used as interior finish shall also meet the flame spread and smoke-developed index requirements for interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8. Foam plastics installed as interior trim shall comply with Section 2604.2.

2604.1.1 Plenums.

Foam plastics installed in plenums as interior wall or ceiling finish shall comply with Section 2603.7. Foam plastics installed in plenums as interior trim shall comply with Sections 2604.2 and 2603.7.

[F] 2604.2 Interior trim.

Foam plastic used as interior trim shall comply with Sections 2604.2.1 through 2604.2.4.

[F] 2604.2.1 Density.

The minimum density of the interior trim shall be 20 pcf (320 kg/m3).

[F] 2604.2.2 Thickness.

The maximum thickness of the interior trim shall be 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) and the maximum width shall be 8 inches (204 mm).

[F] 2604.2.3 Area limitation.

The interior trim shall not constitute more than 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling areas to which it is attached.

[F] 2604.2.4 Flame spread.

The flame spread index shall not exceed 75 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The smoke-developed index shall not be limited.

Exception: When the interior trim material has been tested as an interior finish in accordance with NFPA 286 and complies with the acceptance criteria in Section 803.1.2.1, it shall not be required to be tested for flame spread index in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

SECTION 2605
PLASTIC VENEER
2605.1 Interior use.

Where used within a building, plastic veneer shall comply with the interior finish requirements of Chapter 8.

2605.2 Exterior use.

Exterior plastic veneer, other than plastic siding, shall be permitted to be installed on the exterior walls of buildings of any type of construction in accordance with all of the following requirements:

1.	Plastic veneer shall comply with Section 2606.4.

2.	Plastic veneer shall not be attached to any exterior wall to a height greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) above grade.

3.	Sections of plastic veneer shall not exceed 300 square feet (27.9 m2) in area and shall be separated by not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) vertically.

Exception: The area and separation requirements and the smoke-density limitation are not applicable to plastic veneer applied to buildings constructed of Type VB construction, provided the walls are not required to have a fire-resistance rating.

2605.3 Plastic siding.

Plastic siding shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1404 and 1405.

SECTION 2606
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTICS
2606.1 General.

The provisions of this section and Sections 2607 through 2611 shall govern the quality and methods of application of light-transmitting plastics for use as light-transmitting materials in buildings and structures. Foam plastics shall comply with Section 2603. Light-transmitting plastic materials that meet the other code requirements for walls and roofs shall be permitted to be used in accordance with the other applicable chapters of the code.

2606.2 Approval for use.

Sufficient technical data shall be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any light-transmitting material, as approved by the building official and subject to the requirements of this section.

2606.3 Identification.

Each unit or package of light-transmitting plastic shall be identified with a mark or decal satisfactory to the building official, which includes identification as to the material classification.

2606.4 Specifications.

Light-transmitting plastics, including thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting plastic material, shall have a self-ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or greater where tested in accordance with ASTM D1929; a smoke-developed index not greater than 450 where tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, or a maximum average smoke density rating not greater than 75 where tested in the thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM D2843 and shall conform to one of the following combustibility classifications:

Class CC1: Plastic materials that have a burning extent of 1 inch (25 mm) or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 0.060 inch (1.5 mm), or in the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D635.

Class CC2: Plastic materials that have a burning rate of 21/2 inches per minute (1.06 mm/s) or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 0.060 inch (1.5 mm), or in the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D635.

2606.5 Structural requirements.

Light-transmitting plastic materials in their assembly shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the loads indicated in Chapter 16. Technical data shall be submitted to establish stresses, maximum unsupported spans and such other information for the various thicknesses and forms used as deemed necessary by the building official.

2606.6 Fastening.

Fastening shall be adequate to withstand the loads in Chapter 16. Proper allowance shall be made for expansion and contraction of light-transmitting plastic materials in accordance with accepted data on the coefficient of expansion of the material and other material in conjunction with which it is employed.

2606.7 Light-diffusing systems.

Unless the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, light-diffusing systems shall not be installed in the following occupancies and locations:

1.	Group A with an occupant load of 1,000 or more.

2.	Theaters with a stage and proscenium opening and an occupant load of 700 or more.

3.	Group I-2.

4.	Group I-3.

5.	Interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways.

2606.7.1 Support.

Light-transmitting plastic diffusers shall be supported directly or indirectly from ceiling or roof construction by use of noncombustible hangers. Hangers shall be not less than No. 12 steel-wire gage (0.106 inch) galvanized wire or equivalent.

2606.7.2 Installation.

Light-transmitting plastic diffusers shall comply with Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting plastic diffusers will fall from the mountings before igniting, at an ambient temperature of not less than 200°F (111°C) below the ignition temperature of the panels. The panels shall remain in place at an ambient room temperature of 175°F (79°C) for a period of not less than 15 minutes.

2606.7.3 Size limitations.

Individual panels or units shall not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) in length nor 30 square feet (2.79 m2) in area.

2606.7.4 Fire suppression system.

In buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, plastic light-diffusing systems shall be protected both above and below unless the sprinkler system has been specifically approved for installation only above the light-diffusing system, or the light-diffusing system is listed and labeled in accordance with UL 723S. Areas of light-diffusing systems that are protected in accordance with this section shall not be limited.

2606.7.5 Electrical luminaires.

Light-transmitting plastic panels and light-diffuser panels that are installed in approved electrical luminaires shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting plastic panels conform to the requirements of Section 2606.7.2. The area of approved light-transmitting plastic materials that is used in required exits or corridors shall not exceed 30 percent of the aggregate area of the ceiling in which such panels are installed, unless the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2606.8 Partitions.

Light-transmitting plastics used in or as partitions shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 6 and 8.

2606.9 Bathroom accessories.

Light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted as glazing in shower stalls, shower doors, bathtub enclosures and similar accessory units. Safety glazing shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 24.

2606.10 Awnings, patio covers and similar structures.

Awnings constructed of light-transmitting plastics shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 3105 and Chapter 32 for projections. Patio covers constructed of light-transmitting plastics shall comply with Section 2606. Light-transmitting plastics used in canopies at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall comply with Section 2606, except as modified by Section 406.7.2.

2606.11 Greenhouses.

Light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted in lieu of plain glass in greenhouses.

2606.12 Solar collectors.

Light-transmitting plastic covers on solar collectors having noncombustible sides and bottoms shall be permitted on buildings not over three stories above grade plane or 9,000 square feet (836.1 m2) in total floor area, provided the light-transmitting plastic cover does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area for CC1 materials or 25 percent of the roof area for CC2 materials.

Exception: Light-transmitting plastic covers having a thickness of 0.010 inch (0.3 mm) or less shall be permitted to be of any plastic material provided the area of the solar collectors does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area.

SECTION 2607
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS
2607.1 General.

Light-transmitting plastics shall not be used as wall panels in exterior walls in occupancies in Groups A-l, A-2, H, I-2 and I-3. In other groups, light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted to be used as wall panels in exterior walls, provided that the walls are not required to have a fire-resistance rating and the installation conforms to the requirements of this section. Such panels shall be erected and anchored on a foundation, waterproofed or otherwise protected from moisture absorption and sealed with a coat of mastic or other approved waterproof coating. Light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall comply with Section 2606.

2607.2 Installation.

Exterior wall panels installed as provided for herein shall not alter the type of construction classification of the building.

2607.3 Height limitation.

Light-transmitting plastics shall not be installed more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above grade plane.

2607.4 Area limitation and separation.

The maximum area of a single wall panel and minimum vertical and horizontal separation requirements for exterior light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall be as provided for in Table 2607.4. The maximum percentage of wall area of any story in light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall not exceed that indicated in Table 2607.4 or the percentage of unprotected openings permitted by Section 705.8, whichever is smaller.

Exceptions:

1.	In structures provided with approved flame barriers extending 30 inches (760 mm) beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor, a vertical separation is not required at the floor except that provided by the vertical thickness of the flame barrier projection.

2.	Veneers of approved weather-resistant light-transmitting plastics used as exterior siding in buildings of Type V construction in compliance with Section 1406.

3.	The area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels in exterior walls of greenhouses shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2607.4 but shall be limited as required for unprotected openings in accordance with Section 705.8.

TABLE 2607.4

AREA LIMITATION AND SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELSa

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
(feet)
	CLASS OF
PLASTIC
	MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE
AREA OF EXTERIOR
WALL IN PLASTIC WALL
PANELS	MAXIMUM SINGLE AREA
OF PLASTIC WALL PANELS
(square feet)	MINIMUM SEPARATION OF PLASTIC WALL
PANELS (feet)

Vertical	Horizontal
Less than 6	—	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	—	—
6 or more but less than 11	CC1	10	50	8	4
CC2	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	—	—
11 or more but less than or
equal to 30
	CC1	25	90	6	4
CC2	15	70	8	4
Over 30	CC1	50	Not Limited	3b	0
CC2	50	100	6b	3

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	For combinations of plastic glazing and plastic wall panel areas permitted, see Section 2607.6.

b.	For reductions in vertical separation allowed, see Section 2607.4.

2607.5 Automatic sprinkler system.

Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the maximum percentage area of exterior wall in any story in light-transmitting plastic wall panels and the maximum square footage of a single area given in Table 2607.4 shall be increased 100 percent, but the area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall not exceed 50 percent of the wall area in any story, or the area permitted by Section 705.8 for unprotected openings, whichever is smaller. These installations shall not be installed more than75 feet (22 860 mm) above grade plane.

2607.6 Combinations of glazing and wall panels.

Combinations of light-transmitting plastic glazing and light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall be subject to the area, height and percentage limitations and the separation requirements applicable to the class of light-transmitting plastic as prescribed for light-transmitting plastic wall panel installations.

SECTION 2608
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC GLAZING
2608.1 Buildings of Type VB construction.

Openings in the exterior walls of buildings of Type VB construction, where not required to be protected by Section 705, shall be permitted to be glazed or equipped with light-transmitting plastic. Light-transmitting plastic glazing shall comply with Section 2606.

2608.2 Buildings of other types of construction.

Openings in the exterior walls of buildings of types of construction other than Type VB, where not required to be protected by Section 705, shall be permitted to be glazed or equipped with light-transmitting plastic in accordance with Section 2606 and all of the following:

1.	The aggregate area of light-transmitting plastic glazing shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of any wall face of the story in which it is installed. The area of a single pane of glazing installed above the first story above grade plane shall not exceed 16 square feet (1.5 m2) and the vertical dimension of a single pane shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm).

Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the area of allowable glazing shall be increased to not more than 50 percent of the wall face of the story in which it is installed with no limit on the maximum dimension or area of a single pane of glazing.

2.	Approved flame barriers extending 30 inches (762 mm) beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor, or vertical panels not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in height, shall be installed between glazed units located in adjacent stories.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	Light-transmitting plastics shall not be installed more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above grade level.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

SECTION 2609
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS
2609.1 General.

Light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall comply with this section and Section 2606. Light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall not be installed in Groups H, I-2 and I-3. In all other groups, light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall comply with any one of the following conditions:

1.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	The roof construction is not required to have a fire-resistance rating by Table 601.

3.	The roof panels meet the requirements for roof coverings in accordance with Chapter 15.

2609.2 Separation.

Individual roof panels shall be separated from each other by a distance of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) measured in a horizontal plane.

Exceptions:

1.	The separation between roof panels is not required in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	The separation between roof panels is not required in low-hazard occupancy buildings complying with the conditions of Section 2609.4, Exception 2 or 3.

2609.3 Location.

Where exterior wall openings are required to be protected by Section 705.8, a roof panel shall not be installed within 6 feet (1829 mm) of such exterior wall.

2609.4 Area limitations.

Roof panels shall be limited in area and the aggregate area of panels shall be limited by a percentage of the floor area of the room or space sheltered in accordance with Table 2609.4.

Exceptions:

1.	The area limitations of Table 2609.4 shall be permitted to be increased by 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Low-hazard occupancy buildings, such as swimming pool shelters, shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4, provided that the buildings do not exceed 5,000 square feet (465 m2) in area and have a minimum fire separation distance of 10 feet (3048 mm).

3.	Greenhouses that are occupied for growing plants on a production or research basis, without public access, shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4 provided they have a minimum fire separation distance of 4 feet (1220 mm).

4.	Roof coverings over terraces and patios in occupancies in Group R-3 shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4 and shall be permitted with light-transmitting plastics.

TABLE 2609.4

AREA LIMITATIONS FOR LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS

CLASS OF
PLASTIC
	MAXIMUM AREA OF
INDIVIDUAL ROOF PANELS
(square feet)	MAXIMUM AGGREGATE
AREA OF ROOF PANELS
(percent of floor area)
CC1	300	30
CC2	100	25

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

SECTION 2610
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING
PLASTIC SKYLIGHT GLAZING
2610.1 Light-transmitting plastic glazing of skylight assemblies.

Skylight assemblies glazed with light-transmitting plastic shall conform to the provisions of this section and Section 2606.

Exception: Skylights in which the light-transmitting plastic conforms to the required roof-covering class in accordance with Section 1505.

2610.1.1 Unit skylights.

Unit skylights glazed with lighttransmitting plastic shall comply with Section 2405.5.

2610.2 Mounting.

The light-transmitting plastic shall be mounted above the plane of the roof on a curb constructed in accordance with the requirements for the type of construction classification, but not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the roof. Edges of the light-transmitting plastic skylights or domes shall be protected by metal or other approved noncombustible material, or the light transmitting plastic dome or skylight shall be shown to be able to resist ignition where exposed at the edge to a flame from a Class B brand as described in ASTM E108 or UL 790. The Class B brand test shall be conducted on a skylight that is elevated to a height as specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions, but not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Curbs shall not be required for skylights used on roofs having a minimum slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) in occupancies in Group R-3 and on buildings with a nonclassified roof covering.

2.	The metal or noncombustible edge material is not required where nonclassified roof coverings are permitted.

2610.3 Slope.

Flat or corrugated light-transmitting plastic skylights shall slope not less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12). Dome-shaped skylights shall rise above the mounting flange a minimum distance equal to 10 percent of the maximum width of the dome but not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

Exception: Skylights that pass the Class B Burning Brand Test specified in ASTM E108 or UL 790.

2610.4 Maximum area of skylights.

Each skylight shall have a maximum area within the curb of 100 square feet (9.3 m2).

Exception: The area limitation shall not apply where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910.

2610.5 Aggregate area of skylights.

The aggregate area of skylights shall not exceed 331/3 percent of the floor area of the room or space sheltered by the roof in which such skylights are installed where Class CC1 materials are utilized, and 25 percent where Class CC2 materials are utilized.

Exception: The aggregate area limitations of light-transmitting plastic skylights shall be increased 100 percent beyond the limitations set forth in this section where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910.

2610.6 Separation.

Skylights shall be separated from each other by a distance of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) measured in a horizontal plane.

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	In Group R-3, multiple skylights located above the same room or space with a combined area not exceeding the limits set forth in Section 2610.4.

2610.7 Location.

Where exterior wall openings are required to be protected in accordance with Section 705, a skylight shall not be installed within 6 feet (1829 mm) of such exterior wall.

2610.8 Combinations of roof panels and skylights.

Combinations of light-transmitting plastic roof panels and skylights shall be subject to the area and percentage limitations and separation requirements applicable to roof panel installations.

SECTION 2611
LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC INTERIOR SIGNS
2611.1 General.

Light-transmitting plastic interior wall signs shall be limited as specified in Sections 2611.2 through 2611.4. Light-transmitting plastic interior wall signs in covered and open mall buildings shall comply with Section 402.6.4. Light-transmitting plastic interior signs shall also comply with Section 2606.

2611.2 Aggregate area.

The sign shall not exceed 20 percent of the wall area.

2611.3 Maximum area.

The sign shall not exceed 24 square feet (2.23 m2).

2611.4 Encasement.

Edges and backs of the sign shall be fully encased in metal.

SECTION 2612
PLASTIC COMPOSITES
2612.1 General.

Plastic composites shall consist of either wood/plastic composites or plastic lumber. Plastic composites shall comply with the provisions of this code and with the additional requirements of Section 2612.

2612.2 Labeling.

Plastic composite deck boards and stair treads, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance to ASTM D7032 and includes the allowable load and maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032. Plastic composite handrails and guards, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance to ASTM D7032 and includes the maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

2612.3 Flame spread index.

Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards shall exhibit a flame spread index not exceeding 200 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 with the test specimen remaining in place during the test.

Exception: Materials determined to be noncombustible in accordance with Section 703.5.

2612.4 Termite and decay resistance.

Where required by Section 2304.12, plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards containing wood, cellulosic or any other biodegradable materials shall be termite and decay resistant as determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

2612.5 Construction requirements.

Plastic composites meeting the requirements of Section 2612 shall be permitted to be used as exterior deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards where combustible construction is permitted.

2612.5.1 Span rating.

Plastic composites used as exterior deck boards shall have a span rating determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

2612.6 Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards.

Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards shall be installed in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION 2613
FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMER
2613.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of fiber-reinforced polymer in and on buildings and structures.

2613.2 Labeling and identification.

Packages and containers of fiber-reinforced polymer and their components delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer’s name, product listing, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

2613.3 Interior finishes.

Fiber-reinforced polymer used as interior finishes, decorative materials or trim shall comply with Chapter 8.

2613.3.1 Foam plastic cores.

Fiber-reinforced polymer used as interior finish and which contains foam plastic cores shall comply with Chapter 8 and this chapter.

2613.4 Light-transmitting materials.

Fiber-reinforced polymer used as light-transmitting materials shall comply with Sections 2606 through 2611 as required for the specific application.

2613.5 Exterior use.

Fiber-reinforced polymer shall be permitted to be installed on the exterior walls of buildings of any type of construction when such polymers meet the requirements of Section 2603.5. Fireblocking shall be installed in accordance with Section 718.

Exceptions:

1.	Compliance with Section 2603.5 is not required when all of the following conditions are met:

1.1.	The fiber-reinforced polymer shall not exceed an aggregate total of 20 percent of the area of the specific wall to which it is attached, and no single architectural element shall exceed 10 percent of the area of the specific wall to which it is attached, and no contiguous set of architectural elements shall exceed 10 percent of the area of the specific wall to which they are attached.

1.2.	The fiber-reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less. The flame spread index requirement shall not be required for coatings or paints having a thickness of less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) that are applied directly to the surface of the fiber-reinforced polymer.

1.3.	Fireblocking complying with Section 718.2.6 shall be installed.

1.4.	The fiber-reinforced polymer shall be installed directly to a noncombustible substrate or be separated from the exterior wall by one of the following materials: corrosion-resistant steel having a minimum base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.41 mm) at any point, aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.019 inch (0.5 mm) or other approved noncombustible material.

2.	Compliance with Section 2603.5 is not required when the fiber-reinforced polymer is installed on buildings that are 40 feet (12 190 mm) or less above grade when all of the following conditions are met:

2.1.	The fiber-reinforced polymer shall meet the requirements of Section 1406.2.

2.2.	Where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less, the area of the fiber-reinforced polymer shall not exceed 10 percent of the wall area. Where the fire separation distance is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), there shall be no limit on the area of the exterior wall coverage using fiber-reinforced polymer.

2.3.	The fiber-reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread index of 200 or less. The flame spread index requirements do not apply to coatings or paints having a thickness of less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) that are applied directly to the surface of the fiber-reinforced polymer.

2.4.	Fireblocking complying with Section 718.2.6 shall be installed.

SECTION 2614
REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE INSULATION
2614.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of reflective plastic core insulation in buildings and structures. Reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with the requirements of Section 2614 and of one of the following: Section 2614.3 or 2614.4.

2614.2 Identification.

Packages and containers of reflective plastic core insulation delivered to the job site shall show the manufacturer’s or supplier’s name, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

2614.3 Surface-burning characteristics.

Reflective plastic core insulation shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The reflective plastic core insulation shall be tested at the maximum thickness intended for use. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2599.

2614.4 Room corner test heat release.

Reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286 or UL 1715 in the manner intended for use and at the maximum thickness intended for use.

SECTION 2615
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES—
PLASTICS
2615.1 General.
2615.1.1

Plastic materials used as structural elements shall be designed by methods admitting of rational analysis according to established principles of mechanics.

2615.1.2

Reserved.

2615.1.3

Reserved.

2615.1.4

Plastic structural elements, other than sheets, shall be designed by a Florida-registered professional engineer or a Florida-registered architect.

2615.2 Approved plastic.

Approved plastics for outdoor exposure shall be evaluated for outdoor durability in accordance with the Voluntary Standard Uniform Load Test Procedure for Thermoformed Plastic Domed Skylights, of the AAMA/WDMA 101/IS2/NAFS, Voluntary Performance Specification for Windows, Skylights and Glass Doors, as follows:

1.	Outdoor exposure conditions: Specimen exposed in Florida at 45 degree south exposure for a period of five years.

a.	Impact testing, after exposure test as above, in accordance with ASTM D256, and

b.	Tensile testing on controlled and weathered specimen in accordance with ASTM D638. Yield strength difference between controlled and weathered specimen shall not exceed 10 percent.

2.	Alternate:

a.	Exposure to xenon arc weatherometer using a 6500-watt lamp in accordance with ASTM G155 and ASTM D2565 for a period of 4,500 hours.

b.	Impact testing, after exposure test as above, in accordance with ASTM D256, and

c.	Tensile testing on controlled and weathered specimen in accordance with ASTM D638. Yield strength difference between controlled and weathered specimen shall not exceed 10 percent.

2615.3 Foam plastics.

Reserved.

2615.4 Light-transmitting plastics.

Reserved.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-27]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 27
ELECTRICAL
SECTION 2701
GENERAL
2701.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter and NFPA 70 shall govern the design, construction, erection and installation of the electrical components, appliances, equipment and systems used in buildings and structures covered by this code. The Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 70 shall govern the use and maintenance of electrical components, appliances, equipment and systems. The Florida Building Code, Existing Building and NFPA 70 shall govern the alteration, repair, relocation, replacement and addition of electrical components, appliances, equipment and systems.

SECTION 2702
EMERGENCY AND STANDBY POWER SYSTEMS
[F] 2702.1 General.

Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall comply with Sections 2702.1.1 through 2702.1.8.

[F] 2702.1.1 Stationary generators.

Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200.

[F] 2702.1.2 Fuel line piping protection.

Fuel lines supplying a generator set inside a high-rise building shall be separated from areas of the building other than the room the generator is located in by an approved method, or an assembly that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Where the building is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the required fire-resistance rating shall be reduced to 1 hour.

[F] 2702.1.3 Installation.

Emergency power systems and standby power systems required by this code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111.

[F] 2702.1.4 Load transfer.

Emergency power systems shall automatically provide secondary power within 10 seconds after primary power is lost, unless specified otherwise in this code. Standby power systems shall automatically provide secondary power within 60 seconds after primary power is lost, unless specified otherwise in this code.

[F] 2702.1.5 Load duration.

Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be designed to provide the required power for a minimum duration of 2 hours without being refueled or recharged, unless specified otherwise in this code.

[F] 2702.1.6 Uninterruptable power source.

An uninterrupted source of power shall be provided for equipment when required by the manufacturer’s instructions, the listing, this code or applicable referenced standards.

[F] 2702.1.7 Interchangeability.

Emergency power systems shall be an acceptable alternative for installations that require standby power systems.

[F] 2702.1.8 Group I-2 occupancies.

In Group I-2 occupancies located in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, where new essential electrical systems are installed, and where new essential electrical system generators are installed, the systems and generators shall be located and installed in accordance with ASCE 24. Where connections for hookup of temporary generators are provided, the connections shall be located at or above the elevation required in ASCE 24.

[F] 2702.2 Where required.

Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 2702.2.1 through 2702.2.18.

[F] 2702.2.1 Ambulatory care facilities.

Essential electrical systems for ambulatory care facilities shall comply with Section 422.6.

[F] 2702.2.2 Elevators and platform lifts.

Standby power shall be provided for elevators and platform lifts as required in Sections 1009.4, 1009.5, 3003.1, 3007.8 and 3008.8.

[F] 2702.2.3 Emergency responder radio coverage systems.

Standby power shall be provided for emergency responder radio coverage systems required in Section 917 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The standby power supply shall be capable of operating the emergency responder radio coverage system for a duration of not less than 12 hours at 100 percent system operation capacity.

[F] 2702.2.4 Emergency voice alarm communication systems.

Standby power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communication systems in accordance with Section 907.5.2.

[F] 2702.2.5 Exhaust systems.

Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for domestic kitchens located in multistory structures as required in Section 505.3 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures as required in Section 504.10 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and Section 614.10 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

[F] 2702.2.6 Exit signs.

Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs as required in Section 1013.6.3. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 90 minutes.

[F] 2702.2.7 Gas detection systems.

Emergency or standby power shall be provided for gas detection systems in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 2702.2.8 Group I-2 occupancies.

Essential electrical systems for Group I-2 occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 407.11.

[F] 2702.2.9 Group I-3 occupancies.

Emergency power shall be provided for power-operated doors and locks in Group I-3 occupancies as required in Section 408.4.2.

[F] 2702.2.10 Hazardous materials.

Emergency or standby power shall be provided in occupancies with hazardous materials where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 2702.2.11 High-rise buildings.

Emergency and standby power shall be provided in high-rise buildings as required in Section 403.4.8.

[F] 2702.2.12 Means of egress illumination.

Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination as required in Section 1008.3. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 90 minutes.

[F] 2702.2.13 Membrane structures.

Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures as required in Section 3102.8.2. Standby power shall be provided for a duration of not less than 4 hours. Auxiliary inflation systems in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 2702.2.14 Pyrophoric materials.

Emergency power shall be provided for occupancies with silane gas in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 2702.2.15 Semiconductor fabrication facilities.

Emergency power shall be provided for semiconductor fabrication facilities as required in Section 415.11.11.

[F] 2702.2.16 Smoke control systems.

Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems as required in Sections 404.7, 909.11, 909.20.7.2 and 909.21.5.

[F] 2702.2.17 Special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors.

Standby power shall be provided for special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors as required in Section 1010.3.3. The standby power supply shall have a capacity to operate not fewer than 50 closing cycles of the door.

[F] 2702.2.18 Underground buildings.

Emergency and standby power shall be provided in underground buildings as required in Section 405.

[F] 2702.3 Critical circuits.

Required critical circuits shall be protected using one of the following methods:

1.	Cables, used for survivability of required critical circuits, that are listed in accordance with UL 2196 and have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.	Electrical circuit protective systems having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Electrical circuit protective systems shall be installed in accordance with their listing requirements.

3.	Construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

[F] 2702.4 Maintenance.

Emergency and standby power systems shall be maintained and tested in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-28]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 28
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS
SECTION 2801
GENERAL
[M] 2801.1 Scope.

Mechanical appliances, equipment and systems shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. Masonry chimneys, fireplaces and barbecues shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and Chapter 21 of this code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-29]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 29
PLUMBING SYSTEMS
SECTION 2901
GENERAL
[P] 2901.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing shall govern the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems. Toilet and bathing rooms shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1210. Plumbing systems and equipment shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Private sewage disposal systems shall conform to Chapter 64E–6, Florida Administrative Code, for Onsite Sewage Treatment and Disposal Systems.

SECTION 2902
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES
[P] 2902.1 Minimum number of fixtures.

Plumbing fixtures shall be provided in the minimum number as shown in Table 2902.1 based on the actual use of the building or space. Uses not shown in Table 2902.1 shall be considered individually by the code official. The number of occupants shall be determined by this code.

[P] TABLE 2902.1

MINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURESa (See Sections 2902.1.1 and 2902.2)

No.	CLASSIFICATION	DESCRIPTION	WATER CLOSETS
(URINALS SEE SECTION 424.2
OF THE FLORIDA
BUILDING CODE, PLUMBING)
	LAVATORIES	BATHTUBS/
SHOWERS
	DRINKING
FOUNTAINS
(SEE SECTION 410
OF THE
FLORIDA
BUILDING
CODE,
PLUMBING)
	OTHER
Male	Female	Male	Female
1	Assembly	Theaters and other buildings for the performing arts and motion picturesd	1 per 125	1 per 65	1 per 200	—	1 per 500	1 service sink
Nightclubs, bars, taverns, dance halls and buildings for similar purposesd	1 per 40	1 per 40	1 per 75	—	1 per 500	1 service sink
Restaurants, banquet halls and food courtsd	1 per 75	1 per 75	1 per 200	—	1 per 500	1 service sink
Casino gaming areas	1 per 100 for the first 400 and 1 per 250 for the remainder exceeding 400	1 per 50 for the first 400 and 1 per 150 for the remainder exceeding 400	1 per 250 for the first 750 and 1 per 500 for the remainder exceeding 750	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink
Auditoriums without permanent seating, art galleries, exhibition halls, museums, lecture halls, libraries, arcades and gymnasiumsd	1 per 125	1 per 65	1 per 200	—	1 per 500	1 service sink
Passenger terminals and transportation facilitiesd	1 per 500	1 per 500	1 per 750	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink
Places of worship and other religious servicesd	1 per 150	1 per 75	1 per 200	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink
Coliseums, arenas, skating rinks, pools and tennis courts for indoor sporting events and activities	1 per 75 for the first 1,500 and 1 per 120 for the remainder exceeding 1,500	1 per 40 for the first 1,520 and 1 per 60 for the remainder exceeding 1,520	1 per 200	1 per 150	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink
Stadiums, amusement parks, bleachers and grandstands for outdoor sporting events and activitiesf	1 per 75 for the first 1,500 and 1 per 120 for the remainder exceeding 1,500	1 per 40 for the first 1,520 and 1 per 60 for the remainder exceeding 1,520	1 per 200	1 per 150	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink
2	Business	Buildings for the transaction of business, professional services, other services involving merchandise, office buildings, banks, light industrial, ambulatory care and similar uses	1 per 25 for the first 50
and 1 per 50 for the
remainder exceeding 50
	1 per 40 for the first 80 and 1 per 80 for the remainder exceeding 80	—	1 per 100	1 service sinke
3	Educational	Educational facilities	1 per 50	1 per 50	—	1 per 100	1 service sink
4	Factory and industrial	Structures in which occupants are engaged in work fabricating, assembly or processing of products or materials	1 per 100	1 per 100	—	1 per 400	1 service sink
5	Institutional	Custodial care facilities	1 per 10	1 per 10	1 per 8	1 per 100	1 service sink
Medical care recipients in hospitals and nursing homesb	1 per roomc	1 per roomc	1 per 15	1 per 100	1 service sink
Employees in hospitals and nursing homesb	1 per 25	1 per 35	—	1 per 100	—
Visitors in hospitals and nursing homes	1 per 75	1 per 100	—	1 per 500	—
Prisonsb	1 per cell	1 per cell	1 per 15	1 per 100	1 service sink
Reformatories, detention centers and correctional centersb	1 per 15	1 per 15	1 per 15	1 per 100	1 service sink
Employees in reformitories, detention centers and correctional centersb	1 per 25	1 per 35	—	1 per 100	—
Adult day care and child day care	1 per 15	1 per 15	1	1 per 100	1 service sink
6	Mercantile	Retail stores, service stations, shops, salesrooms, markets and shopping centers	1 per 500	1 per 750	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sinke
7	Residential	Hotels, motels, boarding houses (transient)	1 per sleeping unit	1 per sleeping unit	1 per sleeping unit	—	1 service sink
Dormitories, fraternities, sororities and boarding houses (not transient)	1 per 10	1 per 10	1 per 8	1 per 100	1 service sink
Apartment house	1 per dwelling unit	1 per dwelling unit	1 per dwelling unit	—	1 kitchen sink per dwelling unit; 1 automatic clothes washer connection per 20 dwelling units
One- and two-family dwellings and lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms	1 per dwelling unit	1 per 10	1 per dwelling unit	—	1 kitchen sink per dwelling unit; 1 automatic clothes washer connection per dwelling unit
Congregate living facilities with 16 or fewer persons	1 per 10	1 per 10	1 per 8	1 per 100	1 service sink
8	Storage	Structures for the storage of goods, warehouses, storehouses and freight depots, low and moderate hazard	1 per 100	1 per 100	—	1 per 1,000	1 service sink

a.	The fixtures shown are based on one fixture being the minimum required for the number of persons indicated or any fraction of the number of persons indicated. The number of occupants shall be determined by this code.

b.	Toilet facilities for employees shall be separate from facilities for inmates or care recipients.

c.	A single-occupant toilet room with one water closet and one lavatory serving not more than two adjacent patient sleeping units shall be permitted, provided that each patient sleeping unit has direct access to the toilet room and provisions for privacy for the toilet room user are provided.

d.	The occupant load for seasonal outdoor seating and entertainment areas shall be included when determining the minimum number of facilities required.

e.	For business and mercantile classifications with an occupant load of 15 or fewer, a service sink shall not be required.

f.	The required number and type of plumbing fixtures for outdoor swimming pools shall be in accordance with Section 403.6 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

[P] 2902.1.1 Fixture calculations.

INSIGHTS

To determine the occupant load of each sex, the total occupant load shall be divided in half. To determine the required number of fixtures, the fixture ratio or ratios for each fixture type shall be applied to the occupant load of each sex in accordance with Table 2902.1. Fractional numbers resulting from applying the fixture ratios of Table 2902.1 shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For calculations involving multiple occupancies, such fractional numbers for each occupancy shall first be summed and then rounded up to the next whole number.

Exceptions:

1.	The total occupant load shall not be required to be divided in half where approved statistical data indicate a distribution of the sexes of other than 50 percent of each sex.

2.	Where multiple-user facilities are designed to serve all genders, the minimum fixture count shall be calculated 100 percent, based on total occupant load. In such multiple-user user facilities, each fixture type shall be in accordance with ICC A117.1 and each urinal that is provided shall be located in a stall.

3.	Distribution of the sexes is not required where single-user water closets and bathing room fixtures are provided in accordance with Section 2902.1.2.

 INSIGHTS (1)
[P] 2902.1.2 Single-user toilet and bathing room fixtures.

The plumbing fixtures located in single-user toilet and bathing rooms, including family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms that are required by Chapter 11, shall contribute toward the total number of required plumbing fixtures for a building or tenant space. Single-user toilet and bathing rooms and family or assisted-use toilet rooms and bathing rooms shall be identified as being available for use by all persons regardless of their sex.

The total number of fixtures shall be permitted to be based on the required number of separate facilities or based on the aggregate of any combination of single-user or separate facilities.

[P] 2902.1.3 Lavatory distribution.

Where two or more toilet rooms are provided for each sex, the required number of lavatories shall be distributed proportionately to the required number of water closets.

[P] 2902.2 Separate facilities.

Where plumbing fixtures are required, separate facilities shall be provided for each sex.

Exceptions:

1.	Separate facilities shall not be required for dwelling units and sleeping units.

2.	Separate facilities shall not be required in structures or tenant spaces with a total occupant load, including both employees and customers, of 15 or fewer.

3.	Separate facilities shall not be required in mercantile occupancies in which the maximum occupant load is 100 or fewer.

4.	Separate facilities shall not be required in business occupancies in which the maximum occupant load is 25 or fewer.

5.	Separate facilities shall not be required to be designated by sex where single-user toilet rooms are provided in accordance with Section 2902.1.2.

6.	Separate facilities shall not be required where rooms having both water closets and lavatory fixtures are designed for use by both sexes and privacy for water closets is provided in accordance with Section 405.3.4 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Urinals shall be located in an area visually separated from the remainder of the facility or each urinal that is provided shall be located in a stall.

[P] 2902.2.1 Family or assisted-use toilet facilities serving as separate facilities.

Where a building or tenant space requires a separate toilet facility for each sex and each toilet facility is required to have only one water closet, two family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall be permitted to serve as the required separate facilities. Family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall not be required to be identified for exclusive use by either sex as required by Section 2902.4.

[P] 2902.3 Employee and public toilet facilities.

For structures and tenant spaces intended for public utilization, customers, patrons and visitors shall be provided with public toilet facilities. Employees associated with structures and tenant spaces shall be provided with toilet facilities. The number of plumbing fixtures located within the required toilet facilities shall be provided in accordance with Section 2902 for all users. Employee toilet facilities shall be either separate or combined employee and public toilet facilities.

Exception: Public toilet facilities shall not be required for:

1.	Parking garages where operated without parking attendants.

2.	Structures and tenant spaces intended for quick transactions, including takeout, pickup and drop-off, having a public access area less than or equal to 300 square feet (28 m2).

[P] 2902.3.1 Access.

The route to the public toilet facilities required by Section 2902.3 shall not pass through kitchens, storage rooms or closets. Access to the required facilities shall be from within the building or from the exterior of the building. Routes shall comply with the accessibility requirements of this code. The public shall have access to the required toilet facilities at all times that the building is occupied.

[P] 2902.3.2 Prohibited toilet room location.

Toilet rooms shall not open directly into a room used for the preparation of food for service to the public.

[P] 2902.3.3 Location of toilet facilities in occupancies other than malls.

In occupancies other than covered and open mall buildings, the required public and employee toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the space required to be provided with toilet facilities, and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m).

Exceptions:

1.	The location and maximum distances of travel to required employee facilities in factory and industrial occupancies are permitted to exceed that required by this section, provided that the location and maximum distance of travel are approved.

2.	The location and maximum distances of travel to required public and employee facilities in Group S occupancies are permitted to exceed that required by this section, provided that the location and maximum distance of travel are approved.

[P] 2902.3.4 Location of toilet facilities in malls.

In covered and open mall buildings, the required public and employee toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the space required to be provided with toilet facilities, and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 300 feet (91 mm). In mall buildings, the required facilities shall be based on total square footage (m2) within a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building, and facilities shall be installed in each individual store or in a central toilet area located in accordance with this section. The maximum distance of travel to central toilet facilities in mall buildings shall be measured from the main entrance of any store or tenant space. In mall buildings, where employees’ toilet facilities are not provided in the individual store, the maximum distance of travel shall be measured from the employees’ work area of the store or tenant space.

[P] 2902.3.5 Pay facilities.

Where pay facilities are installed, such facilities shall be in excess of the required minimum facilities. Required facilities shall be free of charge.

[P] 2902.3.6 Door locking.

Where a toilet room is provided for the use of multiple occupants, the egress door for the room shall not be lockable from the inside of the room. This section does not apply to family or assisted-use toilet rooms.

[P] 2902.4 Signage.

Required public facilities shall be provided with signs that designate the sex as required by Section 2902.2. Signs shall be readily visible and located near the entrance to each toilet facility. Signs for accessible toilet facilities shall comply with Section 1111.

[P] 2902.4.1 Directional signage.

Directional signage indicating the route to the required public toilet facilities shall be posted in a lobby, corridor, aisle or similar space, such that the sign can be readily seen from the main entrance to the building or tenant space.

[P] 2902.5 Drinking fountain location.

Drinking fountains shall not be required to be located in individual tenant spaces provided that public drinking fountains are located within a distance of travel of 500 feet (152 m) of the most remote location in the tenant space and not more than one story above or below the tenant space. Where the tenant space is in a covered or open mall, such distance shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm). Drinking fountains shall be located on an accessible route.

[P] 2902.6 Small occupancies.

Drinking fountains shall not be required for an occupant load of 15 or fewer.

[P] 2902.7 Service sink location.

Service sinks shall not be required to be located in individual tenant spaces in a covered mall provided that service sinks are located within a distance of travel of 300 feet (91 m) of the most remote location in the tenant space and not more than one story above or below the tenant space. Service sinks shall be located on an accessible route.

[P] SECTION 2903
INSTALLATION OF FIXTURES
[P] 2903.1 Setting.

Fixtures shall be set level and in proper alignment with reference to adjacent walls.

[P] 2903.1.1 Water closets, urinals, lavatories and bidets.

A water closet, urinal, lavatory or bidet shall not be set closer than 15 inches (381 mm) from its center to any side wall, partition, vanity or other obstruction. Where partitions or other obstructions do not separate adjacent fixtures, fixtures shall not be set closer than 30 inches (762 mm) center to center between adjacent fixtures. There shall be not less than a 21-inch (533 mm) clearance in front of a water closet, urinal, lavatory or bidet to any wall, fixture or door. Water closet compartments shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width and not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) in depth for floor-mounted water closets and not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width and 56 inches (1422 mm) in depth for wall-hung water closets.

Exception: An accessible children’s water closet shall be set not closer than 12 inches (305 mm) from its center to the required partition or to the wall on one side.

[P] 2903.1.2 Public lavatories.

In employee and public toilet rooms, the required lavatory shall be located in the same room as the required water closet.

[P] 2903.1.3 Location of fixtures and piping.

Piping, fixtures or equipment shall not be located in such a manner as to interfere with the normal operation of windows, doors or other means of egress openings.

[P] 2903.1.4 Water closet compartment.

Each water closet utilized by the public or employees shall occupy a separate compartment with walls or partitions and a door enclosing the fixtures to ensure privacy.

Exceptions:

1.	Water closet compartments shall not be required in a single-occupant toilet room with a lockable door.

2.	Toilet rooms located in child day care facilities and containing two or more water closets shall be permitted to have one water closet without an enclosing compartment.

3.	This provision is not applicable to toilet areaslocated within Group I-3 housing areas.

[P] 2903.1.5 Urinal partitions.

Each urinal utilized by the public or employees shall occupy a separate area with walls or partitions to provide privacy. The horizontal dimension between walls or partitions at each urinal shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm). The walls or partitions shall begin at a height not greater than 12 inches (305 mm) from and extend not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the finished floor surface. The walls or partitions shall extend from the wall surface at each side of the urinal not less than 18 inches (457 mm) or to a point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the outermost front lip of the urinal measured from the finished backwall surface, whichever is greater.

Exceptions:

1.	Urinal partitions shall not be required in a singleoccupant or family/assisted-use toilet room with a lockable door.

2.	Toilet rooms located in child day care facilities and containing two or more urinals shall be permitted to have one urinal without partitions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-3]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 3
USE AND OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
SECTION 301
SCOPE
301.1 General.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the classification of all buildings and structures as to occupancy and use. Different classifications of occupancy and use represent varying levels of hazard and risk to building occupants and adjacent properties.

SECTION 302
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
AND USE DESIGNATION
302.1 Occupancy classification.

Occupancy classification is the formal designation of the primary purpose of the building, structure or portion thereof. Structures shall be classified into one or more of the occupancy groups listed in this section based on the nature of the hazards and risks to building occupants generally associated with the intended purpose of the building or structure. An area, room or space that is intended to be occupied at different times for different purposes shall comply with all applicable requirements associated with such potential multipurpose. Structures containing multiple occupancy groups shall comply with Section 508. Where a structure is proposed for a purpose that is not specifically listed in this section such structure shall be classified in the occupancy it most nearly resembles based on the fire safety and relative hazard. Occupied roofs shall be classified in the group that the occupancy most nearly resembles, according to the fire safety and relative hazard involved, and shall comply with Section 503.1.4.

1.	Assembly (see Section 303): Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4 and A-5.

2.	Business (see Section 304): Group B.

3.	Educational (see Section 305): Group E.

4.	Factory and Industrial (see Section 306): Groups F-1 and F-2.

5.	High Hazard (see Section 307): Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5.

6.	Institutional (see Section 308): Groups I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-4.

7.	Mercantile (see Section 309): Group M.

8.	Residential (see Section 310): Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4.

9.	Storage (see Section 311): Groups S-1 and S-2.

10.	Utility and Miscellaneous (see Section 312): Group U.

302.2 Use designation.

Occupancy groups contain subordinate uses having similar hazards and risks to building occupants. Uses include, but are not limited to, those functional designations listed within the occupancy group descriptions in Section 302.1. Certain uses require specific limitations and controls in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4 and elsewhere in this code.

SECTION 303
ASSEMBLY GROUP A
303.1 Assembly Group A.

Assembly Group A occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for the gathering of persons for purposes such as civic, social or religious functions; recreation, food or drink consumption or awaiting transportation.

303.1.1 Small buildings and tenant spaces.

A building or tenant space used for assembly purposes with an occupant load of less than 50 persons shall be classified as a Group B occupancy.

303.1.2 Small assembly spaces.

The following rooms and spaces shall not be classified as Assembly occupancies:

1.	A room or space used for assembly purposes with an occupant load of less than 50 persons and accessory to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B occupancy or as part of that occupancy.

2.	A room or space used for assembly purposes that is less than 750 square feet (70 m2) in area and accessory to another occupancy shall be classified as a Group B occupancy or as part of that occupancy.

303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies.

A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy.

303.1.4 Accessory to places of religious worship.

Accessory religious educational rooms and religious auditoriums with occupant loads of less than 100 per room or space are not considered separate occupancies.

303.2 Assembly Group A-1.

Group A-1 occupancy includes assembly uses, usually with fixed seating, intended for the production and viewing of the performing arts or motion pictures including, but not limited to:

Motion picture theaters

Symphony and concert halls

Television and radio studios admitting an audience

Theaters

303.3 Assembly Group A-2.

Group A-2 occupancy includes assembly uses intended for food and/or drink consumption including, but not limited to:

Banquet halls

Casinos (gaming areas)

Nightclubs

Restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities (including associated commercial kitchens)

Taverns and bars

303.4 Assembly Group A-3.

Group A-3 occupancy includes assembly uses intended for worship, recreation or amusement and other assembly uses not classified elsewhere in Group A including, but not limited to:

Amusement arcades

Art galleries

Bowling alleys

Community halls

Courtrooms

Dance halls (not including food or drink consumption)

Exhibition halls

Funeral parlors

Gymnasiums (without spectator seating)

Indoor swimming pools (without spectator seating)

Indoor tennis courts (without spectator seating)

Lecture halls

Libraries

Museums

Places of religious worship

Pool and billiard parlors

Waiting areas in transportation terminals

303.5 Assembly Group A-4.

Group A-4 occupancy includes assembly uses intended for viewing of indoor sporting events and activities with spectator seating including, but not limited to:

Arenas

Skating rinks

Swimming pools

Tennis courts

303.6 Assembly Group A-5.

Group A-5 occupancy includes assembly uses intended for participation in or viewing outdoor activities including, but not limited to:

Amusement park structures

Bleachers

Grandstands

Stadiums

SECTION 304
BUSINESS GROUP B
304.1 Business Group B.

Business Group B occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for office, professional or service-type transactions, including storage of records and accounts. Business occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Airport traffic control towers

Ambulatory care facilities

Animal hospitals, kennels and pounds

Banks

Barber and beauty shops

Car wash

Civic administration

Clinic, outpatient

Dry cleaning and laundries: pick-up and delivery stations and self-service

Educational occupancies for students above the 12th grade

Electronic data processing

Food processing establishments and commercial kitchens not associated with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities not more than 2,500 square feet (232 m2) in area.

Laboratories: testing and research

Motor vehicle showrooms

Post offices

Print shops

Professional services (architects, attorneys, dentists, physicians, engineers, etc.)

Radio and television stations

Telephone exchanges

Training and skill development not in a school or academic program (this shall include, but not be limited to, tutoring centers, martial arts studios, gymnastics and similar uses regardless of the ages served, and where not classified as a Group A occupancy).

304.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY.

CLINIC, OUTPATIENT.

304.3

Public and private colleges and universities shall comply with Section 468.

304.4

Florida colleges shall comply with Section 453.

SECTION 305
EDUCATIONAL GROUP E
305.1 Educational Group E.

Educational Group E occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, by six or more persons at any one time for educational purposes through the 12th grade.

305.1.1 Accessory to places of religious worship.

Religious educational rooms and religious auditoriums, which are accessory to places of religious worship in accordance with Section 303.1.4 and have occupant loads of less than 100 per room or space, shall be classified as Group A-3 occupancies.

305.2 Group E, day care facilities.

This group includes buildings and structures or portions thereof occupied by more than five children older than 21/2 years of age who receive educational, supervision or personal care services for fewer than 24 hours per day.

305.2.1 Within places of religious worship.

Rooms and spaces within places of religious worship providing such day care during religious functions shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy.

305.2.2 Five or fewer children.

A facility having five or fewer children receiving such day care shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy.

305.2.3 Five or fewer children in a dwelling unit.

A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having five or fewer children receiving such day care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential.

305.3

Public and private educational occupancies shall comply with Section 468.

305.4

Public education occupancies shall comply with Section 453.

SECTION 306
FACTORY GROUP F
306.1 Factory Industrial Group F.

Factory Industrial Group F occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for assembling, disassembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, repair or processing operations that are not classified as a Group H hazardous or Group S storage occupancy.

306.2 Moderate-hazard factory industrial, Group F-1.

Factory industrial uses that are not classified as Factory Industrial F-2 Low Hazard shall be classified as F-1 Moderate Hazard and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Aircraft (manufacturing, not to include repair)

Appliances

Athletic equipment

Automobiles and other motor vehicles

Bakeries

Beverages: over 16-percent alcohol content

Bicycles

Boats

Brooms or brushes

Business machines

Cameras and photo equipment

Canvas or similar fabric

Carpets and rugs (includes cleaning)

Clothing

Construction and agricultural machinery

Disinfectants

Dry cleaning and dyeing

Electric generation plants

Electronics

Energy storage systems (ESS) in dedicated use buildings

Engines (including rebuilding)

Food processing establishments and commercial kitchens not associated with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities more than 2,500 square feet (232 m2) in area.

Furniture

Hemp products

Jute products

Laundries

Leather products

Machinery

Metals

Millwork (sash and door)

Motion pictures and television filming (without spectators)

Musical instruments

Optical goods

Paper mills or products

Photographic film

Plastic products

Printing or publishing

Recreational vehicles

Refuse incineration

Shoes

Soaps and detergents

Textiles

Tobacco

Trailers

Upholstering

Water/sewer treatment facilities

Wood; distillation

Woodworking (cabinet)

306.2.1 Aircraft manufacturing facilities.

Aircraft manufacturing facilities shall comply with Section 412.7.

306.3 Low-hazard factory industrial, Group F-2.

Factory industrial uses that involve the fabrication or manufacturing of noncombustible materials that during finishing, packing or processing do not involve a significant fire hazard shall be classified as F-2 occupancies and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Beverages: up to and including 16-percent alcohol content

Brick and masonry

Ceramic products

Foundries

Glass products

Gypsum

Ice

Metal products (fabrication and assembly)

SECTION 307
HIGH-HAZARD GROUP H
[F] 307.1 High-hazard Group H.

High-hazard Group H occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, that involves the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a physical or health hazard in quantities in excess of those allowed in control areas complying with Section 414, based on the maximum allowable quantity limits for control areas set forth in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Hazardous occupancies are classified in Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 and shall be in accordance with this section, the requirements of Section 415 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Hazardous materials stored, or used on top of roofs or canopies, shall be classified as outdoor storage or use and shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

TABLE 307.1(1)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS POSING A PHYSICAL HAZARDa, j, m, n, p

MATERIAL	CLASS	GROUP WHEN
THE MAXIMUM
ALLOWABLE
QUANTITY IS
EXCEEDED	STORAGEb	USE-CLOSED SYSTEMSb	USE-OPEN SYSTEMSb
Solid
pounds
(cubic feet)	Liquid
gallons
(pounds)	Gas cubic
feet at NTP
	Solid
pounds
(cubic feet)	Liquid
gallons
(pounds)	Gas cubic
feet at NTP
	Solid
pounds
(cubic feet)	Liquid
gallons
(pounds)
Combustible dust	NA	H-2	See
Note q
	NA	NA	See
Note q
	NA	NA	See
Note q
	NA
Combustible fiberq	Loose	H-3	(100)	NA	NA	(100)	NA	NA	(20)	NA
Baledo	(1,000)	(1,000)	(200)
Combustible liquidc, i	II	H-2 or H-3	NA	120d, e	NA	NA	120d	NA	NA	30d
IIIA	H-2 or H-3	330d, e	330d	80d
IIIB	NA	13,200e, f	13,200f	3,300f
Consumer fireworks	1.4G	H-3	125e, l	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA
Cryogenic flammable	NA	H-2	NA	45d	NA	NA	45d	NA	NA	10d
Cryogenic inert	NA	NA	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA
Cryogenic oxidizing	NA	H-3	NA	45d	NA	NA	45d	NA	NA	10d
Explosives	Division 1.1	H-1	1e, g	(1)e, g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g
Division 1.2	H-1	1e, g	(1)e, g	0.25g	(0.25)g	0.25g	(0.25)g
Division 1.3	H-1 or H-2	5e, g	(5)e, g	1g	(1)g	1g	(1)g
Division 1.4	H-3	50e, g	(50)e, g	50g	(50)g	NA	NA
Division 1.4G	H-3	125e, l	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA
Division 1.5	H-1	1e, g	(1)e, g	0.25g	(0.25)g	0.25g	(0.25)g
Division 1.6	H-1	1e, g	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA
Flammable gas	Gaseous	H-2	NA	NA	1,000d, e	NA	NA	1,000d, e	NA	NA
Liquefied	(150)d, e	NA	(150)d, e	NA
Flammable liquidc	IA	H-2 or H-3	NA	30d, e	NA	NA	30d	NA	NA	10d
IB and IC	120d, e	120d	30d
Flammable liquid, combination (IA, IB, IC)	NA	H-2 or H-3	NA	120d, e, h	NA	NA	120d, h	NA	NA	30d, h
Flammable solid	NA	H-3	125d, e	NA	NA	125d	NA	NA	25d	NA
Inert gas	Gaseous	NA	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA
Liquefied	NA	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA	NL	NA	NA
Organic peroxide	UD	H-1	1e, g	(1)e, g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g
I	H-2	5d, e	(5)d, e	1d	(1)d	1d	(1)d
II	H-3	50d, e	(50)d, e	50d	(50)d	10d	(10)d
III	H-3	125d, e	(125)d, e	125d	(125)d	25d	(25)d
IV	NA	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL
V	NA	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL
Oxidizer	4	H-1	1g	(1)e, g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g	NA	0.25g	(0.25)g
3k	H-2 or H-3	10d, e	(10)d, e	2d	(2)d	2d	(2)d
2	H-3	250d, e	(250)d, e	250d	(250)d	50d	(50)d
1	NA	4,000e, f	(4,000)e, f	4,000f	(4,000)f	1,000f	(1,000)f
Oxidizing gas	Gaseous	H-3	NA	NA	1,500d, e	NA	NA	1,500d, e	NA	NA
Liquefied	(150)d, e	NA	(150)d, e	NA
Pyrophoric	NA	H-2	4e, g	(4)e, g	50e, g	1g	(1)g	10e, g	0	0
Unstable (reactive)	4	H-1	1e, g	(1)e, g	10e, g	0.25g	(0.25)g	2e, g	0.25g	(0.25)g
3	H-1 or H-2	5d, e	(5)d, e	50d, e	1d	(1)d	10d, e	1d	(1)d
2	H-3	50d, e	(50)d, e	750d, e	50d	(50)d	750d, e	10d	(10)d
1	NA	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL
Water reactive	3	H-2	5d, e	(5)d, e	NA	5d	(5)d	NA	1d	(1)d
2	H-3	50d, e	(50)d, e	50d	(50)d	10d	(10)d
1	NA	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.

NL = Not Limited; NA = Not Applicable; UD = Unclassified Detonable.

a.	For use of control areas, see Section 414.2.

b.	The aggregate quantity in use and storage shall not exceed the quantity listed for storage.

c.	The quantities of alcoholic beverages in retail and wholesale sales occupancies shall not be limited provided the liquids are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons. In retail and wholesale sales occupancies, the quantities of medicines, foodstuffs or consumer products, and cosmetics containing not more than 50 percent by volume of water-miscible liquids with the remainder of the solutions not being flammable, shall not be limited, provided that such materials are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons.

d.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where Note e also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

e.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, day boxes, gas cabinets, gas rooms or exhausted enclosures or in listed safety cans in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Where Note d also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

f.	Quantities shall not be limited in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

g.	Allowed only in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

h.	Containing not more than the maximum allowable quantity per control area of Class IA, IB or IC flammable liquids.

i.	The maximum allowable quantity shall not apply to fuel oil storage complying with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

j.	Quantities in parenthesis indicate quantity units in parenthesis at the head of each column.

k.	A maximum quantity of 200 pounds of solid or 20 gallons of liquid Class 3 oxidizers is allowed when such materials are necessary for maintenance purposes, operation or sanitation of equipment when the storage containers and the manner of storage are approved.

l.	Net weight of the pyrotechnic composition of the fireworks. Where the net weight of the pyrotechnic composition of the fireworks is not known, 25 percent of the gross weight of the fireworks, including packaging, shall be used.

m.	For gallons of liquids, divide the amount in pounds by 10 in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

n.	For storage and display quantities in Group M and storage quantities in Group S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5, see Tables 414.2.5(1) and 414.2.5(2).

o.	Densely packed baled cotton that complies with the packing requirements of ISO 8115 shall not be included in this material class.

p.	The following shall not be included in determining the maximum allowable quantities:

1.	Liquid or gaseous fuel in fuel tanks on vehicles.

2.	Liquid or gaseous fuel in fuel tanks on motorized equipment operated in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3.	Gaseous fuels in piping systems and fixed appliances regulated by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

4.	Liquid fuels in piping systems and fixed appliances regulated by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

5.	Alcohol-based hand rubs classified as Class I or II liquids in dispensers that are installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The location of the alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR) dispensers shall be provided in the construction documents.

q.	Where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3.

[F] TABLE 307.1(2)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL POSING A HEALTH HAZARDa, c, f, h, i

MATERIAL	STORAGEb	USE-CLOSED SYSTEMSb	USE-OPEN SYSTEMSb
Solid
poundsd, e
	Liquid gallons
(pounds)d, e
	Gas cubic feet at NTP
(pounds)d
	Solid
poundsd
	Liquid gallons
(pounds)d
	Gas cubic feet at NTP
(pounds)d
	Solid
poundsd
	Liquid gallons
(pounds)d

Corrosives	5,000	500	Gaseous 810e
Liquefied (150)
	5,000	500	Gaseous 810e
Liquefied (150)
	1,000	100
Highly
Toxic
	10	(10)	Gaseous 20g
Liquefied (4)g
	10	(10)	Gaseous 20g
Liquefied (4)g
	3	(3)
Toxic	500	(500)	Gaseous 810e
Liquefied (150)e
	500	(500)	Gaseous 810e
Liquefied (150)e
	125	(125)

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.

a.	For use of control areas, see Section 414.2.

b.	The aggregate quantity in use and storage shall not exceed the quantity listed for storage.

c.	In retail and wholesale sales occupancies, the quantities of medicines, foodstuffs or consumer products, and cosmetics containing not more than 50 percent by volume of water-miscible liquids and with the remainder of the solutions not being flammable, shall not be limited, provided that such materials are packaged in individual containers not exceeding 1.3 gallons.

d.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where Note e also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

e.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent where stored in approved storage cabinets, gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Where Note d also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

f.	For storage and display quantities in Group M and storage quantities in Group S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5, see Tables 414.2.5(1) and 414.2.5(2).

g.	Allowed only where stored in approved exhausted gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures as specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

h.	Quantities in parenthesis indicate quantity units in parenthesis at the head of each column.

i.	For gallons of liquids, divide the amount in pounds by 10 in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 307.1.1 Uses other than Group H.

An occupancy that stores, uses or handles hazardous materials as described in one or more of the following items shall not be classified as Group H, but shall be classified as the occupancy that it most nearly resembles.

1.	Buildings and structures occupied for the application of flammable finishes, provided that such buildings or areas conform to the requirements of Section 416 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

2.	Wholesale and retail sales and storage of flammable and combustible liquids in mercantile occupancies conforming to the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3.	Closed piping system containing flammable or combustible liquids or gases utilized for the operation of machinery or equipment.

4.	Cleaning establishments that utilize combustible liquid solvents having a flash point of 140°F (60°C) or higher in closed systems employing equipment listed by an approved testing agency, provided that this occupancy is separated from all other areas of the building by 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

5.	Cleaning establishments that utilize a liquid solvent having a flash point at or above 200°F (93°C).

6.	Liquor stores and distributors without bulk storage.

7.	Refrigeration systems.

8.	The storage or utilization of materials for agricultural purposes on the premises.

9.	Stationary storage battery systems installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

10.	Corrosive personal or household products in their original packaging used in retail display.

11.	Commonly used corrosive building materials.

12.	Buildings and structures occupied for aerosol product storage shall be classified as Group S-1, provided that such buildings conform to the requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

13.	Display and storage of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials in quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area in Group M or S occupancies complying with Section 414.2.5.

14.	The storage of black powder, smokeless propellant and small arms primers in Groups M and R-3 and special industrial explosive devices in Groups B, F, M and S, provided such storage conforms to the quantity limits and requirements prescribed in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

15.	Mercantile occupancies offering for retail sale sparklers, novelties and trick noisemakers as defined at Section 791.01, Florida Statutes, and that are not defined as fireworks by Chapter 791, Florida Statutes. Storage of sparklers and other novelties or trick noisemakers as defined in Chapter 791, Florida Statutes, within mercantile occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 791.055, Florida Statutes.

16.	Stationary fuel cell power systems installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

17.	Capacitor energy storage systems in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 307.1.2 Hazardous materials.

Hazardous materials in any quantity shall conform to the requirements of this code, including Section 414, and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 307.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AEROSOL CONTAINER.

AEROSOL PRODUCT.

Level 1 aerosol products.

Level 2 aerosol products.

Level 3 aerosol products.

BALED COTTON.

BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED.

BARRICADE.

Artificial barricade.

Natural barricade.

BOILING POINT.

CLOSED SYSTEM.

COMBUSTIBLE DUST.

COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS.

COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID.

Class II.

Class IIIA.

Class IIIB.

COMPRESSED GAS.

CONTROL AREA.

CORROSIVE.

CRYOGENIC FLUID.

DAY BOX.

DEFLAGRATION.

DETONATION.

DISPENSING.

EXPLOSION.

EXPLOSIVE.

High explosive.

Low explosive.

Mass-detonating explosives.

UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives.

Division 1.1.

Division 1.2.

Division 1.3.

Division 1.4.

Division 1.5.

Division 1.6.

FIREWORKS.

Fireworks, 1.3G.

Fireworks, 1.4G.

FLAMMABLE GAS.

FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS.

FLAMMABLE LIQUID.

Class IA.

Class IB.

Class IC.

FLAMMABLE MATERIAL.

FLAMMABLE SOLID.

FLASH POINT.

HANDLING.

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.

HEALTH HAZARD.

HIGHLY TOXIC.

INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS.

INERT GAS.

OPEN SYSTEM.

OPERATING BUILDING.

ORGANIC PEROXIDE.

Class I.

Class II.

Class III.

Class IV.

Class V.

Unclassified detonable.

OXIDIZER.

Class 4.

Class 3.

Class 2.

Class 1.

OXIDIZING GAS.

PHYSICAL HAZARD.

PYROPHORIC.

PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION.

TOXIC.

UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL.

Class 4.

Class 3.

Class 2.

Class 1.

WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL.

Class 3.

Class 2.

Class 1.

[F] 307.3 High-hazard Group H-1.

Buildings and structures containing materials that pose a detonation hazard shall be classified as Group H-1. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Detonable pyrophoric materials

Explosives:

Division 1.1

Division 1.2

Division 1.3

Division 1.4

Division 1.5

Division 1.6

Organic peroxides, unclassified detonable

Oxidizers, Class 4

Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3 detonable and Class 4

[F] 307.3.1 Occupancies containing explosives not classified as H-1.

The following occupancies containing explosive materials shall be classified as follows:

1.	Division 1.3 explosive materials that are used and maintained in a form where either confinement or configuration will not elevate the hazard from a mass fire to mass explosion hazard shall be allowed in H-2 occupancies.

2.	Articles, including articles packaged for shipment, that are not regulated as a Division 1.4 explosive under Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives regulations, or unpackaged articles used in process operations that do not propagate a detonation or deflagration between articles shall be allowed in H-3 occupancies.

[F] 307.4 High-hazard Group H-2.

Buildings and structures containing materials that pose a deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning shall be classified as Group H-2. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids that are used or stored in normally open containers or systems, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at more than 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103.4 kPa).

Combustible dusts where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3.

Cryogenic fluids, flammable.

Flammable gases.

Organic peroxides, Class I.

Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally open containers or systems, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at more than 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103 kPa).

Pyrophoric liquids, solids and gases, nondetonable.

Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3, nondetonable.

Water-reactive materials, Class 3.

[F] 307.5 High-hazard Group H-3.

Buildings and structures containing materials that readily support combustion or that pose a physical hazard shall be classified as Group H-3. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids that are used or stored in normally closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103.4 kPa) or less.

Combustible fibers, other than densely packed baled cotton, where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3.

Consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common)

Cryogenic fluids, oxidizing

Flammable solids

Organic peroxides, Class II and III

Oxidizers, Class 2

Oxidizers, Class 3, that are used or stored in normally closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103 kPa) or less

Oxidizing gases

Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 2

Water-reactive materials, Class 2

[F] 307.6 High-hazard Group H-4.

Buildings and structures containing materials that are health hazards shall be classified as Group H-4. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Corrosives

Highly toxic materials

Toxic materials

[F] 307.7 High-hazard Group H-5.

Semiconductor fabrication facilities and comparable research and development areas in which hazardous production materials (HPM) are used and the aggregate quantity of materials is in excess of those listed in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) shall be classified as Group H-5. Such facilities and areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 415.11.

[F] 307.8 Multiple hazards.

Buildings and structures containing a material or materials representing hazards that are classified in one or more of Groups H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-4 shall conform to the code requirements for each of the occupancies so classified.

SECTION 308
INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I
308.1 Institutional Group I.

Institutional Group I occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, in which care or supervision is provided to persons who are or are not capable of self-preservation without physical assistance or in which persons are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the occupants is restricted. Institutional occupancies shall be classified as Group I-1, I-2, I-3 or I-4.

308.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

24-HOUR BASIS.

CUSTODIAL CARE.

DETOXIFICATION FACILITIES.

FOSTER CARE FACILITIES.

HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS.

INCAPABLE OF SELF-PRESERVATION.

MEDICAL CARE.

NURSING HOMES.

308.3 Institutional Group I-1.

Institutional Group I-1 occupancy shall include buildings, structures or portions thereof for more than 16 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24-hour basis in a supervised environment and receive custodial care. Buildings of Group I-1 shall be classified as one of the occupancy conditions specified in Section 308.3.1 or 308.3.2. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Alcohol and drug centers

Assisted living facilities

Congregate care facilities

Group homes

Halfway houses

Residential board and care facilities

Social rehabilitation facilities

308.3.1 Condition 1.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which all persons receiving custodial care who, without any assistance, are capable of responding to an emergency situation to complete building evacuation.

308.3.2 Condition 2.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which there are any persons receiving custodial care who require limited verbal or physical assistance while responding to an emergency situation to complete building evacuation.

308.3.3 Six to 16 persons receiving custodial care.

A facility housing not fewer than six and not more than 16 persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as Group R-4.

308.3.4 Five or fewer persons receiving custodial care.

A facility with five or fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

308.4 Institutional Group I-2.

Institutional Group I-2 occupancy shall include buildings and structures used for medical care on a 24-hour basis for more than five persons who are incapable of self-preservation. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Foster care facilities

Detoxification facilities

Hospitals

Nursing homes

Psychiatric hospitals

308.4.1 Occupancy conditions.

Buildings of Group I-2 shall be classified as one of the occupancy conditions specified in Section 308.4.1.1 or 308.4.1.2.

308.4.1.1 Condition 1.

This occupancy condition shall include facilities that provide nursing and medical care but do not provide emergency care, surgery, obstetrics or in-patient stabilization units for psychiatric or detoxification, including but not limited to nursing homes and foster care facilities.

308.4.1.2 Condition 2.

This occupancy condition shall include facilities that provide nursing and medical care and could provide emergency care, surgery, obstetrics or in-patient stabilization units for psychiatric or detoxification, including but not limited to hospitals.

308.4.2 Five or fewer persons receiving medical care.

A facility with five or fewer persons receiving medical care shall be classified as Group R-3 or shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

308.5 Institutional Group I-3.

Institutional Group I-3 occupancy shall include buildings and structures that are inhabited by more than five persons who are under restraint or security. A Group I-3 facility is occupied by persons who are generally incapable of self-preservation due to security measures not under the occupants’ control. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Correctional centers

Detention centers

Jails

Prerelease centers

Prisons

Reformatories

Buildings of Group I-3 shall be classified as one of the occupancy conditions specified in Sections 308.5.1 through 308.5.5 (see Section 408).

308.5.1 Condition 1.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is allowed from sleeping areas, and other spaces where access or occupancy is permitted, to the exterior via means of egress without restraint. A Condition 1 facility is permitted to be constructed as Group R.

308.5.2 Condition 2.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is allowed from sleeping areas and any other occupied smoke compartment to one or more other smoke compartments. Egress to the exterior is impeded by locked exits.

308.5.3 Condition 3.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is allowed within individual smoke compartments, such as within a residential unit comprised of individual sleeping units and group activity spaces, where egress is impeded by remote-controlled release of means of egress from such a smoke compartment to another smoke compartment.

308.5.4 Condition 4.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is restricted from an occupied space. Remote-controlled release is provided to permit movement from sleeping units, activity spaces and other occupied areas within the smoke compartment to other smoke compartments.

308.5.5 Condition 5.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which free movement is restricted from an occupied space. Staff-controlled manual release is provided to permit movement from sleeping units, activity spaces and other occupied areas within the smoke compartment to other smoke compartments.

308.6 Institutional Group I-4, day care facilities.

Institutional Group I-4 occupancy shall include buildings and structures occupied by more than five persons of any age who receive custodial care for fewer than 24 hours per day by persons other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood, marriage or adoption, and in a place other than the home of the person cared for. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Adult day care

Child day care

308.6.1 Classification as Group E.

A child day care facility that provides care for more than five but not more than 100 children 21/2 years or less of age, where the rooms in which the children are cared for are located on a level of exit discharge serving such rooms and each of these child care rooms has an exit door directly to the exterior, shall be classified as Group E.

308.6.2 Within a place of religious worship.

Rooms and spaces within places of religious worship providing such care during religious functions shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy.

308.6.3 Five or fewer persons receiving care.

A facility having five or fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy.

308.6.4 Five or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit.

A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having five or fewer persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential.

SECTION 309
MERCANTILE GROUP M
309.1 Mercantile Group M.

Mercantile Group M occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure or a portion thereof for the display and sale of merchandise, and involves stocks of goods, wares or merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public. Mercantile occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Department stores

Drug stores

Markets

Motor fuel-dispensing facilities

Retail or wholesale stores

Sales rooms

309.2 Quantity of hazardous materials.

The aggregate quantity of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials stored or displayed in a single control area of a Group M occupancy shall not exceed the quantities in Table 414.2.5(1).

SECTION 310
RESIDENTIAL GROUP R
310.1 Residential Group R.

Residential Group R includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for sleeping purposes when not classified as an Institutional Group I or when not regulated by the Florida Building Code, Residential.

310.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

BOARDING HOUSE.

CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES.

DORMITORY.

GROUP HOME.

GUEST ROOM.

LODGING HOUSE.

PERSONAL CARE SERVICE.

TRANSIENT.

310.3 Residential Group R-1.

Residential Group R-1 occupancies containing sleeping units where the occupants are primarily transient in nature, including:

Boarding houses (transient) with more than 10 occupants

Congregate living facilities (transient) with more than 10 occupants

Hotels (transient)

Motels (transient)

310.4 Residential Group R-2.

Residential Group R-2 occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature, including:

Apartment houses

Boarding houses (nontransient)

Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with more than 16 occupants

Convents

Dormitories

Fraternities and sororities

Hotels (nontransient)

Live/work units

Monasteries

Motels (nontransient)

Vacation timeshare properties

310.5 Residential Group R-3.

Residential Group R-3 occupancies where the occupants are primarily permanent in nature and not classified as Group R-1, R-2, R-4 or I, including:

Buildings that do not contain more than two dwelling units

Boarding houses (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants

Boarding houses (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants

Care facilities that provide accommodations for five or fewer persons receiving care

Congregate living facilities (nontransient) with 16 or fewer occupants

Congregate living facilities (transient) with 10 or fewer occupants

Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms and 10 or fewer occupants

310.5.1 Care facilities within a dwelling.

Care facilities for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family dwelling are permitted to comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential provided an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

310.5.2 Lodging houses.

Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms and 10 or fewer occupants shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential, provided that an automatic sprinkler system is installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

310.6 Residential Group R-4.

Residential Group R-4 occupancy shall include buildings, structures or portions thereof for more than five but not more than 16 persons, excluding staff, who reside on a 24-hour basis in a supervised residential environment and receive custodial care. Buildings of Group R-4 shall be classified as one of the occupancy conditions specified in Section 310.6.1 or 310.6.2. This group shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Alcohol and drug centers

Assisted living facilities

Congregate care facilities

Group homes

Halfway houses

Residential board and custodial care facilities

Social rehabilitation facilities

Group R-4 occupancies shall meet the requirements for construction as defined for Group R-3, except as otherwise provided for in this code or shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Residential provided the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

310.6.1 Condition 1.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which all persons receiving custodial care, without any assistance, are capable of responding to an emergency situation to complete building evacuation.

310.6.2 Condition 2.

This occupancy condition shall include buildings in which there are any persons receiving custodial care who require limited verbal or physical assistance while responding to an emergency situation to complete building evacuation.

SECTION 311
STORAGE GROUP S
311.1 Storage Group S.

Storage Group S occupancy includes, among others, the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for storage that is not classified as a hazardous occupancy.

311.1.1 Accessory storage spaces.

A room or space used for storage purposes that is accessory to another occupancy shall be classified as part of that occupancy.

311.2 Moderate-hazard storage, Group S-1.

Storage Group S-1 occupancies are buildings occupied for storage uses that are not classified as Group S-2, including, but not limited to, storage of the following:

Aerosol products, Levels 2 and 3

Aircraft hangar (storage and repair)

Bags: cloth, burlap and paper

Bamboos and rattan

Baskets

Belting: canvas and leather

Books and paper in rolls or packs

Boots and shoes

Buttons, including cloth covered, pearl or bone

Cardboard and cardboard boxes

Clothing, woolen wearing apparel

Cordage

Dry boat storage (indoor)

Furniture

Furs

Glues, mucilage, pastes and size

Grains

Horns and combs, other than celluloid

Leather

Linoleum

Lumber

Motor vehicle repair garages complying with the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials listed in Table 307.1(1) (see Section 406.8)

Photo engravings

Resilient flooring

Silks

Soaps

Sugar

Tires, bulk storage of

Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff

Upholstery and mattresses

Wax candles

311.3 Low-hazard storage, Group S-2.

Storage Group S-2 occupancies include, among others, buildings used for the storage of noncombustible materials such as products on wood pallets or in paper cartons with or without single thickness divisions; or in paper wrappings. Such products are permitted to have a negligible amount of plastic trim, such as knobs, handles or film wrapping. Group S-2 storage uses shall include, but not be limited to, storage of the following:

Asbestos

Beverages up to and including 16-percent alcohol in metal, glass or ceramic containers

Cement in bags

Chalk and crayons

Dairy products in nonwaxed coated paper containers

Dry cell batteries

Electrical coils

Electrical motors

Empty cans

Food products

Foods in noncombustible containers

Fresh fruits and vegetables in nonplastic trays or containers

Frozen foods

Glass

Glass bottles, empty or filled with noncombustible liquids

Gypsum board

Inert pigments

Ivory

Meats

Metal cabinets

Metal desks with plastic tops and trim

Metal parts

Metals

Mirrors

Oil-filled and other types of distribution transformers

Parking garages, open or enclosed

Porcelain and pottery

Stoves

Talc and soapstones

Washers and dryers

SECTION 312
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS GROUP U
312.1 General.

Buildings and structures of an accessory character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the requirements of this code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

Agricultural buildings

Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family residence (see Section 412.5)

Barns

Carports

Communication equipment structures with a gross floor area of less than 1,500 square feet (139 m2).

Fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) in height

Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy

Greenhouses Livestock shelters

Private garages

Retaining walls

Sheds

Stables

Tanks

Towers

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-30]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 30
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS
SECTION 3001
GENERAL
3001.1 Scope.

This chapter governs the design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of elevators and conveying systems and their components.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See the Department of Business and Professional Regulation [DBPR] Chapter 399, Florida Statutes, and Rule 61C-5, Florida Administrative Code. The regulation and enforcement of the following sections of the adopted codes, and their addenda, are preempted to the Bureau of Elevator Safety of the Department of Business and Professional regulation: ASME A17.1, ASME A17.3 and ASME A18.1

3001.2 Referenced standards.

Except as otherwise provided for in this code, the design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of elevators and conveying systems and their components shall conform to the applicable standard specified in Table 3001.2 and ASCE 24 for construction in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3. The Division of Hotels and Restaurants may grant variances and waivers to the Elevator Safety Code as authorized by the Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1, Section 1.2) and Florida Statutes (Chapter 120 and Chapter 399.)

TABLE 3001.2

STANDARDS FOR ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS

TYPE	STANDARD
Elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters, moving walks, material lifts	ASME A17.1/CSA B44, ASME A17.6, ASME A17.7/CSA B44.7
Existing elevators and escalators	ASME A17.3
Platform lifts, stairway chairlifts, wheelchair lifts	ASME A18.1
Belt manlifts	ASME A90.1
Conveyors and related equipment	ASME B20.1
Industrial scissors lifts	ANSI MH29.1
Automotive lifts	ALI ALCTV
3001.3 Accessibility.

Passenger elevators are required to be accessible by the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

3001.4 Change in use.

A change in use of an elevator from freight to passenger, passenger to freight, or from one freight class to another freight class shall comply with Section 8.7 of ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

3001.5 Design, installation and alteration of elevators.
3001.5.1

Each new elevator shall comply with the Florida Elevator Safety Code that was in effect at the time of receipt of application for the construction permit for the elevator.

3001.5.2

Each alteration to, or relocation of, an elevator shall comply with the Florida Elevator Safety Code that was in effect at the time of receipt of the application for the construction permit for the alteration or relocation.

3001.5.3

All existing elevators shall comply with ASME A17.3.

3001.6

As used in this chapter, the term:

ALTERATION. Any change to equipment, including its parts, components, and/or subsystems, other than maintenance, repair, or replacement.

CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION. A document issued by the department which indicates that the conveyance has had the required safety inspection and tests and that fees have been paid as provided in Chapter 399, Florida Statutes.

CONVEYANCE. An elevator, dumbwaiter, escalator, moving sidewalk, platform lift and stairway chairlift.

DEPARTMENT. For the purpose of this section, the Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

DIVISION. For the purpose of this section, the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

ELEVATOR. One of the following mechanical devices:

(a)	A hoisting and lowering mechanism, equipped with a car and platform that moves in guide rails and serves two or more landings to transport material or passengers or both.

(b)	An escalator, which is a power-driven, inclined continuous stairway used for raising or lowering passengers.

(c)	A dumbwaiter, which is a hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a car of limited size which moves in guide rails and serves two or more landings.

(d)	A moving walk, which is a type of passenger-carrying device on which passengers stand or walk and in which the passenger-carrying surface remains parallel to its direction of motion and is uninterrupted.

(e)	An inclined stairway chairlift, which is a device used to transport physically handicapped persons over architectural barriers.

(f)	An inclined or vertical wheelchair lift, which is a device used to transport wheelchair handicapped persons over architectural barriers.

Exceptions:

1.	Personnel hoists and material hoists within the scope of ASME A10.

2.	Man lifts within the scope of ASME A90.1.

3.	Mobile scaffolds, towers, and platforms within the scope of ANSI A92.

4.	Powered platforms and equipment for exterior and interior maintenance within the scope of ASME A120.1.

5.	Conveyors and related equipment within the scope of ASME B20.1.

6.	Cranes, derricks, hoists, hooks, jacks and slings within the scope of ASME B30.

7.	Industrial trucks within the scope of ASME B56.

8.	Portable equipment, except for portable escalators that are covered by this code.

9.	Tiered or piling machines used to move materials to and from storage located and operating entirely within one story.

10.	Equipment for feeding or positioning materials at machine tools and printing presses.

11.	Skip or furnace hoists.

12.	Wharf ramps.

13.	Railroad car lifts or dumpers.

14.	Line jacks, false cars, shafters, moving platforms and similar equipment used for installing an elevator by a contractor licensed in this state.

15.	Automated people movers at airports.

16.	Elevators in television and radio towers.

17.	Hand-operated dumbwaiters.

18.	Sewage pump station lifts.

19.	Automobile parking lifts.

20.	Equipment covered in Section 1.1.2 of the ASME A17.1 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators.

21.	Elevators, inclined stairway chairlifts, and inclined or vertical wheelchair lifts located in private residences.

ESCALATOR. An installation defined as an escalator in the Florida Building Code.

EXISTING INSTALLATION. An installation defined as an “installation, existing” in the Florida Building Code.

PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A separate dwelling or a separate apartment in a multiple dwelling which is occupied by members of a single family.

SECTION 3002
HOISTWAY ENCLOSURES
3002.1 Hoistway enclosure protection.

Elevator, dumbwaiter and other hoistway enclosures shall be shaft enclosures complying with Sections 712 and 713.

3002.1.1 Opening protectives.

Openings in hoistway enclosures shall be protected as required in Chapter 7.

Exception: The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway enclosure doors at the floor level designated for recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be permitted to remain open during Phase I Emergency Recall Operation.

3002.1.2 Hardware.

Hardware on opening protectives shall be of an approved type installed as tested, except that approved interlocks, mechanical locks and electric contacts, door and gate electric contacts and door-operating mechanisms shall be exempt from the fire test requirements.

3002.2 Number of elevator cars in a hoistway.

Where four or more elevator cars serve all or the same portion of a building, the elevators shall be located in not fewer than two separate hoistways. Not more than four elevator cars shall be located in any single hoistway enclosure.

3002.3 Emergency signs.

An approved pictorial sign of a standardized design shall be posted adjacent to each elevator call station on all floors instructing occupants to use the exit stairways and not to use the elevators in case of fire. The sign shall read: IN CASE OF FIRE, ELEVATORS ARE OUT OF SERVICE. USE EXIT STAIRS.

Exceptions:

1.	The emergency sign shall not be required for elevators that are part of an accessible means of egress complying with Section 1009.

2.	The emergency sign shall not be required for elevators that are used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance with Section 3008.

3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher.

Any building that is more than three stories high or in which the vertical distance between the bottom terminal landing and the top terminal landing exceeds 25 feet (7620 mm), must be constructed to contain at least one passenger elevator that is operational for building occupants and fire department emergency access to all floors. The elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 24 inches by 76 inches (610 mm by 1950 mm) with not less than 5-inch (127 mm) radius corners, in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway door frame.

3002.5 Emergency doors.

Where an elevator is installed in a single blind hoistway or on the outside of a building, there shall be installed in the blind portion of the hoistway or blank face of the building, an emergency door in accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

3002.6 Prohibited doors.

Doors, other than hoistway doors and the elevator car door, shall be prohibited at the point of access to an elevator car unless such doors are readily openable from the car side without a key, tool, special knowledge or effort.

3002.7 Common enclosure with stairway.

Elevators shall not be in a common shaft enclosure with a stairway.

Exception: Elevators within open parking garages need not be separated from stairway enclosures.

3002.8 Glass in elevator enclosures.

Glass in elevator enclosures shall comply with Section 2409.2.

3002.9 Plumbing and mechanical systems.

Plumbing and mechanical systems shall not be located in an elevator hoistway enclosure.

Exception: Floor drains, sumps and sump pumps shall be permitted at the base of the hoistway enclosure provided they are indirectly connected to the plumbing system.

3002.10

Automatic fire alarm initiating devices shall be located and installed in accordance with ASME A17.1 and NFPA 72.

SECTION 3003
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
[F] 3003.1 Standby power.

In buildings and structures where standby power is required or furnished to operate an elevator, the operation shall be in accordance with Sections 3003.1.1 through 3003.1.4.

[F] 3003.1.1 Manual transfer.

Standby power shall be manually transferable to all elevators in each bank.

[F] 3003.1.2 One elevator.

Where only one elevator is installed, the elevator shall automatically transfer to standby power within 60 seconds after failure of normal power.

[F] 3003.1.3 Two or more elevators.

Where two or more elevators are controlled by a common operating system, all elevators shall automatically transfer to standby power within 60 seconds after failure of normal power where the standby power source is of sufficient capacity to operate all elevators at the same time. Where the standby power source is not of sufficient capacity to operate all elevators at the same time, all elevators shall transfer to standby power in sequence, return to the designated landing and disconnect from the standby power source. After all elevators have been returned to the designated level, at least one elevator shall remain operable from the standby power source.

[F] 3003.1.4 Venting.

Where standby power is connected to elevators, the machine room ventilation or air conditioning shall be connected to the standby power source.

[F] 3003.2 Fire fighters’ emergency operation.

Elevators shall be provided with Phase I emergency recall operation and Phase II emergency in-car operation in accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

[F] 3003.3 Seven fire service elevator keys.

All elevators that operate in a building that is six or more stories in height shall be equipped to operate with one of seven emergency response region elevator keys in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 3004
CONVEYING SYSTEMS
3004.1 General.

Escalators, moving walks, conveyors, personnel hoists and material hoists shall comply with the provisions of Sections 3004.2 through 3004.4.

3004.2 Escalators and moving walks.

Escalators and moving walks shall be constructed of approved noncombustible and fire-retardant materials. This requirement shall not apply to electrical equipment, wiring, wheels, handrails and the use of 1/28-inch (0.9 mm) wood veneers on balustrades backed up with noncombustible materials.

3004.2.1 Enclosure.

Escalator floor openings shall be enclosed with shaft enclosures complying with Section 713.

3004.2.2 Escalators.

Where provided in below-grade transportation stations, escalators shall have a clear width of not less than 32 inches (815 mm).

3004.3 Conveyors.

Conveyors and conveying systems shall comply with ASME B20.1.

3004.3.1 Enclosure.

Conveyors and related equipment connecting successive floors or levels shall be enclosed with shaft enclosures complying with Section 713.

3004.3.2 Conveyor safeties.

Power-operated conveyors, belts and other material-moving devices shall be equipped with automatic limit switches that will shut off the power in an emergency and automatically stop all operation of the device.

3004.4 Personnel and material hoists.

Personnel and material hoists shall be designed utilizing an approved method that accounts for the conditions imposed during the intended operation of the hoist device. The design shall include, but isnot limited to, anticipated loads, structural stability, impact, vibration, and stresses. The design shall account for the construction, installation, operation and inspection of the hoist tower, car, machinery and control equipment, guide members and hoisting mechanism. Additionally, the design of personnel hoists shall include provisions for field testing and maintenance that will demonstrate that the hoist device functions in accordance with the design. Field tests shall be conducted upon the completion of an installation or following a major alteration of a personnel hoist.

SECTION 3005
MACHINE ROOMS
3005.1 Access.

An approved means of access shall be provided to elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces.

3005.2 Venting.

Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces that contain the driving machine, and control rooms or spaces that contain the operation or motion controller for elevator operation shall be provided with an independent ventilation or air-conditioning system to protect against the overheating of the electrical equipment. The system shall be capable of maintaining temperatures within the range established for the elevator equipment.

3005.3 Pressurization.

The elevator machine room, control rooms or control space with openings into a pressurized elevator hoistway shall be pressurized upon activation of a heat or smoke detector located in the elevator machine room, control room or control space.

3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces, and control spaces.

The following rooms and spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both:

1.	Machine rooms.

2.	Control rooms.

3.	Control spaces.

4.	Machinery spaces outside of the hoistway enclosure.

The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than the required rating of the hoistway enclosure served by the machinery. Openings in the fire barriers shall be protected with assemblies having a fire protection rating not less than that required for the hoistway enclosure doors.

Exceptions:

1.	For other than fire service access elevators and occupant evacuation elevators, where machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces do not abut and have no openings to the hoistway enclosure they serve, the fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, shall be permitted to be reduced to a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

2.	For other than fire service access elevators and occupant evacuation elevators, in buildings four stories or less above grade plane where machine room, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces do not abut and have no openings to the hoistway enclosure they serve, the machine room, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces are not required to be fire-resistance rated.

3005.5 Shunt trip.

Where elevator hoistways, elevator machine rooms, control rooms and control spaces containing elevator control equipment are protected with automatic sprinklers, a means installed in accordance with Section 21.4 of NFPA 72 shall be provided to disconnect automatically the main line power supply to the affected elevator prior to the application of water. This means shall not be self-resetting. The activation of automatic sprinklers outside the hoistway, machine room, machinery space, control room or control space shall not disconnect the main line power supply.

3005.6 Plumbing systems.

Plumbing systems shall not be located in elevator equipment rooms.

SECTION 3006
ELEVATOR LOBBIES AND
HOISTWAY OPENING PROTECTION
3006.1 General.

Elevator hoistway openings and enclosed elevator lobbies shall be provided in accordance with the following:

1.	Where hoistway opening protection is required by Section 3006.2, such protection shall be in accordance with Section 3006.3.

2.	Where enclosed elevator lobbies are required for underground buildings, such lobbies shall comply with Section 405.4.3.

3.	Where an area of refuge is required and an enclosed elevator lobby is provided to serve as an area of refuge, the enclosed elevator lobby shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

4.	Where fire service access elevators are provided, enclosed elevator lobbies shall comply with Section 3007.6.

5.	Where occupant evacuation elevators are provided, enclosed elevator lobbies shall comply with Section 3008.6.

3006.2 Hoistway opening protection required.

Elevator hoistway door openings shall be protected in accordance with Section 3006.3 where an elevator hoistway connects more than three stories, is required to be enclosed within a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 712.1.1 and any of the following conditions apply:

1.	The building is not protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.	The building contains a Group I-1 Condition 2 occupancy.

3.	The building contains a Group I-2 occupancy.

4.	The building contains a Group I-3 occupancy.

5.	The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor to the highest floor of the floors served by the hoistway.

Exceptions:

1.	Protection of elevator hoistway door openings is not required where the elevator serves only open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.

2.	Protection of elevator hoistway door openings is not required at the level(s) of exit discharge, provided the level(s) of exit discharge is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	Enclosed elevator lobbies and protection of elevator hoistway door openings are not required on levels where the elevator hoistway opens to the exterior.

3006.3 Hoistway opening protection.

Where Section 3006.2 requires protection of the elevator hoistway door opening, the protection shall be provided by one of the following:

1.	An enclosed elevator lobby shall be provided at each floor to separate the elevator hoistway shaft enclosure doors from each floor by fire partitions in accordance with Section 708. In addition, doors protecting openings in the elevator lobby enclosure walls shall comply with Section 716.5.3 as required for corridor walls. Penetrations of the enclosed elevator lobby by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected as required for corridors in accordance with Section 717.5.4.1.

2.	An enclosed elevator lobby shall be provided at each floor to separate the elevator hoistway shaft enclosure doors from each floor by smoke partitions in accordance with Section 710 where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. In addition, doors protecting openings in the smoke partitions shall comply with Sections 710.5.2.2, 710.5.2.3 and 716.5.9. Penetrations of the enclosed elevator lobby by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected as required for corridors in accordance with Section 717.5.4.1.

3.	Additional doors shall be provided at each elevator hoistway door opening in accordance with Section 3002.6. Such door shall comply with the smoke and draft control door assembly requirements in Section 716.5.3.1 when tested in accordance with UL 1784 without an artificial bottom seal.

4.	The elevator hoistway shall be pressurized in accordance with Section 909.21.

5.	A smoke protective curtain assembly for hoistways shall be provided at each elevator hoistway door opening in accordance with Section 3002.6. Such curtain assemblies shall comply with the smoke and draft control requirements in Section 716.5.3.1 when tested in accordance with UL 1784 without an artificial bottom seal. Such curtain assemblies shall be equipped with a control unit listed to UL 864. Such curtain assemblies shall comply with section 2.11.6.3 of ASME A17.1/CSA B44. Installation and maintenance shall be in accordance with NFPA 105.

3006.4 Means of egress.

Elevator lobbies shall be provided with at least one means of egress complying with Chapter 10 and other provisions in this code. Egress through an elevator lobby shall be permitted in accordance with Item 1 of Section 1016.2. Electrically locked exit access doors providing egress from elevator lobbies shall be permitted in accordance with Section 1010.2.16.

SECTION 3007
FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATOR
3007.1 General.

Where required by Section 403.6.1, every floor above and including the lowest level of fire department vehicle access of the building shall be served by fire service access elevators complying with Sections 3007.1 through 3007.9. Except as modified in this section, fire service access elevators shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

Exceptions:

1.	Elevators that only service an open or enclosed parking garage and the lobby of the building shall not be required to serve as fire service access elevators

2.	The elevator shall not be required to serve the top floor of a building where that floor is utilized only for equipment for building systems.

3007.2 Automatic sprinkler system.

The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3007.2.1.

3007.2.1 Prohibited locations.

Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoistways of fire service access elevators.

3007.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring.

The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow-initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building’s fire alarm system.

3007.3 Water protection.

Water from the operation of an automatic sprinkler system outside the enclosed lobby shall be prevented from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure in accordance with an approved method.

3007.4 Shunt trip.

Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed on elevator systems used for fire service access elevators.

3007.5 Hoistway enclosures.

The fire service access elevator hoistway shall be located in a shaft enclosure complying with Section 713.

3007.5.1 Structural integrity of hoistway enclosures.

The fire service access elevator hoistway enclosure shall comply with Sections 403.2.3.1 through 403.2.3.4.

3007.5.2 Hoistway lighting.

When fire-fighters’ emergency operation is active, the entire height of the hoistway shall be illuminated at not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) as measured from the top of the car of each fire service access elevator.

3007.6 Fire service access elevator lobby.

The fire service access elevator shall open into a fire service access elevator lobby in accordance with Sections 3007.6.1 through 3007.6.5. Egress is permitted through the elevator lobby in accordance with Item 1 of Section 1016.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Where a fire service access elevator has two entrances onto a floor, the second entrance shall be permitted to open into an elevator lobby in accordance with Section 3006.1.

2.	Where a fire service access elevator is required, a 1-hour fire-rated fire service access elevator lobby with direct access from the fire service access elevator is not required if the fire service access elevator opens into an exit access corridor that is no less than 6 feet wide for its entire length and is at least 150 square feet with the exception of door openings, and has a minimum 1-hour fire rating with three-quarter hour fire- and smoke-rated openings; and during a fire event the fire service access elevator is pressurized and floor-to-floor smoke control is provided.

Exception: Where transient residential occupancies occur at floor levels more than 420 feet above the level of fire service access, a 1-hour fire-rated service access elevator lobby with direct access from the fire service access elevator is required.

3007.6.1 Access to interior exit stairway or ramp.

The fire service access elevator lobby shall have direct access from the enclosed elevator lobby to an enclosure for an interior exit stairway or ramp.

Exception: Access to an interior exit stairway or ramp shall be permitted to be through a protected path of travel that has a level of fire protection not less than the elevator lobby enclosure. The protected path shall be separated from the enclosed elevator lobby through an opening protected by a smoke and draft control assembly in accordance Section 716.5.3.

3007.6.2 Lobby enclosure.

The fire service access elevator lobby shall be enclosed with a smoke barrier having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour, except that lobby doorways shall comply with Section 3007.6.3.

Exception: Enclosed fire service access elevator lobbies are not required at the levels of exit discharge.

3007.6.3 Lobby doorways.

Other than doors to the hoistway, elevator control room or elevator control space, each doorway to a fire service access elevator lobby shall be provided with a 3/4-hour fire door assembly complying with Section 716. The fire door assembly shall comply with the smoke and draft control door assembly requirements of Section 716.5.3.1, and be tested in accordance with UL 1784 without an artificial bottom seal.

3007.6.4 Lobby size.

Regardless of the number of fire service access elevators served by the same elevator lobby, the enclosed fire service access elevator lobby shall be not less than 150 square feet (14 m2) in an area with a dimension of not less than 8 feet (2440 mm).

3007.6.5 Fire service access elevator symbol.

A pictorial symbol of a standardized design designating which elevators are fire service access elevators shall be installed on each side of the hoistway door frame on the portion of the frame at right angles to the fire service access elevator lobby. The fire service access elevator symbol shall be designed as shown in Figure 3007.6.5 and shall comply with the following:

1.	The fire service access elevator symbol shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height.

2.	The helmet shall contrast with the background, with either a light helmet on a dark background or a dark helmet on a light background.

3.	The vertical center line of the fire service access elevator symbol shall be centered on the hoistway door frame. Each symbol shall be not less than 78 inches (1981 mm), and not more than 84 inches (2134 mm) above the finished floor at the threshold.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 3007.6.5

FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATOR SYMBOL

3007.7 Elevator system monitoring.

The fire service access elevator shall be continuously monitored at the fire command center by a standard emergency service interface system meeting the requirements of NFPA 72.

3007.8 Electrical power.

The following features serving each fire service access elevator shall be supplied by both normal power and Type 60/Class 2/Level 1 standby power:

1.	Elevator equipment.

2.	Elevator hoistway lighting.

3.	Ventilation and cooling equipment for elevator machine rooms, control rooms, machine spaces and control spaces.

4.	Elevator car lighting.

3007.8.1 Protection of wiring or cables.

Wires or cables that are located outside of the elevator hoistway and machine room and that provide normal or standby power, control signals, communication with the car, lighting, heating, air conditioning, ventilation and fire-detecting systems to fire service access elevators shall be protected using one of the following methods:

1.	Cables used for survivability of required critical circuits shall be listed in accordance with UL 2196 and shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

2.	Electrical circuit protective systems shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Electrical circuit protective systems shall be installed in accordance with their listing requirements.

3.	Construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

Exception: Wiring and cables to control signals are not required to be protected provided that wiring and cables do not serve Phase II emergency in-car operations.

3007.9 Standpipe hose connection.

A Class I standpipe hose connection in accordance with Section 905 shall be provided in the interior exit stairway and ramp having direct access from the fire service access elevator lobby.

3007.9.1 Access.

The exit enclosure containing the standpipe shall have access to the floor without passing through the fire service access elevator lobby.

Exception: Group R-1 and R-2 occupancy buildings. Standpipes in high-rise buildings of Group R-1 or R-2 must be located in stairwells and are subject only to the requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipes and Hose Systems, adopted by the State Fire Marshal.

SECTION 3008
OCCUPANT EVACUATION ELEVATORS
3008.1 General.

Elevators used for occupant self-evacuation during fires shall comply with Sections 3008.1 through 3008.10.

3008.1.1 Number of occupant evacuation elevators.

The number of elevators available for occupant evacuation shall be determined based on an egress analysis that addresses one of the following scenarios:

1.	Full building evacuation where the analysis demonstrates that the number of elevators provided for evacuation results in an evacuation time less than 1 hour.

2.	Evacuation of the five consecutive floors with the highest cumulative occupant load where the analysis demonstrates that the number of elevators provided for evacuation results in an evacuation time less than 15 minutes.

A minimum of one elevator in each bank shall be designated for occupant evacuation. Not fewer than two shall be provided in each occupant evacuation elevator lobby where more than one elevator opens into the lobby. Signage shall be provided to denote which elevators are available for occupant evacuation.

3008.1.2 Additional exit stairway.

Where an additional means of egress is required in accordance with Section 403.5.2, an additional exit stairway shall not be required to be installed in buildings provided with occupant evacuation elevators complying with Section 3008.1.

3008.1.3 Fire safety and evacuation plan.

The building shall have an approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The fire safety and evacuation plan shall incorporate specific procedures for the occupants using evacuation elevators.

3008.1.4 Operation.

The occupant evacuation elevators shall be used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance with the occupant evacuation operation requirements in ASME A17.1/CSA B44 and the building’s fire safety and evacuation plan.

3008.2 Automatic sprinkler system.

The building shall be equipped throughout with an approved, electrically supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3008.2.1.

3008.2.1 Prohibited locations.

Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoistways of occupant evacuation elevators.

3008.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring.

The automatic sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow-initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building’s fire alarm system.

3008.3 Water protection.

Water from the operation of an automatic sprinkler system outside the enclosed lobby shall be prevented from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure in accordance with an approved method.

3008.4 Shunt trip.

Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed on elevator systems used for occupant evacuation elevators.

3008.5 Hoistway enclosure protection.

Occupant evacuation elevator hoistways shall be located in shaft enclosures complying with Section 713.

3008.5.1 Structural integrity of hoistway enclosures.

Occupant evacuation elevator hoistway enclosures shall comply with Sections 403.2.3.1 through 403.2.3.4.

3008.6 Occupant evacuation elevator lobby.

Occupant evacuation elevators shall open into an elevator lobby in accordance with Sections 3008.6.1 through 3008.6.6. Egress is permitted through the elevator lobby in accordance with Item 1 of Section 1016.2.

3008.6.1 Access to interior exit stairway or ramp.

The occupant evacuation elevator lobby shall have direct access from the enclosed elevator lobby to an interior exit stairway or ramp.

Exceptions:

1.	Access to an interior exit stairway or ramp shall be permitted to be through a protected path of travel that has a level of fire protection not less than the elevator lobby enclosure. The protected path shall be separated from the enclosed elevator lobby through an opening protected by a smoke and draft control assembly in accordance with Section 716.5.3.

2.	Elevators that only service an open parking garage and the lobby of the building shall not be required to provide direct access in accordance with this section.

3008.6.2 Lobby enclosure.

The occupant evacuation elevator lobby shall be enclosed with a smoke barrier having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour, except that lobby doorways shall comply with Section 3008.6.3.

Exception: Enclosed occupant evacuation elevator lobbies are not required at the levels of exit discharge.

3008.6.3 Lobby doorways.

Other than the doors to the hoistway, elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces within the lobby enclosure smoke barrier, each doorway to an occupant evacuation elevator lobby shall be provided with a 3/4-hour fire door assembly complying with Section 716. The fire door assembly shall comply with the smoke and draft control assembly requirements of Section 716.5.3.1 and shall be tested in accordance with UL 1784 without an artificial bottom seal.

3008.6.3.1 Vision panel.

A vision panel shall be installed in each fire door assembly protecting the lobby doorway. The vision panel shall consist of fire-protection-rated glazing and shall comply with the requirements of Section 716 and shall be located to furnish clear vision of the occupant evacuation elevator lobby.

3008.6.3.2 Door closing.

Each fire door assembly protecting the lobby doorway shall be automatic-closing upon receipt of any fire alarm signal from the emergency voice/alarm communication system serving the building.

3008.6.4 Lobby size.

Each occupant evacuation elevator lobby shall have minimum floor area as follows:

1.	The occupant evacuation elevator lobby floor area shall accommodate, at 3 square feet (0.28 m2) per person, not less than 25 percent of the occupant load of the floor area served by the lobby.

2.	The occupant evacuation elevator lobby floor area shall accommodate one wheelchair space of 30 inches by 48 inches (760 mm by 1220 mm) for each 50 persons, or portion thereof, of the occupant load of the floor area served by the lobby.

Exception: The size of lobbies serving multiple banks of elevators shall have the minimum floor area approved on an individual basis and shall be consistent with the building’s fire safety and evacuation plan.

3008.6.5 Signage.

An approved sign indicating elevators are suitable for occupant self-evacuation shall be posted on all floors adjacent to each elevator call station serving occupant evacuation elevators.

3008.6.6 Two-way communication system.

A two-way communication system shall be provided in each occupant evacuation elevator lobby for the purpose of initiating communication with the fire command center or an alternate location approved by the fire department. The two-way communication system shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 1009.

3008.7 Elevator system monitoring.

The occupant evacuation elevators shall be continuously monitored at the fire command center or a central control point approved by the fire department and arranged to display all of the following information:

1.	Floor location of each elevator car.

2.	Direction of travel of each elevator car.

3.	Status of each elevator car with respect to whether it is occupied.

4.	Status of normal power to the elevator equipment, elevator machinery and electrical apparatus cooling equipment where provided, elevator machine room, control room and control space ventilation and cooling equipment.

5.	Status of standby or emergency power system that provides backup power to the elevator equipment, elevator machinery and electrical cooling equipment where provided, elevator machine room, control room and control space ventilation and cooling equipment.

6.	Activation of any fire alarm initiating device in any elevator lobby, elevator machine room, machine space containing a motor controller or electric driving machine, control space, control room or elevator hoistway.

3008.7.1 Elevator recall.

The fire command center or an alternate location approved by the fire department shall be provided with the means to manually initiate a Phase I Emergency Recall of the occupant evacuation elevators in accordance with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

3008.8 Electrical power.

The following features serving each occupant evacuation elevator shall be supplied by both normal power and Type 60/Class 2/Level 1 standby power:

1.	Elevator equipment.

2.	Ventilation and cooling equipment for elevator machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces.

3.	Elevator car lighting.

3008.8.1 Determination of standby power load.

Standby power loads shall be based upon the determination of the number of occupant evacuation elevators in Section 3008.1.1.

3008.8.2 Protection of wiring or cables.

Wires or cables that are located outside of the elevator hoistway, machine room, control room and control space and that provide normal or standby power, control signals, communication with the car, lighting, heating, air conditioning, ventilation and fire-detecting systems to occupant evacuation elevators shall be protected using one of the following methods:

1.	Cables used for survivability of required critical circuits shall be listed in accordance with UL 2196 and shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

2.	Electrical circuit protective systems shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Electrical circuit protective systems shall be installed in accordance with their listing requirements.

3.	Construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

Exception: Wiring and cables to control signals are not required to be protected provided that wiring and cables do not serve Phase II emergency in-car operation.

3008.9 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.

The building shall be provided with an emergency voice/alarm communication system. The emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be accessible to the fire department. The system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

3008.9.1 Notification appliances.

Not fewer than one audible and one visible notification appliance shall be installed within each occupant evacuation elevator lobby.

3008.10 Hazardous material areas.

No building areas shall contain hazardous materials exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area as addressed in Section 414.2.

SECTION 3009
ELEVATOR ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED
3009.1

In a building having any elevators that do not provide access to every floor level, elevator hallway call buttons on all main levels of ingress and on any floor that is commonly served by more than one group of elevators must be marked with Arabic and braille symbols that indicate floor levels to which access is provided. The symbols must be placed directly above each call button.

3009.2

Each elevator car interior must have a support rail on at least one wall. All support rails must be smooth and have no sharp edges and must not be more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) thick or 21/2 inches (63 mm) in diameter. Support rails must be continuous and a minimum length of 42 inches (1067 mm) overall.

The inside surface of support rails must be 11/2 inches (38 mm) clear of the car wall. The distance from the top of the support rail to the finished car floor must be at least 31 inches (787 mm) and not more than 33 inches (838 mm). Padded or tufted material or decorative materials such as wallpaper, vinyl, cloth or the like may be not be used on support rails.

3009.3

A bench or seat may be installed on the rear wall of the elevator car enclosure, if the bench or seat does not protrude beyond the vertical plane of the elevator car enclosure wall when folded into a recess provided for the bench or seat and, when not in use, the bench or seat automatically folds into the recess. The bench or seat must be capable of supporting a live load of at least 250 pounds (113.4 kg) on any 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) area. A padded, tufted or other decorative material may not be used to cover the bench or seat; or may the bench or seat encroach on the minimum clear inside-car dimensions specified in this section.

This section applies only to elevators available for the transportation of the public. This section does not apply to elevators restricted by key or similar device to a limited number of persons in a building that has an elevator that otherwise meets the requirements of this section or to elevators used only for the transportation of freight. However, elevators that are used as freight and passenger elevators for the public and employees must comply with this section. This section does not apply to dumbwaiters or escalators.

This section supersedes all other state regulations and local ordinances and rules affecting the accessibility of passenger elevators to the physically handicapped, and the standards established by this section may not be modified by municipal or county ordinance.

SECTION 3010
SERIAL NUMBERS
3010.1 Serial numbers.

Each elevator shall have a serial number assigned by the division or authority having jurisdiction painted on or attached to the elevator car in plain view and also to the driving mechanism. This serial number shall be shown on all required certificates and permits.

3010.1.1

Certificates of operation must be posted in a conspicuous location in the elevator and shall contain the text of Section 823.12, Florida Statutes relating to the prohibition against smoking in elevators. The certificate must be framed with a transparent cover.

3010.1.2

The designation “NO SMOKING” along with the international symbol for no smoking shall be conspicuously displayed within the interior of the elevator in the plain view of the public.

3010.1.3

The following ASME A17.1 and ASME A17.3 rules are hereby amended to read as follows:

a.	Rule 2.29.1.1 of ASME A17.1 is amended to add the following to the rule: “Each car in a multicar group shall be sequentially identified from left to right, as viewed from the elevator lobby.”

b.	Rule 2.7.3.1.1 of ASME A17.1 is amended to add the following to the rule: “The key to the machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces shall be kept on the premises at all times and be readily available for use by State of Florida Certified Elevator Inspectors.”

c.	Rule 3.11.3 of ASME A17.3 is amended to read as follows:

Note: Updates to the Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators ASME A17.1 and ASME A17.3 which require Phase II Firefighters’ Service shall apply except where Section 399.02(9) Florida Statutes states Phase II Firefighters’ Service on elevators may not be enforced until the elevator is replaced or requires major modification, whichever occurs first, on elevators in condominiums or multifamily residential buildings, including those that are part of a continuing care facility licensed under Chapter 651, or similar retirement community with apartments, having a certificate of occupancy by the local building authority that was issued before July 1, 2008. This exception does not prevent an elevator owner from requesting a variance from the applicable codes. This subsection does not prohibit the division from granting variances pursuant to Section 120.542, Florida Statutes.

SECTION 3011
ELECTROLYSIS PROTECTION FOR
UNDERGROUND HYDRAULIC ELEVATOR
CYLINDERS
3011.1 Electrolysis protection for underground hydraulic elevator cylinders.

All newly installed underground hydraulic pressure cylinders shall be encased in outer plastic containment to minimize electrolytic corrosion between the metal cylinder and ground cathode.

3011.1.1

The plastic casing shall be capped at the bottom, and all joints must be solvent or heat welded to ensure water tightness.

3011.1.2

The plastic casing shall be constructed of polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride (PVC). The plastic pipe wall thickness must not be less than 0.125 inch (3.175 mm).

3011.1.3

The neck of the plastic casing shall have a means of inspection provided to monitor the annulus between the pressurized hydraulic cylinder and the protective plastic casing.

3011.1.4

Replacements of existing hydraulic cylinders shall be protected by the aforementioned method where existing physical dimensions permit.

SECTION 3012
ALTERATIONS TO ELECTRIC AND HYDRAULIC
ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS
3012.1 Alterations to electric and hydraulic elevators and escalators.

Alterations set forth in Part 8, ASME A17.1 to include any change to equipment, including its parts, components, and/or subsystems, other than maintenance, repair, or replacement; require an elevator construction permit, along with documented performance of inspections and tests to determine conformance with ASME A17.1. A repair or replacement of equipment, parts, components or subsystems that requires inspection, tests and independent witnessing in other sections of ASME A17.1, A17.3 and A18.1 shall require an elevator construction permit.

SECTION 3013
CLEARANCE REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN
ELEVATOR DOORS FOR ELEVATORS INSIDE A
PRIVATE RESIDENCE
3013.1 For elevators installed in a private residence:

(a)	The distance between the hoistway face of the hoistway doors and the hoistway edge of the landing sill may not exceed 3/4 inch for swinging doors and 21/4 inches for sliding doors.

(b)

1.	Horizontal sliding car doors and gates shall be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally on an area 4 inches by 4 inches at right angles to and at any location on the car door without permanent deformation. The deflection may not exceed 3/4 inch and may not displace the door from its guides or tracks. The force must be applied while the door is in the fully closed position.

2.	Folding car doors shall be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally using a 4-inch-diameter sphere at any location within the folds on the car door without permanent deformation. The deflection may not exceed 3/4 inch and may not displace the door from its guides or tracks. The force must be applied while the door is in the fully closed position.

(c)	The distance between the hoistway face of the landing door and the hoistway face of the car door or gate shall conform to one of the following:

1.	If a power-operated horizontally sliding hoistway and car doors are used, the measurement between the leading edge of the doors or sight guard, if provided, may not exceed 4 inches. If it is possible for a user to detach or disconnect either door from the operator and such detachment or disconnection allows the user to operate the door manually, the requirement in subparagraph 5 applies.

2.	If swinging hoistway doors and folding car doors are used and both doors are in the fully closed position, the space between the hoistway door and the folding door must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

3.	If swinging hoistway doors and car gates are used between the hoistway door and the car gate must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

4.	If the car doors are powered and arranged so that they cannot be closed until after the hoistway door is closed, and the car doors automatically open when the car is at a landing and the hoistway door is opened, the measurement between the hoistway face of the hoistway door and the hoistway face of the car door at its leading edge may not exceed 4 inches. If it is possible for a user to detach or disconnect either door from the operator and such detachment or disconnection allows the user to operate the door manually, the requirement in subparagraph 5 applies.

5.	If swinging or horizontally sliding hoistway doors and manual horizontally sliding car doors are used and both doors are in the fully closed position, the space between the swinging or horizontally sliding hoistway door and the manual horizontally sliding car doors must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

Exception: As an alternative to compliance with Section 3013.1(c), Items 2 through 5, a permanent installation of a nonremovable, hoistway door space guard is allowed. The door space guard must be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally using a 4-inch-diameter sphere at any location within the folds on the car door without permanent deformation.

3013.2

During normal operation, the elevator controller must monitor the closed and locked contacts of the hoistway door locking device, whether electrical or mechanical. If the closed and locked contacts of the landing locks are open while the car is not in the unlocking zone for the hoistway door locking device, the elevator controller must interrupt power to the motor and brake and must not allow the elevator car to restart until the owner or the owner’s agent, with a master elevator key, has checked for obstructions above and below the elevator car, returned the hoistway door locking device contacts to the normal operating position, and manually reset the elevator controller with the master elevator key. Additionally, a visual indicator must be visible at all landings until the hoistway door locking device has been returned to the normal operating position and the elevator controller has been manually reset.

3013.3

This section applies to all new elevators in a private residence.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-31]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 31
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION
SECTION 3101
GENERAL
3101.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern special building construction including membrane structures, temporary structures, pedestrian walkways and tunnels, automatic vehicular gates, awnings and canopies, marquees, signs, towers and antennas, and exterior elevated flooring systems.

SECTION 3102
MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
3102.1 General.

The provisions of Sections 3102.1 through 3102.8 shall apply to air-supported, air-inflated, membrane-covered cable, membrane-covered frame and tensile membrane structures, collectively known as membrane structures, erected for a period of 180 days or longer. Those erected for a shorter period of time shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Membrane structures covering water storage facilities, water clarifiers, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, greenhouses and similar facilities not used for human occupancy are required to meet only the requirements of Sections 3102.3.1 and 3102.7. Membrane structures erected on a building, balcony, deck or other structure for any period of time shall comply with this section.

3102.1.1 Tensile membrane structures.

Tensile membrane structures, including permanent and temporary structures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 55. The provisions in Sections 3102.3 through 3102.6 shall apply.

3102.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AIR-INFLATED STRUCTURE.

AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE.

Double skin.

Single skin.

CABLE-RESTRAINED, AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE.

MEMBRANE-COVERED CABLE STRUCTURE.

MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME STRUCTURE.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE.

TENSILE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE.

3102.3 Type of construction.

Noncombustible membrane structures shall be classified as Type IIB construction. Noncombustible frame or cable-supported structures covered by an approved membrane in accordance with Section 3102.3.1 shall be classified as Type IIB construction. Heavy timber frame-supported structures covered by an approved membrane in accordance with Section 3102.3.1 shall be classified as Type IV construction. Other membrane structures shall be classified as Type V construction.

Exception: Plastic less than 30 feet (9144 mm) above any floor used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers is not required to meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

3102.3.1 Membrane and interior liner material.

Membranes and interior liners shall be either noncombustible as set forth in Section 703.5 or meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701 and the manufacturer’s test protocol.

Exception: Plastic less than 20 mil (0.5 mm) in thickness used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers is not required to meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

3102.4 Allowable floor areas.

The area of a membrane structure shall not exceed the limitations specified in Section 506.

3102.5 Maximum height.

Membrane structures shall not exceed one story nor shall such structures exceed the height limitations in feet specified in Section 504.3.

Exception: Noncombustible membrane structures serving as roofs only.

3102.6 Mixed construction.

Membrane structures shall be permitted to be utilized as specified in this section as a portion of buildings of other types of construction. Height and area limits shall be as specified for the type of construction and occupancy of the building.

3102.6.1 Noncombustible membrane.

A noncombustible membrane shall be permitted for use as the roof or as a skylight of any building or atrium of a building of any type of construction provided the membrane is not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) above any floor, balcony or gallery.

3102.6.1.1 Membrane.

A membrane meeting the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701 shall be permitted to be used as the roof or as a skylight on buildings of Type IIB, III, IV and V construction, provided the membrane is not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) above any floor, balcony or gallery.

3102.7 Engineering design.

The structure shall be designed and constructed to sustain dead loads, loads due to tension or inflation, live loads including wind and flood loads and in accordance with Chapter 16.

3102.7.1 Lateral restraint.

For membrane-covered frame structures, the membrane shall not be considered to provide lateral restraint in the calculation of the capacities of the frame members.

3102.8 Inflation systems.

Air-supported and air-inflated structures shall be provided with primary and auxiliary inflation systems to meet the minimum requirements of Sections 3102.8.1 through 3102.8.3.

3102.8.1 Equipment requirements.

This inflation system shall consist of one or more blowers and shall include provisions for automatic control to maintain the required inflation pressures. The system shall be so designed as to prevent overpressurization of the system.

3102.8.1.1 Auxiliary inflation system.

In addition to the primary inflation system, in buildings larger than 1,500 square feet (140 m2) in area, an auxiliary inflation system shall be provided with sufficient capacity to maintain the inflation of the structure in case of primary system failure. The auxiliary inflation system shall operate automatically when there is a loss of internal pressure and when the primary blower system becomes inoperative.

3102.8.1.2 Blower equipment.

Blower equipment shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.	Blowers shall be powered by continuous-rated motors at the maximum power required for any flow condition as required by the structural design.

2.	Blowers shall be provided with inlet screens, belt guards and other protective devices as required by the building official to provide protection from injury.

3.	Blowers shall be housed within a weather-protecting structure.

4.	Blowers shall be equipped with backdraft check dampers to minimize air loss when inoperative.

5.	Blower inlets shall be located to provide protection from air contamination. The location of inlets shall be approved.

3102.8.2 Standby power.

Wherever an auxiliary inflation system is required, an approved standby power-generating system shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with a suitable means for automatically starting the generator set upon failure of the normal electrical service and for automatic transfer and operation of all of the required electrical functions at full power within 60 seconds of such service failure. Standby power shall be capable of operating independently for not less than 4 hours.

3102.8.3 Support provisions.

A system capable of supporting the membrane in the event of deflation shall be provided for in air-supported and air-inflated structures having an occupant load of 50 or more or where covering a swimming pool regardless of occupant load. The support system shall be capable of maintaining membrane structures used as a roof for Type I construction not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) above floor or seating areas. The support system shall be capable of maintaining other membranes not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the floor, seating area or surface of the water.

SECTION 3103
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
3103.1 General.

The provisions of Sections 3103.1 through 3103.4 shall apply to structures erected for a period of less than 180 days. Special event structures, tents, umbrella structures and other membrane structures erected for a period of less than 180 days shall also comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Those erected for a longer period of time shall comply with applicable sections of this code.

3103.1.1 Conformance.

Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare.

3103.1.2 Permit required.

Temporary structures that cover an area greater than 120 square feet (11.16 m2), including connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance that are used or intended to be used for the gathering together of 10 or more persons, shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without obtaining a permit from the building official.

3103.2 Construction documents.

A permit application and construction documents shall be submitted for each installation of a temporary structure. The construction documents shall include a site plan indicating the location of the temporary structure and information delineating the means of egress and the occupant load.

3103.3 Location.

Temporary structures shall be located in accordance with the requirements of Table 705.5 based on the fire-resistance rating of the exterior walls for the proposed type of construction.

3103.4 Means of egress.

Temporary structures shall conform to the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10 and shall have an exit access travel distance of 100 feet (30 480 mm) or less.

SECTION 3104
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS AND TUNNELS
3104.1 General.

This section shall apply to connections between buildings such as pedestrian walkways or tunnels, located at, above or below grade level, that are used as a means of travel by persons. The pedestrian walkway shall not contribute to the building area or the number of stories or height of connected buildings.

3104.1.1 Application.

Pedestrian walkways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 3104.2 through 3104.9. Tunnels shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 3104.2 and 3104.10.

3104.2 Separate structures.

Buildings connected by pedestrian walkways or tunnels shall be considered to be separate structures.

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings that are on the same lot and considered as portions of a single building in accordance with Section 503.1.2.

2.	Reserved.

3104.3 Construction.

The pedestrian walkway shall be of noncombustible construction.

Exceptions:

1.	Combustible construction shall be permitted where connected buildings are of combustible construction.

2.	Fire-retardant-treated wood, in accordance with Section 603.1, Item 1.3, shall be permitted for the roof construction of the pedestrian walkway where connected buildings are a minimum of Type I or II construction.

3104.4 Contents.

Only materials and decorations approved by the building official shall be located in the pedestrian walkway.

3104.5 Connections of pedestrian walkways to buildings.

The connection of a pedestrian walkway to a building shall comply with Section 3104.5.1, 3104.5.2, 3104.5.3 or 3104.5.4.

Exception: Buildings that are on the same lot and considered as portions of a single building in accordance with Section 503.1.2.

3104.5.1 Fire barriers.

Pedestrian walkways shall be separated from the interior of the building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 and Sections 3104.5.1.1 through 3104.5.1.3.

3104.5.1.1 Exterior walls.

Exterior walls of buildings connected to pedestrian walkways shall be 2-hour fire-resistance rated. This protection shall extend not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) in every direction surrounding the perimeter of the pedestrian walkway.

3104.5.1.2 Openings in exterior walls of connected buildings.

Openings in exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 3104.5.1.1 shall be equipped with opening protectives providing a not less than 3/4-hour fire protection rating in accordance with Section 716.

3104.5.1.3 Supporting construction.

The fire barrier shall be supported by construction as required by Section 707.5.1.

3104.5.2 Alternative separation.

The wall separating the pedestrian walkway and the building shall comply with Section 3104.5.2.1 or 3104.5.2.2 where:

1.	The distance between the connected buildings is more than 10 feet (3048 mm).

2.	The pedestrian walkway and connected buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and the roof of the walkway is not more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above grade connecting to the fifth, or lower, story above grade plane, of each building.

Exception: Open parking garages need not be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system.

3104.5.2.1 Passage of smoke.

The wall shall be capable of resisting the passage of smoke.

3104.5.2.2 Glass.

The wall shall be constructed of a tempered, wired or laminated glass and doors separating the interior of the building from the pedestrian walkway. The glass shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 that, when actuated, shall completely wet the entire surface of interior sides of the wall or glass. Obstructions shall not be installed between the sprinkler heads and the wall or glass. The glass shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler operates.

3104.5.3 Open sides on walkway.

Where the distance between the connected buildings is more than 10 feet (3048 mm), the walls at the intersection of the pedestrian walkway and each building need not be fire-resistance rated provided both sidewalls of the pedestrian walkway are not less than 50 percent open with the open area uniformly distributed to prevent the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases. The roof of the walkway shall be located not more than 40 feet (12 160 mm) above grade plane, and the walkway shall only be permitted to connect to the third or lower story of each building.

Exception: Where the pedestrian walkway is protected with a sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the roof of the walkway shall be located not more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above grade plane and the walkway shall only be permitted to connect to the fifth or lower story of each building.

3104.5.4 Exterior walls greater than 2 hours.

Where exterior walls of connected buildings are required by Section 705 to have a fire-resistance rating greater than 2 hours, the walls at the intersection of the pedestrian walkway and each building need not be fire-resistance rated provided:

1.	The pedestrian walkway is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	The roof of the walkway is not located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above grade plane and the walkway connects to the fifth, or lower, story above grade plane of each building.

3104.6 Public way.

Pedestrian walkways over a public way shall comply with Chapter 32.

3104.7 Egress.

Access shall be provided at all times to a pedestrian walkway that serves as a required exit.

3104.8 Width.

The unobstructed width of pedestrian walkways shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm). The total width shall be not greater than 30 feet (9144 mm).

3104.9 Exit access travel.

The length of exit access travel shall be 200 feet (60 960 mm) or less.

Exceptions:

1.	Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be 250 feet (76 200 mm) or less.

2.	Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway constructed with both sides not less than 50 percent open shall be 300 feet (91 440 mm) or less.

3.	Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway constructed with both sides not less than 50 percent open, and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, shall be 400 feet (122 m) or less.

3104.10 Tunneled walkway.

Separation between the tunneled walkway and the building to which it is connected shall be not less than 2-hour fire-resistant construction and openings therein shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

SECTION 3105
AWNINGS AND CANOPIES
3105.1 General.

Awnings and canopies shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3105.2 through 3105.6 and other applicable sections of this code.

3105.2 Definition.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AWNING.

RETRACTABLE AWNING.

3105.3 Design and construction.

Awnings and canopies shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind or other lateral loads and live loads as required by Chapter 16 and in accordance with Section 3105.4 of this code with due allowance for shape, open construction and similar features that relieve the pressures or loads. Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration. Awnings shall have frames of noncombustible material, fire-retardant-treated wood, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11, or 1-hour construction with combustible or noncombustible covers and shall be either fixed, retractable, folding or collapsible.

3105.3.1 Location.
3105.3.1.1

Fabric awnings and fabric-covered frames located over public property or in areas accessible to the general public shall be constructed so that no rigid part of such fabric awnings or fabric-covered frames shall be less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm) from the grade directly below, and no part of the cloth drop shall be less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

3105.3.1.2

A fixed fabric awning or fabric-covered frame shall not extend over public property more than two-thirds the distance from the property line to the nearest curb line in front of the building site as measured from the exterior face of the building, nor shall any portion be closer than 18 inches (457 mm) to the curb line.

Exceptions:

1.	If installed over 14 feet (4267 mm) in height, it may occupy the entire width of the sidewalk.

2.	Unless otherwise regulated by local zoning requirements.

3105.3.1.3

Fabric-covered framework in whole or in part of fabric, erected in connection with gasoline service stations may not be erected within 15 feet (4572 mm) of where flammable liquids are transferred.

3105.3.1.4

Movable fabric awnings or fabric covered frames may extend over public property for a distance of not more than 5 feet (1524 mm), provided such awnings or any part thereof maintain a clear height of 8 feet (2438 mm) above the sidewalk. All such movable awnings shall be supported on metal frames attached to the building.

3105.3.1.5

Every fabric awning or fabric-covered frame shall be located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe, stairway, fire escape or any means of egress to and from the building.

3105.3.2 Area.

No fabric awning or fabric-covered frame shall exceed the area of the building to which it is attached.

3105.3.3

Reserved.

3105.3.4 Material.
3105.3.4.1

Fabric used for awnings or fabric-covered frames shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 or have a flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

Exception: Awnings or fabric-covered frames used in conjunction with Group R-3 occupancies.

3105.3.4.2

Supports for fabric awnings and fabric-covered frame shall be of metal or similar durable material.

3105.4 Design.
3105.4.1

Design of the framing members shall not be based on removal or repositioning of parts, or the whole, during periods of 75 mph wind velocity.

3105.4.2

Design of the structural framing members shall be based on rational analysis, using the applicable wind loads of Chapter 16 as shown below:

3105.4.2.1

The wind design loads for any fabric or membrane-covered structure designed with a quick removal or breakaway membrane or fabric at wind velocities of 75 mph, shall be based on the following criteria:

1.	Minimum wind speed 105 mph.

2.	Exposure Category B, C or D as defined in Chapter 16.

3105.4.2.2

The wind design loads for any fabric or membrane covered structure designed with a permanent or nonremovable fabric or membrane, shall be based on the following criteria:

1.	Minimum wind speed velocity as required in Chapter 16 using Figure 1609.3(4).

2.	Exposure B, C or D as defined in Chapter 16.

3105.4.3

The fabric portions of awnings fabric covered frames shall be securely laced, tied or otherwise fastened to the frame; no rafter or front bar will be permitted in pockets; and in no case shall a rolling curtain be caused to operate over a canopy frame.

3105.4.4

The horizontal projection of cantilevered portions shall not be greater than two times the height, except where the building construction does not permit a proper installation; in which case, variance may be permitted by the building official, based on special design and construction.

3105.5 Rigid awnings and canopy shutters.
3105.5.1 Loads.

Rigid awnings and canopy shutters shall be designed to resist the loads set forth in Chapter 16 of this code except that structures or parts thereof which are intended to be removed or repositioned during periods of high wind velocity shall be designed in their open or extended position to design pressures based on a basic wind speed of minimum 115 mph, 3-second wind gust with applicable shape factors and to resist not less than 10 psf (478 Pa) roof live load.

3105.5.2

Where such structure is intended to be folded or otherwise repositioned to close an opening when the building is unattended or act as a storm shutter, the design in the closed position shall also comply with Chapter 16 and shall be impact resistant in accordance with Section 1609.1.2 or 1626 for HVHZ.

3105.5.3

Structures designed to be readily removed or repositioned during periods of high wind velocity shall be posted with a legible and readily visible decal or painted instructions to the owner or tenant to remove or reposition the structure or part thereof during such periods of time as are designated by the U.S. Weather Bureau as being a hurricane warning or alert.

3105.6 Awnings and canopy materials.

Awnings and canopies shall be constructed of a rigid framework and shall be provided with an approved covering that meets the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701 or has a flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

Exception: The fire propagation performance and flame spread index requirements shall not apply to awnings installed on detached one- and two-family dwellings.

SECTION 3106
MARQUEES
3106.1 General.

Marquees shall comply with Sections 3106.2 through 3106.5 and other applicable sections of this code.

3106.2 Thickness.

The height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall be not greater than 3 feet (914 mm) where the marquee projects more than two-thirds of the distance from the lot line to the curb line, and shall be not greater than 9 feet (2743 mm) where the marquee is less than two-thirds of the distance from the lot line to the curb line.

3106.3 Roof construction.

Where the roof or any part thereof is a skylight, the skylight shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 24. Every roof and skylight of a marquee shall be sloped to downspouts that shall conduct any drainage from the marquee in such a manner so as not to spill over the sidewalk.

3106.4 Location prohibited.

Every marquee shall be so located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe, and such that the marquee does not obstruct the clear passage of stairways or exit discharge from the building or the installation or maintenance of street lighting.

3106.5 Construction.

A marquee shall be supported entirely from the building and constructed of noncombustible materials. Marquees shall be designed as required in Chapter 16. Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration.

SECTION 3107
SIGNS
3107.1 General.

Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with this code.

SECTION 3108
TELECOMMUNICATION AND
BROADCAST TOWERS
[BS] 3108.1 General.

Towers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of TIA-222.

Exception: Single free-standing poles used to support antennas not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm), measured from the top of the pole to grade, shall not be required to be noncombustible.

[BS] 3108.2 Location and access.

Towers shall be located such that guy wires and other accessories shall not cross or encroach upon any street or other public space, or over above-ground electric utility lines, or encroach upon any privately owned property without the written consent of the owner of the encroached-upon property, space or above-ground electric utility lines. Towers shall be equipped with climbing and working facilities in compliance with TIA-222. Access to the tower sites shall be limited as required by applicable OSHA, FCC and EPA regulations.

SECTION 3109
STRUCTURES SEAWARD OF A COASTAL
CONSTRUCTION CONTROL LINE
3109.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall apply to the design and construction of habitable structures, and substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such structures, that are entirely seaward of, and portions of such structures that extend seaward of, the coastal construction control line or seaward of the 50-foot setback line, whichever is applicable. This section does not apply to structures that are not habitable structures, as defined in this section. Section 1612 shall apply to habitable structures and structures that are not habitable structures if located in whole or in part in special flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3.

3109.1.1 Modification, maintenance or repair of existing habitable structures.

The requirements of Section 3109 do not apply to the modification, maintenance or repair of existing habitable structures, provided all of the following apply to the modification, maintenance or repair:

1.	Is within the limits of the existing foundation.

2.	Does not require, involve or include any additions to, or repair or modification of, the existing foundation.

3.	Does not include any additions or enclosures added, constructed, or installed below the lowest floor or deck.

Advisory Note. If the modification or repair is determined to be substantial improvement or substantial damage, and if the building is located in a special flood hazard area (Zone A and Zone V) established in Section 1612.3, the requirements of Florida Building Code, Existing Building applicable to flood hazard areas shall apply.

3109.1.2 Approval prior to construction.

An environmental permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection is required prior to the start of construction. When issued, a copy of the environmental permit shall be submitted to the building official. The environmental permit may impose special siting considerations to protect the beach-dune system, proposed or existing structures, and public beach access, and may condition the nature, timing and sequence of construction of permitted activities to provide protection to nesting sea turtles and hatchlings and their habitat, including submittal and approval of lighting plans.

3109.1.3 Elevation certification.

As part of the permit process, upon placement of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction, certification of the elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the building official. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification or subsequent to submission and prior to the building official’s review shall be at the applicant’s risk.

3109.2 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the indicated meanings shown herein.

ALLOWED USE. For the purpose of Section 3109.3.4, use of enclosures above, or with dry floodproofing to, the elevation specified in ASCE 24 and below the 100-year storm elevation, includes, but is not limited to use for parking of vehicles, storage, building access, small mechanical and electrical rooms, retail shops, commercial pool bars and other bars, snack bars, commercial grills with portable cooking equipment, commercial dining areas where the permanent kitchen is located landward of the coastal construction control line or above the 100-year storm elevation, toilet rooms and bathrooms, cabanas, recreational spaces such as gyms and card rooms, commercial service/storage/back-of-house facilities; and uses of a similar nature that are not spaces for living, sleeping or cooking.

COASTAL A ZONE. See Section 202.

COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CONTROL LINE. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to Section 161.053, Florida Statutes, and recorded in the official records of the respective county and which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions.

COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. See Section 202.

COMBINED TOTAL STORM TIDE ELEVATION (VALUE). The elevation of combined total tides including storm surges, astronomical tide and dynamic wave setup which occurs primarily inside the wave breaking zone. The combined total storm tide elevations (values) for various return periods are determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection for each coastal county with an established coastal construction control lines and published in reports for each county titled “Revised Combined Total Storm Tide Frequency Analysis.”

DESIGN GRADE. The predicted eroded grade, accounting for erosion and localized scour resulting from the presence of structural components, used in the calculation of flood loads, pile reactions and bearing capacities. The design grade shall be determined by a site-specific analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional or the design grade may be determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection in the report titled “One-Hundred-Year Storm Elevation Requirements for Habitable Structures Located Seaward of a Coastal Construction Control Line” (1999).

DRY FLOODPROOFING. See Section 202.

FIFTY-FOOT SETBACK LINE. A line of jurisdiction, established pursuant to the provisions of Section 161.052, Florida Statutes, in which construction is prohibited within 50 feet (15.13 m) of the line of mean high water at any riparian coastal location fronting the Gulf of Mexico or the Atlantic coast shoreline.

FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 202.

HABITABLE STRUCTURE. Structures designed primarily for human occupancy. Typically included within this category are residences, hotels and restaurants.

LOW-RISE BUILDING. A structure with mean roof height less than or equal to 60 feet.

LOWEST FLOOR. For the purpose of Section 3109, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, excluding any enclosure that complies with the requirements and limitations of Section 3109.3.4 applicable to enclosures below the flood elevation.

LOWEST HORIZONTAL STRUCTURAL MEMBER. A horizontal structural member that supports floor, wall or column loads and transmits the loads to the foundation.

100-YEAR STORM ELEVATION. The height of the breaking wave crest or wave approach as superimposed on the storm surge with dynamic wave setup of a 100-year (one-percent-annual chance) storm. The 100-year storm elevation is determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection based on studies published as part of the Coastal Construction Control Line establishment process and an analysis of topographic and other site specific data and found in the report “One-Hundred-Year Storm Elevation Requirements for Habitable Structures Located Seaward of a Coastal Construction Control Line” (1999). An applicant may request the Department of Environmental Protection to determine a site-specific 100-year storm elevation for the location of the applicant’s proposed structure as part of the environmental permit application process.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See Section 202.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. See Section 202.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. See Section 202.

3109.3 Design and construction.

The design and construction of habitable structures, including substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage to such structures, shall be in accordance with this section and with Section 1612 and ASCE 24, as applicable. Habitable structures subject to this section shall be designed to minimize the potential for wind- and water-borne debris during storms.

Exception: Additions, repairs, and alterations that, when combined with all other work on a structure, do not constitute substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and provided all of the following apply:

a.	The work does not violate the terms of previously issued permits.

b.	Any addition does not advance the seaward limits of the existing structure.

3109.3.1 Flood loads.

Flood loads shall be determined according to Chapter 5 of ASCE 7, where the stillwater depth shall be the difference between the design grade at the location and the higher of:

1.	The stillwater elevation specified in the applicable Flood Insurance Study referenced to the datum on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, if the structure is also in a coastal high hazard area (Zone V); or

2.	The combined total storm tide elevation (value) for the 100-year return period identified by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection in reports titled “Revised Combined Total Storm Tide Frequency Analysis” prepared for each county with an established coastal construction control lines.

3109.3.2 Foundations.

Habitable structures shall be elevated and supported on piles or columns that are designed to comply with this section. The space below elevated habitable structures shall be free of obstructions and walls, if any, shall comply with Section 3109.3.4. Foundations shall be designed to comply with ASCE 24 Section 4.5, except shallow foundations and stemwalls are not permitted.

3109.3.2.1 Piles and columns.

In addition to the requirements of ASCE 24 Section 4.5 for pile and columns foundations:

1.	The design ratio or pile spacing to pile diameter, or column spacing to column diameter, shall be not less than 8:1 for individual piles or columns extending above the design grade, unless justified by a geotechnical analysis and the foundation design.

2.	The tops of grade beams and pile caps shall be at or below the natural grade and below the design grade unless designed to resist increased flood loads associated with setting the grade beam or pile cap above the design grade.

3.	Pile penetration shall take into consideration the anticipated loss of soil above the design grade.

3109.3.2.2 Shear walls.

Shear walls shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Shear walls are permitted perpendicular to the shoreline where perpendicular shall mean less than or equal to ±20 degrees from a line drawn normal to the shoreline.

2.	Shear walls not perpendicular to the shoreline shall be limited to a maximum of 20 percent of the building length in the direction running parallel to the shore, and wall segments, spacing between wall segments, and elevator shafts shall be located and positioned to allow floodwater to flow easily around the walls and elevator shafts.

Exception: Habitable structures other than low-rise buildings are permitted to have shear walls that are not perpendicular to the shoreline and that exceed 20 percent of the total building length provided the design requires a length greater than 20 percent, wall segments, spacing between wall segments, and elevator shafts are located and positioned to allow floodwater to flow easily around the walls and elevator shafts, and the following design documentation is submitted:

a.	A hydraulic analysis conducted and certified by a Florida-registered professional engineer qualified to evaluate the potential impact of flow increase on the subject parcel and adjacent properties and demonstrates the increased shear wall length will not result in substantial increase of flow velocities and drag forces on the structural components of the proposed structure and neighboring structures.

b.	The certified design documentation shall include a statement that the increased length of shear walls over 20 percent of total building length is located landward of the predicted 100-year storm erosion limit.

3109.3.3 Elevation standards.

The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor shall be at or above the higher of the following:

1.	The elevation specified in ASCE 24 Chapter 4 if the structure is in a coastal high hazard area or Coastal A Zone;

2.	The elevation specified by the jurisdiction; or

3.	The 100-year storm elevation determined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection in the report titled “One-Hundred-Year Storm Elevation Requirements for Habitable Structures Located Seaward of a Coastal Construction Control Line” (1999). An applicant may request determination of a site-specific 100-year storm elevation (see definition).

3109.3.4 Walls and enclosures below the flood elevation.

Walls and enclosures below the elevation required by Section 3109.3.3 and above the design grade elevation shall comply with all of the following, as applicable:

1.	Walls seaward of the CCCL shall comply with the breakaway wall requirements of ASCE 24 Section 4.6 using the lesser of the flood loads specified by Section 3109.3.1.

2.	Elevator shafts and stairways shall comply with ASCE 24.

3.	For nonresidential buildings located outside of a coastal high hazard area (Zone V):

a.	Small mechanical and electrical rooms with dry floodproofing to the elevation specified in ASCE 24 or by the jurisdiction are not required to be breakaway.

b.	Stairwells are not required to be breakaway provided the walls have flood openings in accordance with this section.

4.	In special flood hazard areas (Zone V and Zone A), all breakaway walls below the elevation specified in ASCE 24 or the elevation specified by the jurisdiction shall have flood openings in accordance with ASCE 24 Section 4.6.2. Flood openings are not required in:

a.	Shear walls designed in accordance with Section 3109.3.2.2.

b.	Walls of enclosures below buildings not located in special flood hazard areas (Zone X).

c.	Walls that are designed and constructed in conformance with the dry floodproofing requirements of ASCE 24 in areas other than coastal high hazard areas.

5.	In special flood hazard areas (Zone V and Zone A):

a.	Enclosures below the elevation specified in ASCE 24 or the elevation specified by the jurisdiction shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage unless enclosures are designed and constructed in accordance with the dry floodproofing requirements of ASCE 24.

b.	Enclosures above the elevation specified in ASCE 24 or by the jurisdiction and below the 100-year storm elevation, or enclosures with dry floodproofing to the elevation specified in ASCE 24 or by the jurisdiction, shall be limited to allowed use as defined in this section.

6.	In habitable structures not located in special flood hazard areas (Zone X), uses of enclosures below the 100-year storm elevation shall be limited to allowed use as defined in this section.

3109.3.5 Structural slabs below the 100-year storm elevation.

Structural slabs below the 100-year storm elevation and below the lowest floor are not required to be breakaway provided the slabs are designed by a qualified Florida-registered professional engineer to withstand the flood loads specified by Section 3109.3.1.

3109.4 Documentation.

In addition to documentation specified in Section 1612.5, where applicable the following documentation shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a qualified Florida-registered professional engineer and submitted to the building official:

1.	For site-specific determination of design grade, a report of the assumptions and methods used.

2.	For shear walls, the certifications required in Section 3109.3.2.

SECTION 3110
AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES
3110.1 General.

Automatic vehicular gates shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3110.2 through 3110.4 and other applicable sections of this code.

3110.2 Definition.

The following term is defined in Chapter 2:

VEHICULAR GATE.

3110.3 Vehicular gates intended for automation.

Vehicular gates intended for automation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F2200.

3110.4 Vehicular gate openers.

Vehicular gate openers, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

SECTION 3111
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
3111.1 General.

Solar energy systems shall comply with the requirements of this section.

3111.1.1 Wind resistance.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panels and modules and solar thermal collectors shall be designed in accordance with Section 1510.7. For buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone, refer to Section 1620.

3111.1.2 Roof live load.

Roof structures that provide support for solar energy systems shall be designed in accordance with Section 1607.13.4.

3111.2 Solar thermal systems.

Solar thermal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing, the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3111.2.1 Equipment.

Solar thermal systems and components shall be listed and labeled in accordance with ICC 900/SRCC 300 and ICC 901/SRCC 100.

3111.3 Photovoltaic solar energy systems.

Photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with this section, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 70 and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

3111.3.1 Equipment.

Photovoltaic panels and modules shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703. Inverters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1741. Systems connected to the utility grid shall use inverters listed for utility interaction.

3111.3.2 Fire classification.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems shall have a fire classification in accordance with Section 1505.9. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems shall have a fire classification in accordance with Section 1505.8. For buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone, refer to Section 1516.

3111.3.3 Building-integrated photovoltaic systems.

Building-integrated photovoltaic systems that serve as roof coverings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 1507.17. For buildings and structures located within the high-velocity hurricane zone, refer to Section 1518.11.

3111.3.4 Access and pathways.

Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 11.12.2.2 of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3111.3.5 Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Chapter 16 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3111.3.5.1 Fire separation distances.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be subject to the fire separation distance requirements determined by the local jurisdiction.

SECTION 3112
DEPOSIT OF MATERIAL
IN TIDEWATER REGULATED
3112.1

It is not lawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged or deposit or cause to be deposited, in the tide or salt waters of any bay, port, harbor or river of this state, any ballast or material of any kind other than clear stone or rock, free from gravel or pebbles, which said clear stone or rock shall be deposited or discharged only in the construction of enclosures in connection with wharves, piers, quays, jetties or in the construction of permanent bulkheads connecting the solid and permanent portion of wharves. It is lawful to construct three characters of bulkheads for retention of material in solid wharves.

1.	First, clear stone or rock enclosures, or bulkheads, may be built upon all sides to a height not less than 21/2 feet (762 mm) above high watermark; and after the enclosures have been made so solid, tight and permanent as to prevent any sand, mud, gravel or other material that may be discharged or deposited in them from drifting or escaping through such enclosures, any kind of ballast may be discharged or deposited within the enclosures. The enclosures may be constructed of wood, stone and rock combined, the stone and rocks to be placed on the outside of the wood to a height not less at any point than 21/2 feet (762 mm) above high watermark; and after the enclosures have been made so solid, tight and permanent as to prevent any sand, mud gravel or other material that may be discharged or deposited in them from drifting or escaping through such enclosures, any kind of ballast may be discharged or deposited within the enclosures.

2.	Second, a bulkhead may be built by a permanent wharf consisting of thoroughly creosoted piles not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter at the butt end, to be driven close together and to be capped with timber not less than 10 or 14 inches drift (254 or 302 mm), bolted to each pile, and one or more longitudinal stringers to be placed on the outside of the bulkhead and securely anchored by means of iron rods to piles driven within the bulkheads, clear rock to be on the inside of the bulkhead, to a height of not less than 21/2 feet (762 mm) above high water; and after this is done, ballast or other material may be deposited within the permanent enclosure so constructed.

3.	Third, a bulkhead may be constructed to consist of creosoted piles, as described herein, driven not exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) apart from center to center, inside of which two or more longitudinal stringers may be placed and securely bolted to the piles. Inside of these longitudinal pieces, two thicknesses of creosoted sheet piling are to be driven, each course of the sheet piling to make a joint with the other to form an impenetrable wharf; and within this permanent bulkhead so constructed, any ballast or other material may be deposited.

4.	No such enclosure, pier, quay or jetty shall be begun until the point where it is to be built shall have been connected by a substantial wharf with a shore or with a permanent wharf; except that the owners of wharves may at any time, with the consent of the Board of Pilot Commissioners of the Division of Professions of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation, build wharves of clear stone or rock, or creosoted walls as hereinafter provided, on each side of their wharves from the shore to a point at which the water is not more than 15 feet (4.6 m) deep, and when such walls have attained a height of 21/2 feet (762 mm) above high watermark and have been securely closed at the deepwater end by stone or creosoted walls of the same height, any kind of ballast may be deposited in them.

5.	Nothing contained in this section shall interfere with any rights or privileges now enjoyed by riparian owners. While this section empowers those who desire to construct the several characters of wharves, piers, quays, jetties and bulkheads provided for and described herein, nothing in this section shall be so construed as to require any person not desiring to construct a permanent wharf by filling up with ballast, stone or other material to construct under the specifications contained herein; and nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to prevent any person from constructing any wharf or placing any pilings, logs or lumber in any waters where the person would have heretofore had the right so to do.

3112.2

This section shall not prohibit Escambia County from placing in Pensacola Bay, on the Escambia County side, beside the old Pensacola Bay Bridge, certain materials, as recommended by the Department of Environmental Protection, in coordination with the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, to increase the number of fish available for persons fishing from the old Pensacola Bay Bridge.

3112.3

This section shall not prohibit Manatee County from placing in the Manatee County portions of Sarasota Bay and Tampa Bay and in the Manatee River, certain materials, as recommended by the Department of Environmental Protection, in coordination with the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, to increase the number of fish available for persons fishing in the above areas.

3112.4

This section shall not prohibit Pinellas County from placing in Tampa Bay certain materials as recommended by the Department of Environmental Protection, in coordination with the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, to increase the number of fish available for persons fishing in the bay. Deposit of material on a wharf or quay is regulated. It is not lawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited on any wharf or quay, any ballast, stone, earth or like material, except such wharf or quay may be so secured as to prevent such ballast or other material from washing into the waters of the harbor.

SECTION 3113
LIGHTING, MIRRORS, LANDSCAPING
3113.1

Each operator of an automated teller machine that controls the access area or defined parking area to be lighted shall comply with Sections (2), (3), and (4) no later than one year after October 1, 1994. If the access area or defined parking area to be lighted is controlled by a person other than the operator, such other person shall comply with Sections (2), (3), and (4) no later than one year after October 1, 1994.

3113.2

Each operator, or other person responsible for an automated teller machine pursuant to Sections 655.960 through 655.965, shall provide lighting during the hours of darkness with respect to an open and operating automated teller machine and any defined parking area, access area and the exterior of an enclosed automated teller machine installation, as follows:

1.	There shall be a minimum of 10 footcandle (108 lux) power at the face of the automated teller machine and extending in an unobstructed direction outward 5 feet (1.5 m).

2.	There shall be a minimum of 2 footcandle (21.5 lux) power within 50 feet (15.25 m) in all unobstructed directions from the face of the automated teller machine. If the automated teller machine is located within 10 feet (3 m) of the corner of the building and the automated teller machine is generally accessible from the adjacent side, there shall be a minimum of 2 footcandle (21.5 lux) power along the first 40 unobstructed feet (12 m) of the adjacent side of the building.

3.	There shall be a minimum of 2 footcandle (12.5 lux) power in that portion of the defined parking area within 60 feet (18 m) of the automated teller machine.

4.	The operator shall provide reflective mirrors or surfaces at each automated teller machine which provide the customer with a rear view while the customer is engaged in using the automated teller machine.

5.	The operator, or other person responsible pursuant to Sections 655.960 through 655.965 for an automated teller machine, shall ensure that the height of any landscaping, vegetation or other physical obstructions in the area required to be lighted pursuant to Section (2) for any open and operating automated teller machine shall not exceed 3 feet (914 mm), except that trees trimmed to a height of 10 feet (3 m) and whose diameters are less than 2 feet (610 mm) and manmade physical obstructions required by statute, law, code, ordinance or other governmental regulation shall not be affected by this section.

SECTION 3114
AIRPORT NOISE
3114.1 Airport noise study guidelines.

The Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement Act of 1979 14 CFR Part 150 (US Department of Transportation) including revisions through January 2005 and hereby adopted as a guideline for establishing airport noise control. When required by a local government by local ordinance to provide noise attenuation in a new structure or addition to an existing structure near an airport in the area of the local government, the applicant must provide either:

1.	A testing certificate from an accredited noise testing lab that a new structure or addition to existing structure built to the submitted engineering plans will achieve an average minimum dBA reduction equal to or greater than the reduction required,

2.	An engineering judgment signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in the State of Florida that the structure or addition built to the submitted engineering plans will achieve an average minimum dBA reduction equal to or greater than the reduction required, or

3.	Plans using the standards contained in “Guidelines for Sound Insulation of Residences Exposed to Aircraft Operations” prepared for the Department of the Navy by Wyle Research and Consulting, Arlington, Virginia, April 2005 on file with the Florida Building Commission.

SECTION 3115
EXTERIOR ELEVATED FLOORING SYSTEMS
3115.1 Scope.

This section applies to exterior elevated flooring systems installed over roof assemblies or other exterior supporting structures, such as an exterior deck. Each exterior elevated flooring system consists of pedestrian deck panels or pavers supported by pedestals placed directly on roof assemblies or other exterior supporting structures, to provide a level walking surface. Pedestals may be adjustable or a fixed height. The pedestals need not be mechanically or adhesively attached to the supporting structure. The exterior elevated flooring system comprised of the pedestrian deck panels or pavers and pedestals shall be restrained on all sides and along any ramps and walkway areas against horizontal and vertical movement using a perimeter-restraining system.

3115.1.1 Attached exterior elevated flooring systems.

Attached systems shall be designed and constructed as a roofing system in accordance with Chapter 15 of this code.

3115.1.2 Independent exterior elevated flooring systems.

Independent systems shall comply with the provisions of Section 3115.

3115.2 Materials information submitted with permit application.

In addition to other information required to accompany the permit application, product-specific information shall be provided as follows:

3115.2.1 Pedestrian deck panels or pavers.

Documentation describing the weight, dimensions and specifications, and the manufacturing process of the materials. Specifications for materials shall include required material strength properties used in analysis or reference to appropriate tests used to determine paver load capacity.

3115.2.2 Pedestals.

Documentation describing materials, dimensions, specifications and manufacturer’s installation instructions. Specifications shall include the allowable axial compression capacity of the pedestal.

3115.2.3 Fasteners.

Documentation describing mechanical fasteners and adhesives as applicable. A statement shall be provided regarding whether or not the fasteners are commonly available or are proprietary.

3115.2.4 Plastics for outdoor exposure HVHZ.

Plastics for outdoor exposure in the HVHZ shall comply with Florida Building Code, Building Section 2615.2.

3115.2.5 Packaging and identification.

A description of the method of packaging and identification of pedestrian deck panels or pavers, pedestals and accessory components. Identification provisions shall include the manufacturer’s name, the product name and a copy of the installation instructions as packaged with the product.

3115.3 Product approval and manufacturer’s installation instructions.
3115.3.1 Product approval.

Exterior elevated flooring systems shall have Florida product approval or local product approval.

3115.3.2 Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Manufacturer’s installation instructions shall include information on the protection of the roof surface during installation, procedures for removing pavers to facilitate reroofing, roofing repairs, and roofing maintenance. In addition to the copy of the manufacturer’s installation instructions submitted with the permit application, the manufacturer’s installation instructions shall be kept on the job site and made available to inspection personnel.

3115.4 Structural requirements for exterior elevated flooring systems.
3115.4.1 General.

Exterior elevated flooring systems shall withstand the applicable uniform loads of Florida Building Code, Building Table 1607.1, the applicable load combinations and other applicable loads contained in the Florida Building Code, Building, Chapter 16. Independent systems shall not be permitted in the HVHZ.

3115.4.2 Pedestrian deck panels or pavers.

Where analysis of panels or pavers is not consistent with codified material design procedures, testing for uniform load and concentrated load capacities shall be performed in accordance with ASTM E2322 and CISCA Recommended Test Procedures for Access Floors achieving a load capacity three (3) times the uniform load capacity designated in the specifications.

3115.4.3 Pedestals.

INSIGHTS

Where analysis of pedestals is not consistent with codified material design procedures, testing for axial load capacity shall be performed in accordance with CISCA Recommended Test Procedures for Access Floors, 2016, Section 5 achieving a load capacity three (3) times the axial load capacity designated in the specifications.

 INSIGHTS (1)
3115.4.4 Wind resistance.

Wind resistance of independent exterior elevated flooring systems shall be determined by wind tunnel testing in accordance with ASCE 7 Chapter 31 and Section 30.1.5 where applicable. Testing shall be conducted, and the data analyzed by a registered design professional. Exterior elevated flooring systems shall be evaluated by a registered design professional to withstand applicable wind loads as specified in ASCE 7 Chapters 26 through 30, as applicable, as well as combined load effects of other applicable gravity loads in the Florida Building Code, Building, Chapter 16, such as live and dead loads.

3115.4.5 Deflection.

Pedestrian deck panels or pavers shall meet the deflection requirement of floor members in Table 1604.3 and Section 1616.3.1 in the HVHZ.

3115.5 Substrate requirements for exterior elevated flooring systems.
3115.5.1 Bearing capacity.

Pedestal support surface or roofing membrane shall be able to support a concentrated surface load of 40 psi (6.89 kPa) under the pedestal base.

3115.5.2 Drainage.

The substrate immediately below the pedestals shall provide positive drainage.

3115.5.3 Analysis.

Load effects on structural members and their connections that provide support for independent exterior elevated flooring systems shall be determined by methods of structural analysis that take into account equilibrium, general stability, geometric compatibility and both short- and long-term material properties. Roof structures that provide support for exterior elevated flooring systems shall be checked for deflection in accordance with Section 1604.3.6 or Section 1616 for buildings sited in the HVHZ. Roof structures shall be checked in accordance with Section 1611 for ponding. The design shall account for concentrated loads of the pedestals.

3115.6 Accessibility.

Accessibility shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-32]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 32
ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
SECTION 3201
GENERAL
3201.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the encroachment of structures into the public right-of-way.

3201.2 Measurement.

The projection of any structure or portion thereof shall be the distance measured horizontally from the lot line to the outermost point of the projection.

3201.3 Other laws.

The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to permit the violation of other laws or ordinances regulating the use and occupancy of public property.

3201.4 Drainage.

Drainage water collected from a roof, awning, canopy or marquee, and condensate from mechanical equipment shall not flow over a public walking surface.

SECTION 3202
ENCROACHMENTS
3202.1 Encroachments below grade.

Encroachments below grade shall comply with Sections 3202.1.1 through 3202.1.3.

3202.1.1 Structural support.

A part of a building erected below grade that is necessary for structural support of the building or structure shall not project beyond the lot lines, except that the footings of street walls or their supports that are located not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) below grade shall not project more than 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the street lot line.

3202.1.2 Vaults and other enclosed spaces.

The construction and utilization of vaults and other enclosed spaces below grade shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable governing authority.

3202.1.3 Areaways.

Areaways shall be protected by grates, guards or other approved means.

3202.2 Encroachments above grade and below 8 feet in height.

Encroachments into the public right-of-way above grade and below 8 feet (2438 mm) in height shall be prohibited except as provided for in Sections 3202.2.1 through 3202.2.3. Doors and windows shall not open or project into the public right-of-way.

3202.2.1 Steps.

Steps shall not project more than 12 inches (305 mm) and shall be guarded by approved devices not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in height, or shall be located between columns or pilasters.

3202.2.2 Architectural features.

Columns or pilasters, including bases and moldings, shall not project more than 12 inches (305 mm). Belt courses, lintels, sills, architraves, pediments and similar architectural features shall not project more than 4 inches (102 mm).

3202.2.3 Awnings.

The vertical clearance from the public right-of-way to the lowest part of any awning, including valances, shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

3202.3 Encroachments 8 feet or more above grade.

Encroachments 8 feet (2438 mm) or more above grade shall comply with Sections 3202.3.1 through 3202.3.4.

3202.3.1 Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs.

Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs shall be constructed so as to support applicable loads as specified in Chapter 16. Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs with less than 15 feet (4572 mm) clearance above the sidewalk shall not extend into or occupy more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk measured from the building. Stanchions or columns that support awnings, canopies, marquees and signs shall be located not less than 2 feet (610 mm) in from the curb line.

3202.3.2 Windows, balconies, architectural features and mechanical equipment.

Where the vertical clearance above grade to projecting windows, balconies, architectural features or mechanical equipment is more than 8 feet (2438 mm), 1 inch (25 mm) of encroachment is permitted for each additional 1 inch (25 mm) of clearance above 8 feet (2438 mm), but the maximum encroachment shall be 4 feet (1219 mm).

3202.3.3 Encroachments 15 feet or more above grade.

Encroachments 15 feet (4572 mm) or more above grade shall not be limited.

3202.3.4 Pedestrian walkways.

The installation of a pedestrian walkway over a public right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the applicable governing authority. The vertical clearance from the public right-of-way to the lowest part of a pedestrian walkway shall be not less than 15 feet (4572 mm).

3202.4 Temporary encroachments.

Where allowed by the applicable governing authority, vestibules and storm enclosures shall not be erected for a period of time exceeding seven months in any one year and shall not encroach more than 3 feet (914 mm) nor more than one-fourth of the width of the sidewalk beyond the street lot line. Temporary entrance awnings shall be erected with a clearance of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) to the lowest portion of the hood or awning where supported on removable steel or other approved noncombustible support.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-33]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 33
SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION 3301
GENERAL
3301.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern safety during construction and the protection of adjacent public and private properties.

3301.2 Storage and placement.

Construction equipment and materials shall be stored and placed so as not to endanger the public, the workers or adjoining property for the duration of the construction project.

SECTION 3302
CONSTRUCTION SAFEGUARDS
3302.1 Alterations, repairs and additions.

Required exits, existing structural elements, fire protection devices and sanitary safeguards shall be maintained at all times during alterations, repairs or additions to any building or structure.

Exceptions:

1.	Where such required elements or devices are being altered or repaired, adequate substitute provisions shall be made.

2.	Maintenance of such elements and devices is not required when the existing building is not occupied.

3302.2 Manner of removal.

Waste materials shall be removed in a manner that prevents injury or damage to persons, adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.

3302.3 Fire safety during construction.

Fire safety during construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and the applicable provisions of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 3303
DEMOLITION

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
3303.1 Construction documents.

Construction documents and a schedule for demolition shall be submitted where required by the building official. Where such information is required, no work shall be done until such construction documents or schedule, or both, are approved.

3303.2 Pedestrian protection.

The work of demolishing any building shall not be commenced until pedestrian protection is in place as required by this chapter.

3303.3 Means of egress.

A horizontal exit shall not be destroyed unless and until a substitute means of egress has been provided and approved.

3303.4 Vacant lot.

Where a structure has been demolished or removed, the vacant lot shall be filled and maintained to the existing grade or in accordance with the ordinances of the jurisdiction having authority.

3303.5 Water accumulation.

Provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundations on the premises or the adjoining property.

3303.6 Utility connections.

Service utility connections shall be discontinued and capped in accordance with the approved rules and the requirements of the applicable governing authority.

3303.7 Fire safety during demolition.

INSIGHTS

Fire safety during demolition shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and the applicable provisions of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

 INSIGHTS (1)
SECTION 3304
SITE WORK
3304.1 Excavation and fill.

Excavation and fill for buildings and structures shall be constructed or protected so as not to endanger life or property. Stumps and roots shall be removed from the soil to a depth of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below the surface of the ground in the area to be occupied by the building. Wood forms that have been used in placing concrete, if within the ground or between foundation sills and the ground, shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose. Before completion, loose or casual wood shall be removed from direct contact with the ground under the building.

3304.1.1 Slope limits.

Slopes for permanent fill shall be not steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope). Cut slopes for permanent excavations shall be not steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope). Deviation from the foregoing limitations for cut slopes shall be permitted only upon the presentation of a soil investigation report acceptable to the building official.

3304.1.2 Surcharge.

No fill or other surcharge loads shall be placed adjacent to any building or structure unless such building or structure is capable of withstanding the additional loads caused by the fill or surcharge. Existing footings or foundations that can be affected by any excavation shall be underpinned adequately or otherwise protected against settlement and shall be protected against lateral movement.

3304.1.3 Footings on adjacent slopes.

For footings on adjacent slopes, see Chapter 18.

3304.1.4 Fill supporting foundations.

Fill to be used to support the foundations of any building or structure shall comply with Section 1804.6.

SECTION 3305
SANITARY
3305.1 Facilities required.

Sanitary facilities shall be provided during construction, remodeling or demolition activities in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

SECTION 3306
PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS
3306.1 Protection required.

Pedestrians shall be protected during construction, remodeling and demolition activities as required by this chapter and Table 3306.1. Signs shall be provided to direct pedestrian traffic.

TABLE 3306.1

PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS

HEIGHT OF
CONSTRUCTION
	DISTANCE FROM CONSTRUCTION TO LOT LINE	TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED
8 feet or less	Less than 5 feet	Construction railings
5 feet or more	None
More than 8 feet	Less than 5 feet	Barrier and covered walkway
5 feet or more, but not more than one-fourth the height of construction	Barrier and covered walkway
5 feet or more, but between one-fourth and one-half the height of construction	Barrier
5 feet or more, but exceeding one-half the height of construction	None

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

3306.2 Walkways.

A walkway shall be provided for pedestrian travel in front of every construction and demolition site unless the applicable governing authority authorizes the side-walk to be fenced or closed. A walkway shall be provided for pedestrian travel that leads from a building entrance or exit of an occupied structure to a public way. Walkways shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the pedestrian traffic, but in no case shall they be less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in width. Walkways shall be provided with a durable walking surface. Walkways shall be accessible in accordance with Chapter 11 and shall be designed to support all imposed loads and in no case shall the design live load be less than 150 pounds per square foot (psf) (7.2 kN/m2).

3306.3 Directional barricades.

Pedestrian traffic shall be protected by a directional barricade where the walkway extends into the street. The directional barricade shall be of sufficient size and construction to direct vehicular traffic away from the pedestrian path.

3306.4 Construction railings.

Construction railings shall be not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) in height and shall be sufficient to direct pedestrians around construction areas.

3306.5 Barriers.

Barriers shall be not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) in height and shall be placed on the side of the walkway nearest the construction. Barriers shall extend the entire length of the construction site. Openings in such barriers shall be protected by doors that are normally kept closed.

3306.6 Barrier design.

Barriers shall be designed to resist loads required in Chapter 16 unless constructed as follows:

1.	Barriers shall be provided with 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) top and bottom plates.

2.	The barrier material shall be boards not less than 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) thick or wood structural panels not less than 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) thick.

3.	Wood structural use panels shall be bonded with an adhesive identical to that for exterior wood structural use panels.

4.	Wood structural use panels 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) or 5/16 inch (23.8 mm) in thickness shall have studs spaced not more than 2 feet (610 mm) on center.

5.	Wood structural use panels 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) or 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in thickness shall have studs spaced not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center provided a 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) stiffener is placed horizontally at mid-height where the stud spacing is greater than 2 feet (610 mm) on center.

6.	Wood structural use panels 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) or thicker shall not span over 8 feet (2438 mm).

3306.7 Covered walkways.

Covered walkways shall have a clear height of not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) as measured from the floor surface to the canopy overhead. Adequate lighting shall be provided at all times. Covered walkways shall be designed to support all imposed loads. In no case shall the design live load be less than 150 psf (7.2 kN/m2) for the entire structure.

Exception: Roofs and supporting structures of covered walkways for new, light-frame construction not exceeding two stories above grade plane are permitted to be designed for a live load of 75 psf (3.6 kN/m2) or the loads imposed on them, whichever is greater. In lieu of such designs, the roof and supporting structure of a covered walkway are permitted to be constructed as follows:

1.	Footings shall be continuous 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) members.

2.	Posts not less than 4 inches by 6 inches (102 mm by 152 mm) shall be provided on both sides of the roof and spaced not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) on center.

3.	Stringers not less than 4 inches by 12 inches (102 mm by 305 mm) shall be placed on edge upon the posts.

4.	Joists resting on the stringers shall be not less than 2 inches by 8 inches (51 mm by 203 mm) and shall be spaced not more than 2 feet (610 mm) on center.

5.	The deck shall be planks not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick or wood structural panels with an exterior exposure durability classification not less than 23/32 inch (18.3 mm) thick nailed to the joists.

6.	Each post shall be knee braced to joists and stringers by members not less than 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 mm); 4 feet (1219 mm) in length.

7.	A curb that is not less than 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 mm) shall be set on edge along the outside edge of the deck.

3306.8 Repair, maintenance and removal.

Pedestrian protection required by this chapter shall be maintained in place and kept in good order for the entire length of time pedestrians are subject to being endangered. The owner or the owner’s authorized agent, upon the completion of the construction activity, shall immediately remove walkways, debris and other obstructions and leave such public property in as good a condition as it was before such work was commenced.

3306.9 Adjacent to excavations.

Every excavation on a site located 5 feet (1524 mm) or less from the street lot line shall be enclosed with a barrier not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) in height. Where located more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the street lot line, a barrier shall be erected where required by the building official. Barriers shall be of adequate strength to resist wind pressure as specified in Chapter 16.

SECTION 3307
PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY
3307.1 Protection required.

Adjoining public and private property shall be protected from damage during construction, remodeling and demolition work. Protection shall be provided for footings, foundations, party walls, chimneys, skylights and roofs. Provisions shall be made to control water runoff and erosion during construction or demolition activities. The person making or causing an excavation to be made shall provide written notice to the owners of adjoining buildings advising them that the excavation is to be made and that the adjoining buildings should be protected. Said notification shall be delivered not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled starting date of the excavation.

3307.2 Excavation retention systems.

Where a retention system is used to provide support of an excavation for protection of adjacent structures, the system shall conform to the requirements in Section 3307.2.1 through 3307.2.3.

3307.2.1 Excavation retention system design.

Excavation retention systems shall be designed by a registered design professional to provide vertical and lateral support.

3307.2.2 Excavation retention system monitoring.

The retention system design shall include requirements for monitoring of the system and adjacent structures for horizontal and vertical movement.

3307.2.3 Retention system removal.

Elements of the system shall only be removed or decommissioned when adequate replacement support is provided by backfill or by the new structure. Removal or decommissioning shall be performed in such a manner that protects the adjacent property.

SECTION 3308
TEMPORARY USE OF STREETS,
ALLEYS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
3308.1 Storage and handling of materials.

The temporary use of streets or public property for the storage or handling of materials or of equipment required for construction or demolition, and the protection provided to the public shall comply with the provisions of the applicable governing authority and this chapter.

3308.1.1 Obstructions.

Construction materials and equipment shall not be placed or stored so as to obstruct access to fire hydrants, standpipes, fire or police alarm boxes, catch basins or manholes, nor shall such material or equipment be located within 20 feet (6096 mm) of a street intersection, or placed so as to obstruct normal observations of traffic signals or to hinder the use of public transit loading platforms.

3308.2 Utility fixtures.

Building materials, fences, sheds or any obstruction of any kind shall not be placed so as to obstruct free approach to any fire hydrant, fire department connection, utility pole, manhole, fire alarm box or catch basin, or so as to interfere with the passage of water in the gutter. Protection against damage shall be provided to such utility fixtures during the progress of the work, but sight of them shall not be obstructed.

SECTION 3309
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
[F] 3309.1 Where required.

Structures under construction, alteration or demolition shall be provided with no fewer than one approved portable fire extinguisher in accordance with Section 906 and sized for not less than ordinary hazard as follows:

1.	At each stairway on all floor levels where combustible materials have accumulated.

2.	In every storage and construction shed.

3.	Additional portable fire extinguishers shall be provided where special hazards exist, such as the storage and use of flammable and combustible liquids.

[F] 3309.2 Fire hazards.

The provisions of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be strictly observed to safeguard against all fire hazards attendant upon construction operations.

SECTION 3310
MEANS OF EGRESS
3310.1 Stairways required.

Where a building has been constructed to a building height of 50 feet (15 240 mm) or four stories, or where an existing building exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm) in building height is altered, no fewer than one temporary lighted stairway shall be provided unless one or more of the permanent stairways are erected as the construction progresses.

[F] 3310.2 Maintenance of means of egress.

Required means of egress shall be maintained at all times during construction, demolition, remodeling or alterations and additions to any building.

Exception: Existing means of egress need not be maintained where approved temporary means of egress systems and facilities are provided.

SECTION 3311
STANDPIPES
[F] 3311.1 Where required.

In buildings required to have standpipes by Section 905.3.1, no fewer than one standpipe shall be provided for use during construction. Such standpipes shall be installed prior to construction exceeding 40 feet (12 192 mm) in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Such standpipes shall be provided with fire department hose connections at accessible locations adjacent to usable stairways. Such standpipes shall be extended as construction progresses to within one floor of the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring.

[F] 3311.2 Buildings being demolished.

Where a building is being demolished and a standpipe exists within such a building, such standpipe shall be maintained in an operable condition so as to be available for use by the fire department. Such standpipe shall be demolished with the building but shall not be demolished more than one floor below the floor being demolished.

[F] 3311.3 Detailed requirements.

Standpipes shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.

Exception: Standpipes shall be either temporary or permanent in nature, and with or without a water supply, provided that such standpipes conform to the requirements of Section 905 as to capacity, outlets and materials.

SECTION 3312
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM
[F] 3312.1 Completion before occupancy.

In buildings where an automatic sprinkler system is required by this code, it shall be unlawful to occupy any portion of a building or structure until the automatic sprinkler system installation has been tested and approved, except as provided in Section 111.3.

[F] 3312.2 Operation of valves.

Operation of sprinkler control valves shall be permitted only by properly authorized personnel and shall be accompanied by notification of duly designated parties. When the sprinkler protection is being regularly turned off and on to facilitate connection of newly completed segments, the sprinkler control valves shall be checked at the end of each work period to ascertain that protection is in service.

SECTION 3313
WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION
[F] 3313.1 Where required.

An approved water supply for fire protection, either temporary or permanent, shall be made available as soon as combustible material arrives on the site.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-34]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 34

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-35]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 35
REFERENCED STANDARDS

This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title, and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.4.

AA

Aluminum Association
1525 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 600
ArlingtonVA22209

ADM1—2020

Aluminum Design Manual: Part 1—Specification for Aluminum Structures

1604.3.5, 2002.1

ASM 35—00

Aluminum Sheet Metal Work in Building Construction (Fourth Edition)

2002.1

AAF

Aluminum Association of Florida, Inc.
3203 Lawton Road #110
OrlandoFL32803

AAF—20

Guide to Aluminum Construction in High Wind Areas (2020)

2002.4.1, 1622.1.2

AAMA Standards by FGIA

Fenestration & Glazing Industry Alliance
1900 E Gold Road, Suite 1250
SchaumburgIL60173

AAMA 450—10 or

Voluntary Performance Rating Method for Mulled Fenestration Assemblies

1709.8

AAMA 450—20

Performance Rating Method for Mulled Combination Assemblies, Composite Units, and Other Mulled Fenestration Systems

1709.8

AAMA 501—15

Methods of Test for Exterior Walls

1709.8.4

AAMA 506—16

Voluntary Specifications for Impact and Cycle Testing of Fenestration Products

1609.1.2

AAMA 711—13, 20 or 22

Voluntary Specification for Self-Adhering Flashing Used for Installation of Exterior Wall Fenestration Products

1405.4, Table 1507.1.1.1, 1507.1.1.2, 1518.2.1

AAMA 714—15 or 19

Voluntary Specification for Liquid Applied Flashing Used to Create a Water-Resistive Seal around Exterior Wall Openings in Buildings

1405.4

AAMA 1402—09

Standard Specifications for Aluminum Siding, Soffit and Fascia

1404.5.1

AAMA 2502—19

Comparative Analysis Procedure for Window and Door Products

1709.5.1

AAMA/NSA 2100—19

Voluntary Specifications for Sunrooms

202, 2002.6.1, 2002.6.2

AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440—
08, 11 or 17

North American Fenestration Standard/Specification for Windows, Doors, and Skylights

1010.1.6, 1709.5.1, 2405.5, 2411.3.2.1

FMA/AAMA 100—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Windows with Flanges or Mounting

1405.4.1.4

FMA/AAMA 200—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Windows with Frontal Flanges

1405.4.1.4

FMA/WDMA 250—10

Standard Practice for the Installation of Non-Frontal Flange Windows with Mounting Flanges for Surface Barrier Masonry for Extreme Wind/Water Conditions

1405.4.1.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA300—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Exterior Doors in Wood Frame Construction for Extreme Wind/Water Exposure

1405.4.1.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 400—13

Standard Practice for the Installation of Exterior Doors in Surface Barrier Masonry Construction for Extreme Wind/Weather Exposure

1405.4.1.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710—20

Guidelines for the Full Frame Replacement of Windows without Removal of External Brick Veneer

1405.4

ACI

American Concrete Institute
8800 Country Club Drive
Farmington HillsMI48331-3439

117—10

Specification for Tolerances for Concrete Construction and Materials

1901.7.1

ITG-7—09

Specification for Tolerances for Precast Concrete

1901.7.2

216.1—14

Code Requirements for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and Masonry Construction Assemblies

Table 721.1(2), 722.1

318—19

Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete

1604.3.2, 1615.3.1, 1615.4.1, 1808.8.2, Table 1808.8.2, 1808.8.5, 1810.1.3, 1810.2.4, 1810.3.2.1.2, 1810.3.8.3.1, 1810.3.8.3.3, 1810.3.9.4, 1810.3.9.4.2.1, 1810.3.9.4.2.2, 1810.3.10.1, 1810.3.11.1, 1810.3.12, 1901.2, 1901.3, 1902.1, 1903.1, 1904.1, 1904.2, 1905.1, 1905.1.1, 1905.1.2, 1905.1.3, 1905.1.4, 1905.1.6, 1905.1.8, 1906.1, 1908.1, 1909.1, 1909.2, 2206.1, E303.2.2

AF & PA

American Forest & Paper Association
1111 19th Street, NW, Suite 800
WashingtonDC20036

AF&PA—92

Wood Structural Design Data

2314.4.7

AF&PA—05

Design Values for Joists and Rafters

2314.4.7

PWF—07

Permanent Wood Foundation (PWF) Design Specification

2314.4.7

AF&PA—12

Span Tables for Joists and Rafters

2314.4.7, 2317.1.1

WCD 1—01

Wood Construction Data No. 1, Details for Conventional Wood Frame Construction

2314.4.7

WCD 4—03

Wood Construction Data No. 4, Plank and Beam Framing for Residential Buildings

2314.4.7, 2306.1.2

WCD 5—89

Wood Construction Data No. 5, Heavy Timber Construction Details

2314.4.7, 2203.1, 2203.2, 2205.1, 2206.1

AHA

American Hardboard Association
1210 West N.W. Highway
PalatineIL60067

A135.4—04

Basic Hardboard

1404.3.1, 2314.4.1

A135.5—04

Prefinished Hardboard Paneling

2314.4.1

A135.6—98

Hardboard Siding

2314.4.1

A194.1—85

Cellulosic Fiber Board

2314.4.1

IB Spec. No. 1

Recommended Product and Application Specification —Structural Insulating Roof Deck

2314.4.1

IB Spec. No. 2

Recommended Product and Application Specification —1/2 inch Fiberboard Nail-Base Sheathing

2314.4.1

IB Spec. No. 3

Recommended Product and Application Specification —1/2 inch Intermediate Fiberboard Sheathing

2314.4.1

AISC

American Institute of Steel Construction
130 East Randolph, Suite 2000
ChicagoIL60601

AISC DG09—2003

Torsional Analysis of Structural Steel Members, 2003

2214.3

AISC—2017

Steel Construction Manual, 2017

2214.3

AISC DG15—2018

Rehabilitation and Retrofit, 2018

2214.3

AISC DG03—2003

Serviceability Design Considerations for Steel Buildings, 2003

2214.3

ANSI/AISC 341—16

Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings

2205

ANSI/AISC 360—16

Specification for Structural Steel Buildings

722.5.2.2.1, 1604.3.3, 2203.1, 2203.2, 2205, 2206

AISI

American Iron and Steel Institute
25 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 800
WashingtonDC20001

AISI S100—16(2020) w/S2—20

North American Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Steel Structural Members, 2016 Edition (Reaffirmed 2020), with Supplement 2, 2020 Edition

1604.3.3, 1905.1.8, 2203.1, 2203.2, 2210.1, 2210.2, 2214.3

AISI S202—20

Code of Standard Practice for Cold-Formed Steel Framing, 2020

2211.1.3.1

AISI S220—20

North American Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing-Nonstructural Members, 2020

2203.1, 2203.2, 2211.1, 2211.2, 2214.3, Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2

AISI S230—19

Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing-Prescriptive Method for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2019

1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1, 2211.1.2, 2214.3

AISI S240—20

AISI S240, North American Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Structural Framing, 2020

2203.1, 2203.2, 2211.1, 2214.3, 2211.1.1.1, Table 2306.12.2, Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2, Table 2603.12.1

AISI S400—20

North American Standard for Seismic Design of Cold-Formed Steel Structural Systems, 2020

2210.2, 2211.1.1.1, 2211.1.1.2

AISI S913—17

Test Standard for Hold-Downs Attached to Cold-Formed Steel Structural Framing

2210.3

AISI S914—17

Test Standard for Joist Connectors Attached to Cold-Formed Steel Structural Framing

2210.3

AITC

American Institute of Timber Construction
333 West Hampden Avenue
EnglewoodCO80110

A 190.1—07

Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2314.4.2

Technical Note 7—96

Calculation of Fire Resistance of Glued Laminated Timbers

2314.4.2

104—03

Typical Construction Details

2306.1, 2314.4.2

106

Code of Suggested Practices

2314.4.2

108—93

Standard for Heavy Timber Construction

2314.4.2

109—98

Standard for Preservative Treatment for Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2314.4.2

110—01

Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2306.1, 2314.4.2

112—93

Tongue-and-Groove Heavy Timber Roof Decking

2314.4.2

113—10

Dimensions of Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2306.1, 2314.4.2

117—10

Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species—Design Requirements—Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species—Manufacturing Requirements

2314.4.2

119—96

Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Hardwood Species

2306.1, 2314.4.2

ALI

Automotive Lift Institute
P.O. Box 85
CortlandNY13045

ALI ALCTV—2017

Standard for Automotive Lifts—Safety Requirements for Construction, Testing and Validation (ANSI)

3001.2, Table 3001.2

AMCA

Air Movement and Control Association International
30 West University Drive
Arlington HeightsIL60004

540—13

Test Method for Louvers Impacted by Wind Borne Debris

1609.1.2.1, 1626.5.1, 1626.5.2, 1626.5.3

ANSI

American National Standards Institute
25 West 43rd Street, Fourth Floor
New YorkNY10036

A13.1—2020

Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems

415.11.7.5

A41.1

Building Code Requirements for Masonry

2121.2.8

A108.1A—17

Installation of Ceramic Tile in the Wet-Set Method, with Portland Cement Mortar

2103.2.3

A108.1B—17

Installation of Ceramic Tile on a Cured Portland Cement Mortar Setting Bed with Dry-Set or Latex-Portland Cement Mortar

2103.2.3

A108.4—09

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Organic Adhesives or Water-Cleanable Tile-Setting Epoxy Adhesive

2103.2.3.6

A108.5—20

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Dry-Set Portland Cement Mortar or Latex-Portland Cement Mortar

2103.2.3.1, 2103.2.3.2

A108.6—99 (Reaffirmed 2019)

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Chemical-Resistant, Water Cleanable Tile-Setting and -Grouting Epoxy

2103.2.3.3

A108.8—99 (Reaffirmed 2019)

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Chemical-Resistant Furan Resin Mortar and Grout

2103.2.3.4

A108.9—99 (Reaffirmed 2019)

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Modified Epoxy Emulsion Mortar/Grout

2103.2.3.5

A108.10—17

Installation of Grout in Tilework

2103.2.3.7

A117—2015

Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species

2306.1, 2314.4.3

A118.1—18

American National Standard Specifications for Dry-Set Cement Mortar

2103.2.3.1

A118.3—20

American National Standard Specifications for Chemical-Resistant, Water-Cleanable Tile-Setting and -Grouting Epoxy and Water Cleanable Tile-Setting Epoxy Adhesive

2103.2.3.3

A118.4—18

American National Standard Specifications for Latex-Portland Cement Mortar

2103.2.4, 2103.2.3.2

A118.5—99

American National Standard Specifications for Chemical Resistant Furan Mortar and Grouts for Tile Installation

2103.2.3.4

A118.6—19

American National Standard Specifications for Standard Cement Grouts for Tile Installation

2103.2.3.7

A118.8—99

American National Standard Specifications for Modified Epoxy Emulsion Mortar/Grout

2103.2.3.5

A136.1—20

American National Standard Specifications for Organic Adhesives for Installation of Ceramic Tile

2103.2.3.6

A137.1—19

American National Standard Specifications for Ceramic Tile

202

A137.3—17

American National Standard Specification for Gauged Porcelain Tile and Gauged Porcelain Tile Panels/Slabs

202

ANSI/A190.1—17

Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2303.1.3, 2306.1, 2314.4.3

ANSI B18.6.1-81(2016)

Wood Screws (Inch Series)

1506.6

Z535.1

American National Standard Safety Color Code for Making Physical Hazards

453.4.6, 453.14.6

Z358.1

Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment

450.3.11.7

Z97.1—14

Safety Glazing Materials Used in Buildings—Safety Performance Specifications and Methods of Test

1618.4.6.3, 2406.1.2, 2406.2, Table 2406.2(2), 2406.3.1, 2407.1, 2407.1.4.1, 2408.2.1, 2408.3, 2409.2, 2409.3, 2409.4.1

APA

APA - Engineered Wood Association
7011 South 19th Street
TacomaWA98466

ANSI 117—2020

Standard Specification for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species

2306.1, 2314.4.3

ANSI A190.1—2022

Product Standard for Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2303.1.3, 2306.1

ANSI/APA PRG 320—2019

Standard for Performance-Rated Cross-Laminated Timber

2303.1.4

ANSI/APA PRP 210—2019

Standard for Performance-Rated Engineered Wood Siding

2303.1.5, 2304.7, 2306.3, Table 2306.3(1)

ANSI/APA PRR 410—2021

Standard for Performance-Rated Engineered Wood Rim Boards

2303.1.13

APA PDS—20

Panel Design Specification

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA PDS Supplement 1—12

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Curved Panels (revised 2013)

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA PDS Supplement 2—12

Design and Fabrication of Plywood-Lumber Beams (revised 2013)

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA PDS Supplement 3—12

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Stressed-Skin Panels (revised 2013)

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA PDS Supplement 4—12

Design and Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich Panels (revised 2013)

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA PDS Supplement 5—16

Design and Fabrication of All-Plywood Beams

2306.1, 2314.4.3

APA B840—19

303 Siding Manufacturing Specifications

2314.4.3

APA L350—07

Design/Construction Guide Diaphragms and Shearwalls

2314.4.3

APA PRP-108—21

Performance Standards and Policies for Wood Structural Panels

2314.4.3

APA V910—90

Plywood Folded Plate Laboratory Report 121

2314.4.3

APA E30—19

Engineered Wood Construction Guide

2314.4.3

APA R540—19

Builder Tips: Proper Storage and Handling of Glulam Beams

2306.1

APA S475—20

Glued Laminated Beam Design Tables

2306.1

APA S560—20

Field Notching and Drilling of Glued Laminated Timber Beams

2306.1

APA T300—16

Glulam Connection Details

2306.1

APA X440—17

Product and Application Guide: Glulam

2306.1

APA X450—18

Glulam in Residential Building Construction Guide

2306.1

APSP (PHTA Standards)

Pool & Hot Tub Alliance
2111 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite 500
AlexandriaVA22314

ANSI/APSP/ICC 3—2014

American National Standard for Permanently Installed Residential Spas and Swim Spas

454.2.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 4— 2012(R2022)

American National Standard for Aboveground /Onground Residential Swimming Pools

454.2.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 5-2012(R2022)

American National Standard for Residential Inground Swimming Pools

454.2.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 6—2013

American National Standard for Residential Portable Spas and Swim Spas

454.2.6.1

ANSI/PHTA/ICC 7—2020

American National Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs, and Catch Basins

454.2.6.1, 454.2.6.3, 454.2.6.6

ANSI/APSP 16—2017

American National Standard for Suction Outlet Fittings Assemblies (SOFA) for Use in Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs

454.1.6.5.10, 454.1.6.5.12

ASABE

American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers
2950 Niles Road
St. JosephMI49085

EP (R2008) MON DEC2017

Diaphragm Design of Metal-Clad, Wood-Frame Rectangular Buildings

484.3 2306.1

EP 486.3 SEP2017

Shallow-Post and Pier Foundation Design

2306.1

EP 559.1 W/Corr. (2010)2014

Design Requirements and Bending Properties for Mechanically Laminated Wood Assemblies

2306.1

ASCE/SEI

American Society of Civil Engineers
Structural Engineering Institute
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
RestonVA20191-4400

7—22

Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures

202, 449.4.2.2.6, 450.4.2.2.6, 453.4.7, 453.9.1, 453.25.4.1, Table 1504.3.3, Table 1507.2.7.1, 1510.7.1, 1514.4, 1514.4.2, 1514.4.3, 1525, 1602.1, 1603.1.4, 1604.3, 1604.4, Table 1604.5, 1604.8.2, 1604.10, 1605.1, 1605.2, 1607.9.1, 1607.9.1.1, 1607.9.1.2, 1607.9.3, 1607.13.1, 1609.1.1, 1609.1.2, 1609.1.2.4.1, 1609.1.2.4.2, 1609.3, 1609.6.1, 1609.6.3, 1609.8, 1611.2, 1612.4, 1613.1, Table 1613.3.3(1), Table 1613.3.3(2), 1613.3.5, 1613.3.5.1, 1613.3.5.2, 1613.4, 1613.4.1, 1613.5.1, 1613.6, 1614.1, 1616.5, 1620.1, 1620.3, 1620.6, 1621.1, 1621.2, 1622.1.1, Table 1625.4, 1626.1, Table 1626, 1709.5.2.1, 1709.8.3, 1803.5.12, 1808.3.1, 1810.3.6.1, 1810.3.9.4, 1810.3.11.2, 1810.3.12, 1905.1.1, 1905.1.2, 1905.1.7, 1905.1.8, Table 2002.4, 2205.2.1.1, 2205.2.1.2, 2205.2.2, 2206.2.1, 2209.1, 2209.2, 2210.2, 2211.1.1.1, Table 2304.6.1, Table 2306.3(3), 2314.1, 2319.13, 2322.2.3, 2322.2.5, 2404.1, 2505.1, 2505.2, 2506.2.1, 3109.3.1, 3115.2.3, 3115.4.4

8—02

Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Stainless Steel Structural Members

1604.3.3, 2210.1, 2210.2, 2214.3

19—16

Structural Applications of Steel Cables for Buildings

2208.1

24—14

Flood Resistant Design and Construction

449.4.2.2.1, 450.4.2.2.1, 453.4.2, 1203.4.2, 1603.1.7, 1612.4, 1612.4.1, 1612.4.2, 1612.5, 2702.1.7, 2702.1.8, 3001.2, 3101, 3109.2, 3109.3, 3109.3.2.1, 3109.3.3, 3109.3.4

29—05

Standard Calculation Methods for Structural Fire Protection

722.1

32—01

Design and Construction of Frost Protected Shallow Foundations

1809.5

49—12

Wind Tunnel Testing for Buildings and Other Structures

1609.1.1

55—16

Tensile Membrane Structures

3102.1.1

ASHRAE

ASHRAE, Inc.
180 Technology Parkway
Peachtree CornersGA30092

62—01

Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality

C502.1, E306.1

ANSI/ASHRAE/ASJHE 170—08

Ventilation of Heath Care Facilities

450.3.14, 450.3.14.4, 469.4.12.1

ASME

American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Two Park Avenue
New YorkNY10016-5990

ASME/A17.1—2019/CSA B44—2019

Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators

469.4.9.1, 907.3.3, 911.1.6, 1607.10.1, 3001.2, 3001.1, Table 3001.2, 3001.4, 3001.6, 3002.5, 3002.10, 3003.2, 3006.3, 3007.1, 3008.1.3, 3008.1.4, 3008.7.1, 3010.1.3, 3012.1

A17.3—2020

Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators

469.4.9.1, 3001.1, 3001.2, 3001.5.3, 3010.1.3, 3012.1

ASME A17.6-2010

Standard for Elevator Suspension, Compensation, and Governor Systems Safety

Table 3001.2

A17.7—2007/CSA B44—07(R2019)

Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators

Table 3001.2

A18.1—2020

Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts

3001.1, Table 3001.2, 3012.1

A90.1—2015

Safety Standard for Belt Manlifts

Table 3001.2, 3001.6

A112.19.8

Suction Fittings for Use in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs, and Whirlpool Bathtub Appliances

454.1.6.5.3.2.3

A120.1—01

Safety Requirements for Powered Platforms for Building Maintenance

3001.6

B16.18—2018

Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings

909.13.1

B16.22—2018

Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings

909.13.1

B20.1—2021

Safety Standard for Conveyors and Related Equipment

Table 3001.2, 3001.6, 3004.3

B31.3—2020

Process Piping

415.11.7

18.6.1—81(2016)

Wood Screws (Inch Series)

1506.6

A13.1—2020

Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems

415.11.7.5

ASSE

American Society of Safety Engineers
1800 East Oakton Street
Des PlainesIL60018

ANSI/ASSE Z359.1—2020

The Fall Protection Code

1015.6, 1015.7

ASTM

ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West ConshohockenPA19428-2959

A6/A6M—17a

Standard Specification for General Requirements for Rolled Structural Steel Bars, Plates, Shapes and Sheet

1810.3.2.3, 1810.3.5.3.1, 1810.3.5.3.3, 2214.3

A36/A36M—14

Specification for Carbon Structural Steel

1810.3.2.3

A90/A90M—13

Standard Test Method for Weight (Mass) of Coating on Iron and Steel Articles with Zinc or Zinc Alloy Coatings

1506.7

A153/A153M—16a

Specification for Zinc Coating (Hot-Dip) on Iron and Steel Hardware

2304.10.5

A240/A240M—17

Standard Specification for Chromium-Nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip for Pressure Vessels and General Applications

1506.7, Table 1507.4.3(1)

A252—10(2018)

Specification for Welded and Seamless Steel Pipe Piles

1810.3.2.3

A283/A283M—18

Specification for Low and Intermediate Tensile Strength Carbon Steel Plates

1810.3.2.3

A361

Specification for Steel Sheet Zinc-Coated (Withdrawn)

2319.17.1.1

A416/A416M—17a

Specification for Steel Strand, Uncoated Seven-Wire for Prestressed Concrete

1810.3.2.2

A446

Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) by the Hot-Dip Process, Structural (Physical) Quality

1917.4.3

A463/A463M—15

Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Aluminum-Coated, by the Hot-Dip Process

Table 1507.4.3(2)

A525—87

Specification for General Requirements for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) by the Hot-Dip Process

1917.4.3

A572/A572M—18

Specification for High-Strength Low-Alloy Columbium-Vanadium Structural Steel

1810.3.2.3

A588/A588M—15

Specification for High-Strength Low-Alloy Structural Steel with 50 ksi (345 MPa) Minimum Yield Point with Atmospheric Corrosion Resistance

1810.3.2.3

A611

Standard Specification for Structural Steel (SS), Sheet, Carbon, Coil-Rolled

1917.4.3

A615/A615M—15ae1

Specification for Deformed and Plain Carbon-steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement

1810.3.10.2

A641/A641M—14

Standard Specification for Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) Carbon Steel Wire

1506.6

A653/A653M—17

Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated Galvanized or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated Galvannealed by the Hot-Dip Process

Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2), 2304.10.5.1, 2319.17.2.2.7

A690/A690M—13a(2018)

Standard Specification for High-Strength Low-Alloy Nickel, Copper, Phosphorus Steel H-Piles and Sheet Piling with Atmospheric Corrosion Resistance for Use in Marine Environments

1810.3.2.3

A706/A706M—16

Specification for Low-Alloy Steel Deformed and Plain Bars for Concrete Reinforcement

2107.3

A722/A722M—18

Specification for High-Strength Steel Bar for Prestressing Concrete

1810.3.10.2

A755/A755M—16e1

Specification for Steel Sheet, Metallic-coated by the Hot-Dip Process and Prepainted by the Coil-Coating Process for Exterior Exposed Building Products

Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2)

A792/A792M—10(2015)

Specification for Steel Sheet, 55% Aluminum-Zinc Alloy-Coated by the Hot-Dip Process

Table 1507.4.3(1), Table 1507.4.3(2)

A875/A875M—13

Standard Specification for Steel Sheet Zinc-5 Percent, Aluminum Alloy-Coated by the Hot-Dip Process

Table 1507.4.3(2)

A924/A924M—17a

Standard Specification for General Requirements for Steel Sheet, Metallic-Coated by the Hot-Dip Process

Table 1507.4.3(1), 2319.17.1.1, 2319.17.2.2.7

A1003/A1003M—15

Standard Specification for Sheet Steel, Carbon, Metallic, and Non-Metallic Coated for Cold-Formed Steel Framing Members

2214.3

A1064A/A1064M—16a

Carbon-Steel Wire and Welded Wire Reinforcement, Plain and Deformed, for Concrete

1907.2

B42—15a

Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes

909.13.1

B43—15

Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes

909.13.1

B68/B68M—11

Specification for Seamless Copper Tube, Bright Annealed (Metric)

909.13.1

B88—16

Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube

909.13.1

B101—12

Specification for Lead-Coated Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction

1404.5.3, Table 1507.4.3(1)

B117—16

Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (Fog) Apparatus

1506.6

B209—14

Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Steel and Plate

Table 1507.4.3(1)

B251/B251M—17

Specification for General Requirements for Wrought Seamless Copper and Copper-Alloy Tube

909.13.1

B280—18

Specification for Seamless Copper Tube for Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Field Service

909.13.1

B370—12

Specification for Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction

1404.5.2, Table 1507.4.3(1)

B695—04(2016)

Standard Specification for Coatings of Zinc Mechanically Deposited on Iron and Steel Strip for Building Construction

2304.10.5.1, 2304.10.5.3

C5—18

Specification for Quicklime for Structural Purposes

Table 2507.2

C22/C22M-00(2015)

Specification for Gypsum

Table 2506.2

C27—98(2018)

Specification for Standard Classification of Fireclay and High-Alumina Refractory Brick

2111.6

C28/C28M—10(2015)

Specification for Gypsum Plasters

Table 2507.2

C33/C33M—18

Specification for Concrete Aggregates

722.3.1.4, 722.4.1.1.3

C35/C35M-1995(2014)

Specification for Inorganic Aggregates for Use in Gypsum Plaster

Table 2507.2

C55—17

Specification for Concrete Building Brick

Table 722.3.2

C59/C59M—00 (2015)

Specification for Gypsum Casting Plaster and Molding Plaster

Table 2507.2

C61/C61M—00 (2015)

Specification for Gypsum Keene’s Cement

Table 2507.2

C62—17

Standard Specification for Building Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

1807.1.6.3

C67—18

Test Methods of Sampling and Testing Brick and Structural Clay Tile

721.4.1.1.1

C73—17

Specification for Calcium Silicate Brick (Sand-Lime Brick)

Table 722.3.2

C90—16a

Specification for Loadbearing Concrete Masonry Units

Table 722.3.2, 1807.1.6.3, 2109.3

C91/C91M—18

Specification for Masonry Cement

Table 2507.2

C94/C94M—17a

Specification for Ready-Mixed Concrete

E202, E303.2.1

C140/C140M—18

Test Method Sampling and Testing Concrete Masonry Units and Related Units

722.3.1.2

C150/C150M—18

Specification for Portland Cement

1903.1, Table 2507.2

C172/C172M—17

Practice for Sampling Freshly Mixed Concrete

E303.2.4

C199—84 (2016)

Test Method for Pier Test for Refractory Mortars

2111.6, 2111.9, 2113.12

C206—14

Specification for Finishing Hydrated Lime

Table 2507.2

C208—12(2017)e1

Specification for Cellulosic Fiber Insulating Board

Table 1508.2, 2303.1.6

C216—17a

Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

Table 721.1(2), 1807.1.6.3

C270—14a

Specification for Mortar for Unit Masonry

2103.3.2.4

C315—07(2016)

Specification for Clay Flue Liners and Chimney Pots

2111.9, 2113.11.1, Table 2113.16(1)

C317/C317M—00(2015)

Specification for Gypsum Concrete

2514.1

C330/C330M—17a

Specification for Lightweight Aggregates for Structural Concrete

202

C331/C331M—17

Specification for Lightweight Aggregates for Concrete Masonry Units

722.3.1.4, 722.4.1.1.3

C332—09

Specification for Lightweight Aggregates for Insulating Concrete

1917.4.5

C406/C406M—15

Specification for Roofing Slate

1507.7.5

C472—99(2014)

Specification for Standard Test Methods for Physical Testing of Gypsum, Gypsum Plasters and Gypsum Concrete

Table 2506.2

C473—17

Test Method for Physical Testing of Gypsum Panel Products

Table 2506.2

C474—15

Test Methods for Joint Treatment Materials for Gypsum Board Construction

Table 2506.2

C475/C475M—17

Specification for Joint Compound and Joint Tape for Finishing Gypsum Board

Table 2506.2

C476—19

Standard Specification for Grout for Masonry

2122.8.2

C494/C494M—99

Standard Specification for Chemical Admixtures for Concrete

1917.4.4, E202, E303.2.4

C495—99a

Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of Lightweight Insulating Concrete

Table 1508.2, 1917.1.1, 1917.1.2, 1917.1.3

C509—00

Elastomeric Cellular Preformed Gaskets and Sealing Material

2411.3.4

C513

Standard Test Method for Obtaining and Testing Specimens of Hardened Lightweight Insulating Concrete for Compressive Strength

Table 1508.2

C514—04(2014)

Specification for Nails for the Application of Gypsum Board

Table 721.1(2), Table 721.1(3), Table 2506.2

C516—08(2013)e1

Specifications for Vermiculite Loose Fill Thermal Insulation

722.3.1.4, 722.4.1.1.3

C547—17

Specification for Mineral Fiber Pipe Insulation

Table 721.1(2), Table 721.1(3)

C549—06(2012)

Specification for Perlite Loose Fill Insulation

722.3.1.4, 722.4.1.1.3

C552—17e1

Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Thermal Insulation

Table 1508.2

C557—03(2017)

Specification for Adhesives for Fastening Gypsum Wallboard to Wood Framing

Table 2506.2, 2508.4

C578—18

Standard Specification for Rigid, Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation

Table 1508.2, 1917.4.10, 2603.10, Table 2603.12.1, Table 2603.12.2

C587—04(2018)

Specification for Gypsum Veneer Plaster

Table 2507.2

C595/C595—18

Specification for Blended Hydraulic Cements

1903.1, Table 2507.2

C618-12a

Standard Specification for Coal Fly Ash and Raw or Calcined Natural Pozzolan for Use in Concrete

1917.4.4

C631—09(2014)

Specification for Bonding Compounds for Interior Gypsum Plastering

Table 2507.2

C635/C635M—18

Specification for the Manufacture, Performance and Testing of Metal Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-In Panel Ceilings

808.1.1.1, 2506.2.1

C636/C636M—13

Practice for Installation of Metal Ceiling Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-In Panels

808.1.1.1

C645—14

Specification for Nonstructural Steel Framing Members

2319.17.1.3

C652—17a

Specification for Hollow Brick (Hollow Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

1807.1.6.3

C726—17

Standard Specification for Mineral Roof Insulation Board

Table 1508.2

C728—17a

Standard Specification for Perlite Thermal Insulation Board

Table 1508.2

C744—16

Specification for Prefaced Concrete and Calcium Silicate Masonry Units

Table 722.3.2

C754—18

Specification for Installation of Steel Framing Members to Receive Screw-Attached Gypsum Panel Products

Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1

C794—01

Standard Test Method for Adhesion-in-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants

2415.4

C796—97

Standard Test Method for Foaming Agents For Use in Producing Cellular Concrete Using Performed Foam

Table 1508.2, 1917.1.2, 1917.1.3, 1917.4.5

C836/C836M—18

Specification for High-Solids Content, Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Separate Wearing Course

1507.15.2

C840—18a

Specification for Application and Finishing of Gypsum Board

Table 2508.1, 2509.2

C841—03(2018)

Specification for Installation of Interior Lathing and Furring

Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1

C842—05(2015)

Specification for Application of Interior Gypsum Plaster

Table 2511.1.1, 2511.3, 2511.4

C843—17

Specification for Application of Gypsum Veneer Plaster

Table 2511.1.1

C844—15

Specification for Application of Gypsum Base to Receive Gypsum Veneer Plaster

Table 2508.1

C847—18

Specification for Metal Lath

Table 2507.2

C864—05

Dense Elastomeric Compression Seal Gaskets, Setting Blocks, and Spacers

2411.3.4

C869—11

Specification for Foaming Agents Used in Making Preformed Foam for Cellular Concrete

Table 1508.2, 1917.4.5

C887—13

Specification for Packaged, Dry Combined Materials for Surface Bonding Mortar

1805.2.2, 2103.2.2

C897—15

Specification for Aggregate for Job-Mixed Portland Cement-Based Plasters

Table 2507.2

C920—18

Standard for Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants

2415.4, Table 2506.2, B303.6, E303.3.1

C926—18b

Specification for Application of Portland Cement-Based Plaster

2510.3, Table 2511.1.1, 2511.3, 2511.4, 2512.1, 2512.1.2, 2512.2, 2512.6, 2512.8.2, 2512.9, 2513.7

C932—06(2013)

Specification for Surface-applied Bonding Compounds for Exterior Plastering

Table 2507.2

C933—18

Specification for Welded Wire Lath

Table 2507.2

C946—18

Standard Practice for Construction of Dry-Stacked, Surface-Bonded Walls

2103.2.2, 2109.2.2

C954—18

Specification for Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel Studs from 0.033 inch (0.84 mm) to 0.112 inch (2.84 mm) in Thickness

Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2

C956—04(2015)

Specification for Installation of Cast-in-Place Reinforced Gypsum Concrete

2514.1

C957/C957M—17

Specification for High-Solids Content, Cold Liquid-Applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane with Integral Wearing Surface

1507.15.2

C1002—18

Specification for Steel Self-Piercing Tapping Screws for Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Wood Studs or Steel Studs

Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2

C1007—11a(2015)

Specification for Installation of Load Bearing (Transverse and Axial) Steel Studs and Related Accessories

Table 2508.1, Table 2511.1.1

C1029—15

Specification for Spray-Applied Rigid Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation

1507.14.2

C1032—18

Specification for Woven Wire Plaster Base

Table 2507.2

C1036—01

Specification for Flat Glass

2411.1.2

C1047—19

Specification for Accessories for Gypsum Wallboard and Gypsum Veneer Base

Table 2506.2, Table 2507.2

C1048—97b

Standard Specification for Heat-Treated Flat Glass—Kind HS, Kind FT Coated and Uncoated Glass

2411.1.5

C1063—18b

Specification for Installation of Lathing and Furring to Receive Interior and Exterior Portland Cement-Based Plaster

2510.3, Table 2511.1.1, 2512.1.1

C1088—19

Specification for Thin Veneer Brick Units Made from Clay or Shale

Table 721.1(2)

C1115—00

Dense Elastomeric Silicone Rubber Gaskets and Accessories

2411.3.4

C1157/C1157M—17

Standard Performance Specification for Hydraulic Cement

1903.1, Table 2507.2

C1167—11(2017)

Specification for Clay Roof Tiles

1507.3.4, 1523.6.5.2

C1177/C1177M—17

Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Substrate for Use as Sheathing

Figure 722.5.1(2), Figure 722.5.1(3), Table 1508.2, Table 2506.2

C1178/C1178M—18

Specification for Glass Mat Water-Resistant Gypsum Backing Panel

Figure 722.5.1(2), Figure 722.5.1(3), Table 2506.2, Table 2509.2

C1186—08(2016)

Specification for Flat Fiber Cement Sheets

1404.10, 1405.16.1, 1405.16.2

C1225—08 (2012)

Specification For Fiber-Cement Roofing Shingles, Shakes and Slates

1518.5.1

C1261—13(2017)e1

Specification for Firebox Brick for Residential Fireplaces

2111.6, 2111.9

C1278/C1278M—17

Specification for Fiber-Reinforced Gypsum Panels

Table 2509.2, Figure 722.5.1(2), Figure 722.5.1(3), Table 1508.2, Table 2506.2

C1280—13a

Specification for Application of Exterior Gypsum Panel Products for Use as Sheathing

Table 2508.1, 2508.2

C1283—15

Practice for Installing Clay Flue Lining

2113.9.1, 2113.12

C1288—17

Standard Specification for Discrete Nonasbestos Fiber-Cement Interior Substrate Sheets

Table 2509.2

C1289—18

Standard Specification for Faced Rigid Cellular Polyisocyanurate Thermal Insulation Board

Table 1508.2, 2603.10, Table 2603.12.1, Table 2603.12.2, Table 2603.13.1, Table 2603.13.2

C1314—07

Specification for Test Method for Compressive Strength of Masonry Prisms

2122.3

C1325—18

Standard Specification for Nonasbestos Fiber-Mat Reinforced Cement Backer Units

Table 2509.2

C1328/C1328M—12

Specification for Plastic (Stucco Cement)

Table 2507.2

C1364—17

Standard Specification for Architectural Cast Stone

2103.1

C1372—17

Standard Specification for Dry-Cast Segmental Retaining Wall Units

1807.2.4

C1396M/C1396M—17

Specification for Gypsum Board

Figure 722.5.1(2), Figure 722.5.1(3)

C1492—03(2016)

Standard Specification for Concrete Roof Tile

1507.3.5

C1569—03(2016)

Standard Test Method for Wind Resistance of Concrete and Clay Roof Tiles (Wind Tunnel Method)

1504.2.1.2

C1570—03(2016)

Standard Test Method for Wind Resistance of Concrete and Clay Roof Tiles (Air Permeability Method)

1504.2.1.3

C1600/C1600M—17

Standard Specification for Rapid Hardening Hydraulic Cement

Table 2507.2

C1629/C1629M—18a

Standard Classification for Abuse-Resistant Nondecorated Interior Gypsum Panel Products and Fiber-Reinforced Cement Panels

403.2.3.1, 403.2.3.2, 403.2.3.4

C1658/C1658M—18

Standard Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Panels

Figure 722.5.1(2), Figure 722.5.1(3), Table 2506.2

C1670—18

Standard Specification for Adhered Manufactured Stone Masonry Veneer Units

2103.1

C1766—15

Standard Specification for Factory-Laminated Gypsum Panel Products

Table 2506.2

C1902—22a

Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Insulation Used in Building and Roof Applications

Table 1508.2

D25—2012(2017)

Specification for Round Timber Piles

1810.3.2.4, 2303.1.12

D41/D41M—2011(2016)

Specification for Asphalt Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

1514.2.3.1, 1517.6.2.4, 1519.6, 1521.6, 1521.14.1, Table 1507.10.2

D43/D43M—2000(2018)

Specification for Coal Tar Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

1514.2.3.1, 1517.6.2.4, 1519.6, 1521.6, 1521.14.2, Table 1507.10.2

D56—16a

Test Method for Flash Point By Tag Closed Cup Tester

202

D86—17

Test Method for Distillation of Petroleum Products at Atmospheric Pressure

202

D92—18

Standard Test Method for Flash and Fire Points by Cleveland Open Cup Tester

1519.2.2

D93—18

Test Method for Flash Point By Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester

202

D225—07

Specification for Asphalt Shingles (Organic Felt) Surfaced with Mineral Granules

1507.2.5

D226/D226M—17

Specification for Asphalt-Saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

1404.2, 1505.2, 1507.1.1, 1507.1.1.1, Table 1507.1.1, 1507.2.3, 1507.3.3, 1507.5.3, 1507.6.3, 1507.7.3, 1507.8.3, 1507.9.3, Table 1507.10.2, 1507.17.3, Table 1518.2.1, 1518.2

D227/D227M—03(2018)e1

Specification for Coal-Tar-Saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2

D256—03

Standard Test Methods for Determining the Izod Pendulum Impact Resistance of Plastics

2615.2

D312/D312M—16a

Specification for Asphalt Used in Roofing

Table 1507.10.2, 1519.3, Table 1519.3A, 1519.4, 1521.14.1

D412—98a (2002)e1

Standard Test Methods for Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Elastomers—Tension

2415.4

D422—63 (2007)e2

Test Method for Particle-Size Analysis of Soils

1803.5.3

D448—12(2017)

Standard Classification for Sizes of Aggregate for Road and Bridge Construction

1507.12.3, E403.3

D450/D450M—17(2018)

Specification for Coal-Tar Pitch Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2, Table 1519.3B

D624—00e1

Standard Test Method for Tear Strength of Conventional Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Elastomers

2415.4

D635—14

Test Method for Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of Burning of Plastics in a Horizontal Position

2606.4

D638—03

Test Method for Tensile Properties of Plastics

2614.2, 2615.2

D1079—02

Standard Terminology Relating to Roofing, Waterproofing, and Bituminous Materials

1513.1

D1143/D1143M—07(2013)e1

Standard Test Methods for Deep Foundations Under Static Axial Compressive Load

1810.3.3.1.2

D1227—13

Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Used as a Protective Coating for Roofing

Table 1507.10.2, 1507.15.2

D1557—12e1

Standard Test Methods for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using Modified Effort [56,000 ft-lb/ft3 (2,700 KN m/m3)]

J107.5, J111, 1804.5, 1804.6

D1621

Standard Test Method for Compressive Properties of Rigid Cellular Plastics

1523.6.5.2.17.1

D1622

Standard Test Method for Apparent Density of Rigid Cellular Plastics

1523.6.5.2.17.2

D1623

Standard Test Method for Tensile and Tensile Adhesion Properties of Rigid Cellular Plastics

1523.6.5.2.17.3

D1761—06

Test Method for Mechanical Fasteners in Wood

2314.4.4

D1863/D1863M—05(2018)e1

Specification for Mineral Aggregate Used on Built-Up Roofs

1504.8, Table 1507.10.2, 1519.12.1

D1929—16

Standard Test Method for Determining Ignition Temperature of Plastics

402.6.4.4, 406.7.2, 2606.4

D1970/D1970M—17a

Specification for Self-Adhering Polymer Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Used as Steep Roof Underlayment for Ice Dam Protection

1507.1.1, Table 1507.1.1, 1507.1.1.1, 1507.1.1.2, 1507.2.9.2

D2126

Standard Test Method for Response of Rigid Cellular Plastics to Thermal and Humid Aging

1523.6.5.2.17.4

D2178/D2178M—15a

Specification for Asphalt Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2

D2240—03

Standard Test Method for Rubber Property—Durometer Hardness

2415.4

D2487—17

Practice for Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes (Unified Soil Classification System)

Table 1610.1, 1803.5.1

D2565—99(2008)

Standard Practice for Xenon Arc Exposure of Plastics Intended for Outdoor Applications

2615.2

D2626/D2626M—04(2012)e1

Specification for Asphalt Saturated and Coated Organic Felt Base Sheet Used in Roofing

1507.3.3, Table 1507.10.2, 1518.4

D2822/D2822M-05(2011)

Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement, Asbestos Containing

Table 1507.10.2

D2823/D2823M—05(2011)e1

Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings, Asbestos Containing

Table 1507.10.2

D2824/D2824M—18

Standard Specification for Aluminum-Pigmented Asphalt Roof Coating, Nonfibered, and Fibered without Asbestos

Table 1507.10.2

D2842

Standard Test Method for Water Absorption of Rigid Cellular Plastics

1523.6.5.2.17.6

D2843—16

Standard Test Method for Density of Smoke from the Burning or Decomposition of Plastics

2606.4

D2856

Standard Test Method for Open-Cell Content of Rigid Cellular Plastics by the Air-Pycnometer

1523.6.5.2.17.5

D2859—16

Standard Test Method for Ignition Characteristics of Finished Textile Floor Covering Materials

804.4.1, 804.4.2

D2898—10(2017)

Test Methods for Accelerated Weathering of Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood for Fire Testing

1505.1, 1516.1, 2303.2.4, 2303.2.6, 2314.4.4

D3018

Standard Specification for Class A Asphalt Shingles Surfaced with Mineral Granules

1523.6.5.1

D3019/D3019M—17

Specification for Lap Cement Used with Asphalt Roll Roofing, Nonfibered, Asbestos Fibered and Nonasbestos Fibered

Table 1507.10.2

D3161/D3161M—16a

Test Method for Wind Resistance of Steep Slope Roofing Products (Fan Induced Method)

1504.3.3, Table 1504.3.3, 1507.2.7.1, Table 1507.2.7.1, 1507.17.8

D3200—74 (2017)

Standard Specification and Test Method for Establishing Recommended Design Stresses for Round Timber Construction Poles

2303.1.12

D3201/D3201M—13

Standard Test Method for Hygroscopic Properties of Fire-Retardant Wood and Wood-Based Products

2303.2.7, 2314.4.4

D3278—1996(2011)

Test Methods for Flash Point of Liquids by Small Scale Closed-Cup Apparatus

202

D3462/D3462M—16

Specification for Asphalt Shingles Made from Glass Felt and Surfaced with Mineral Granules

1507.2.5, 1523.6.5.1

D3468/D3468—99(2013)e1

Specification for Liquid-Applied Neoprene and Chlorosulfonated Polyethylene Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

1507.15.2

D3498—03

Standard Specifications for Adhesives for Field-Gluing Plywood to Lumber Framing for Floor Systems

1711.2.1, 2314.4.4, 2322.1.5

D3679—17

Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Siding

1404.9, 1405.14

D3689/D3698M—13e1

Test Methods for Deep Foundations Under Static Axial Tensile Load

1810.3.3.1.5

D3737—18el

Practice for Establishing Allowable Properties for Structural Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam)

2303.1.3

D3746/D3746M—85(2015)e1

Test Method for Impact Resistance of Bituminous Roofing Systems

1504.7, 1515.2.4

D3747—79(2007)

Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Adhesive for Adhering Roof Insulation

Table 1507.10.2

D3787—89

Test Method for Bursting Strength of Textiles-Constant-Rate-of-Traverse (CRT) Ball Burst Test

454.2.17.1.15

D3909/D3909M—14

Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Glass Felt) Surfaced with Mineral Granules

1507.2.9.2, 1507.6.5, Table 1507.10.2

D3957—09(2015)

Standard Practices for Establishing Stress Grades for Structural Members Used in Log Buildings

2303.1.11

D4022/D4022M—2007(2012)e1

Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement, Asbestos Containing

Table 1507.10.2

D4086

Standard Practice for Visual Evaluation of Metamerism

454.1.2.4, 454.1.11.3

D4272—15

Test Method for Total Energy Impact of Plastic Films by Dart Drop

1504.7, 1515.2.4

D4318—17e1

Test Methods for Liquid Limit, Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index of Soils

1803.5.3

D4402

Viscosity Determinations of Unfilled Asphalt Using the Brookfield Thermoset Apparatus

1519.2.3

D4434/D4434M—15

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Sheet Roofing

1507.12.2

D4479/D4479M—07(2018)

Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings—Asbestos-Free

Table 1507.10.2

D4533(2015)

Standard Test Method for Trapezoid Tearing Strength of Geo Textiles

1507.1.1.1

D4586/D4586M—07(2018)e1

Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement—Asbestos-Free

Table 1507.10.2

D4601/D4601M—04(2012)e1

Specification for Asphalt-Coated Glass Fiber Base Sheet Used in Roofing

Table 1507.10.2

D4637/D4637M—15

Specification for EPDM Sheet Used in Single-Ply Roof Membrane

1507.12.2

D4829—11

Test Method for Expansion Index of Soils

1803.5.3

D4869/D4869M—16a

Specification for Asphalt-Saturated (Organic Felt) Underlayment Used in Steep Slope Roofing

1507.1.1, Table 1507.1.1, 1507.1.1.1, 1507.1.1.2, 1507.1.1.3, 1507.2.3, 1507.5.3, 1507.6.3, 1507.7.3, 1507.8.3, 1507.17.3, 1518.2, Table 1518.2.1

D4897/D4897M—16a

Specification for Asphalt-Coated Glass Fiber Venting Base Sheet Used in Roofing

Table 1507.10.2

D4945—17

Test Method for High-Strain Dynamic Testing of Deep Foundations

1810.3.3.1.2

D4990—97a (2013)

Specification for Coal Tar Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2

D5019—07a

Specification for Reinforced Nonvulcanized Polymeric Sheet Used in Roofing Membrane

1507.12.2

D5034—95

Standard Test Method for Breaking Strength and Elongation of Textile Fabrics (Grab Test)

454.2.17.1.15

D5055—19el

Specification for Establishing and Monitoring Structural Capacities of Prefabricated Wood I-Joists

2303.1.2

D5456—21el

Specification for Evaluation of Structural Composite Lumber Products

2303.1.10

D5516—18

Test Method of Evaluating the Flexural Properties of Fire-Retardant-Treated Softwood Plywood Exposed to the Elevated Temperatures

2303.2.5.1

D5643/D5643M—06(2018)

Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement, Asbestos-Free

Table 1507.10.2

D5664—17

Standard Test Method for Evaluating the Effects of Fire-Retardant Treatments and Elevated Temperatures on Strength Properties of Fire-Retardant-Treated Lumber

2303.2.5.2

D5665/D5665M—17

Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Cold-Applied Roofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2

D5726—98(2013)

Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Hot-Applied Roofing and Waterproofing

Table 1507.10.2

D5957—98

Standard Guide for Flood Testing Horizontal Waterproofing Installation

1519.16.6

D6083/D6063M—21

Specification for Liquid Applied Acrylic Coating Used in Roofing

Table 1507.10.2, Table 1507.14.3, 1507.15.2, 1523.6.2.1.1, 1523.6.3.1, 1523.6.5.2.12.2

D6162/D6162M—16

Specification for Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6163/D6163M—16

Specification for Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6164/D6164M—16

Standard Specification for Styrene Butadiene Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6222/D6222M—16

Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6223/D6223M—16

Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6298/D6298M—16

Specification for Fiberglass Reinforced Styrene-Butadiene-Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheets with a Factory Applied Metal Surface

1507.11.2

D6305—08(2015)e1

Practice for Calculating Bending Strength Design Adjustment Factors for Fire-Retardant-Treated Plywood Roof Sheathing

2303.2.5.1

D6380/D6380—03(2018)

Standard Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Organic Felt)

1507.2.9.2, 1507.6.5

D6464—03a(2017)

Standard Specification for Expandable Foam Adhesives for Fastening Gypsum Wallboard to Wood Framing

2508.4, Table 2506.2

D6509/D6509M—16

Standard Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Base Sheet Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements

1507.11.2

D6694/D6694M—08(2013)e1

Standard Specification for Liquid-Applied Silicone Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing Systems

Table 1507.14.3, 1507.15.2

D6754/D6745M—15

Standard Specification for Ketone Ethylene Ester Based Sheet Roofing

1507.13.2

D6757/D6757M—18

Specification for Inorganic Underlayment for Use with Steep Slope Roofing

1507.1.1, Table 1507.1.1, 1507.2.3, 1507.17.3, 1518.2

D6841—16

Standard Practice for Calculating Design Value Treatment Adjustment Factors for Fire-Retardant-Treated Lumber

2303.2.5.2

D6878/D6878M—21

Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Polyolefin Based Sheet Roofing

1507.13.2

D6947/D6947M—07(2016)

Standard Specification for Liquid Applied Moisture Cured Polyurethane Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing System

Table 1507.14.3

D7032—17

Standard Specification for Establishing Performance Ratings for Wood-Plastic Composite and Plastic Lumber Deck Boards, Stair Treads, Guards, and Handrails

1406.3, 2612.2, 2612.2.1, 2612.4, 2612.5.1

D7147—11(2018)

Specification for Testing and Establishing Allowable Loads of Joist Hangers

2210.3, 2303.5.1, 2303.5.2, 2304.10.3

D7158/D7158M—19ae1

Standard Test Method for Wind Resistance of Asphalt Shingles (Uplift Force/Uplift Resistance Method)

1504.1.1, 1507.1.1, Table 1507.1.1, 1507.2.7.1, Table 1507.2.7.1

D7254—17

Standard Specification for Polypropylene (PP) Siding

1404.12

D7655/D7655M—12(2017)

Standard Classification for Size of Aggregate Used as Ballast for Roof Membrane Systems

1507.12.3, 1507.13.3

D7672—19

Standard Specification for Evaluating Structural Capacities of Rim Board Products and Assemblies

2303.1.13

D8257/D8257M—20

Standard Specification for Mechanically Attached Polymeric Roof Underlayment Used in Steep Slope Roofing

1507.1.1, 1507.1.1.1, Table 1507.1.1.1, 1518.2, 1518.2.1

E84—18b

Test Methods for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials

202, 402.6.4.4, 406.7.2, 452.2.16.3, 602.4, 602.4.1.1, 602.4.2.1, 703.5.2, 720.1, 720.4, 803.1.1, 803.1.4, 803.10, 803.11, 806.7, 1403.5, 1404.12.1, 1407.9, 1407.10.1, 1409.9, 1409.10.1, 1510.6.2, 1510.6.3, 2303.2, 2314.4.4, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.13, 2603.5.4, 2603.5.5, 2603.7.1, 2604.2.4, 2606.3.5.4, 2606.4, 2612.3, 2614.3, 3105.3.4, 3105.6

E90—09(2016)

Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements

1207.2, 1207.2.1

E96/E96M—16

Test Method for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials

202, 449.3.6.4.2, 451.3.6.3.3, 1203.3, 1405.3.1, 1523.6.5.2.17.7, B302.1

E108—17

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings

453.12.1, 1505.1, 1513.1, 1516.1, 2603.6, 2610.2, 2610.3

E119—18b

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials

703.2, 703.2.2, 703.2.1.3, 703.2.1.5, 703.2.2, 703.6, 704.12, 705.7, 705.8.5, 707.6, 712.1.13.2, 714.3.1, 714.4.1, 715.1, 715.3, 715.4, 716.2, Table 716.3, Table 716.5, 716.5.6, 716.5.8.1.1, Table 716.6, 716.6.7.1, 717.3.1, 717.5.2, 717.5.3, 717.6.1, 716.6.2.1, Table 721.1(1), 2103.1, 2603.5.1

E136—19

Standard Test Method for Assessing Combustibility of Materials Using a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750°C

703.5.1

E283—04(2012) or E283/283M—19

Standard Test Method for Determining Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, Skylights, Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified Pressure Differences Across the Specimen

202

E330/E330M—14 or 14(2021)

Test Method for Structural Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls and Doors by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

1709.5.2, 1709.5.2.1, 1709.8, 2415.4, 2415.7.1

E331—00(2009 or 2016)

Test Method for Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Skylights, Doors and Curtain Walls by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

1403.2, 1404.2, 2415.4

E336-19a

Standard Test Method f or Measurement of Airborne Sound Attenuation Between Rooms in Buildings

1207.2

E492—09(2016)e1

Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Impact Sound Transmission Through Floor-Ceiling Assemblies Using the Tapping Machine

1207.3

E648—17a

Standard Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor-Covering Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source

406.1.4, 424.2, 804.2, 804.3

E681—2009(2015)

Test Methods for Concentration Limits of Flammability of Chemical Vapors and Gases

202

E736/E736M—17

Test Method for Cohesion/Adhesion of Sprayed Fire-Resistive Materials Applied to Structural Members

704.13.3.2

E814—2013a(2017)

Standard Test Method of Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Firestops

202, 714.3, 714.4.1.2, 714.5.1.2

E970—17

Standard Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Exposed Attic Floor Insulation Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source

720.3.1

E1007—19

Test Method for Field Measurement of Tapping Machine Impact Sound Transmission through Floor-Ceiling Assemblies and Associated Support Structures

1207.3

E1300—04e01, 07e01, 09e, 12ae1 or 16

Standard Practice for Determining Load Resistance of Glass in Buildings

1709.5.1, 2404.1, 2404.2, 2404.3.1, 2404.3.2, 2404.3.3, 2404.3.4, 2404.3.5, 2411.2.1.1, 2411.2.1.2, 2411.3.1.2

E1347

Standard Test Method for Color and Color-Difference Measurement by Tristimulus Colorimetry

454.1.2.4, 454.1.11.3

E1354—17

Standard Test Method for Heat and Visible Smoke Release Rates for Materials and Products Using an Oxygen Consumption Calorimeter

424.2, 1403.5

E1477

Standard Test Method for Luminous Reflectance Factor of Acoustical Materials by Use of Integrating-Sphere Reflectometers

454.1.2.4

E1592—05(2017)

Test Method for Structural Performance of Sheet Metal Roof and Siding Systems by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

1504.3.2

E1602—03(2017)

Guide for Construction of Solid Fuel-Burning Masonry Heaters

2112.2

E1886—13a or 19

Test Method for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Storm Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Missiles and Exposed to Cyclic Pressure Differentials

1609.1.2, 1709.5.1

E1966—2015

Standard Test Method for Fire-Resistant Joint Systems

202, 715.3

E1996—14a, 17 or 20

Specification for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Windborne Debris in Hurricanes

449.4.2.5.1, 450.4.2.5.1, 1609.1.2, 1609.1.2.2, 1709.5.1

E2072—14

Standard Specification for Photoluminescent (Phosphorescent) Safety Markings

1025.3, 1025.4

E2140—01

Standard Test Method for Water Penetration of Metal Roof Panel Systems by Static Water Pressure Head

Table 1515.2, 1523.6.5.2.4.1.1, TAS 110 Table 15

E2178—13

Standard Test Method for Air Permeance of Building Materials

202, 1507.10.2

E2203—02

Dense Thermoplastic Elastomers Used for Compression Seals, Gaskets, Setting Blocks, Spacers and Accessories

2411.3.4

E2273—18

Standard Test Method for Determining the Drainage Efficiency of Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) Clad Wall Assemblies

1408.4.1

E2307—15be1

Standard Test Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Perimeter Fire Barriers Using the Intermediate-Scale, Multistory Test Apparatus

715.4

E2322—03(2015)

Standard Test Method for Conducting Transverse and Concentrated Load Tests on Panels Used in Floor and Roof Construction

3115.4.2

E2353—16

Standard Test Methods for Performance of Glazing in Permanent Railing Systems, Guards and Balustrades

2407.1.2

E2397/E2397M—2015

Standard Practice for Determination of Dead Loads and Live Loads Associated with Vegetative Green Roof Systems

1607.13.3.1

E2404—17

Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Textile, Paper or Vinyl Wall or Ceiling Coverings to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics

803.1.4

E2556/E2556M—10(2016)

Standard Specification for Vapor Permeable Flexible Sheet Water-Resistive Barriers Intended for Mechanical Attachment

2510.6

E2568—17a

Standard Specification for PB Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems

1408.2

E2570/E2570—07(2014)e1

Standard Test Method for Evaluating Water-Resistive Barrier (WRB) Coatings Used Under Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) for EIFS with Drainage

1408.4.1.1

E2573—17

Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Site-Fabricated Stretch Systems to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics

803.10

E2599—18

Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Reflective Insulation Materials and Vinyl Stretch Ceiling Materials for Building Applications to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics

2614.3

E2634—18

Standard Specification for Flat Wall Insulating Concrete Form (ICF) Systems

1903.4

E2652—16

Standard Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Tube Furnace with a Cone-Shaped Airflow Stabilizer at 750°C

703.5.1

E2751/E2751M—17a

Standard Practice for Design and Performance of Supported Laminated Glass Walkways

2409.1

E2925—17

Standard Specification for Manufactured Polymeric Drainage and Ventilation Materials Used to Provide a Rainscreen Function

2510.6.2

F547—17

Terminology of Nails for Use with Wood and Wood-Based Materials

Table 2506.2

F1346—91(2010)

Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs

454.1.1, 454.1.3.1.9, 454.2.2, 454.2.17

F1487

Standard Consumer Safety Performance Specification for Playground Equipment for Public Use

453.4.5, 453.10.5.2

F1667—18

Specification for Driven Fasteners: Nails, Spikes and Staples

Table 721.1(2), Table 721.1(3), 1506.5, 1507.2.6, 2303.6, 2304.10.1, 2304.10.5, Table 2506.2, Table 2603.13.1, 2603.13.2

F2006—17 or 21

Standard/Safety Specification for Window Fall Prevention Devices for Nonemergency Escape (Egress) and Rescue (Ingress) Windows

1015.8

F2090—17 or 21

Specification for Window Fall Prevention Devices with Emergency Escape (Egress) Release Mechanisms

1015.8, 1015.8.1

F2200—17

Standard Specification for Automated Vehicular Gate Construction

3110.3

F2208—14

Standard Safety Specification for Residential Pool Alarms

454.2.17.1.9

F2286—16

Standard Design and Performance Specification for Removable Mesh Fencing for Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, and Spas

454.2.17.1.15

F2376—17a

Standard Practice for Classification, Design, Manufacture, Construction, and Operation of Water Slide Systems

454.1.9.2.1.1

F3125/F3125M—15

Standard Specification for High Strength Structural Bolts, Steel and Alloy Steel, Heat Treated, 120 ksi (830 MPa) and 150 ksi (1040 MPa) Minimum Tensile Strength, Inch and Metric Dimensions

2214.3

G53—96

Practice for Operating Light-and Water-Exposure Apparatus (Fluorescent UV-Condensation Type) for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

454.2.17.1.15

G60—01

Standard Practice for Conducting Cyclic Humidity Tests

2319.17.2.2.8, 2603.12.2

G85

Standard Practice for Modified Salt Spray (Fog) Testing

1517.5.1, 1517.5.2, 1523.6.5.2.10, 1523.6.5.2.11

G152—13

Practice for Operating Open Flame Carbon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

1504.6

G153

Standard Practice for Operating Enclosed Carbon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

1504.6

G154—16a

Practice for Operating Fluorescent Light Apparatus for UV Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

1504.6

G155—13

Practice for Operating Xenon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

1504.6, 2615.2

AWC

American Wood Council
222 Catoctin SE, Suite 201
LeesburgVA20175

AWC WCD No. 4—2003

Wood Construction Data—Plank and Beam Framing for Residential Buildings

2306.1.2, 2314.4.7

ANSI/AWC WFCM—2018

Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-Family Dwellings

1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1, 2301.2, 2309.1, 2314.4.7

ANSI/AWC NDS—2018

National Design Specification (NDS) for Wood Construction with 2015 NDS Supplement

202, 722.1, Table 1604.3, 1809.12, 1810.3.2.4, Table 1810.3.2.6, Table 2304.10.1, 2304.13, 2306.1, Table 2306.2(1), Table 2306.2(2), Table 2306.3(1), Table 2306.3(2), 2307.1, 2314.4.7, 2315.4, 2319.17.2.1.3, 2319.17.2.1.5,

AWC STJR—2021

Span Tables for Joists and Rafters

2306.1.1, 2314.4.7

ANSI/AWC PWF—2021

Permanent Wood Foundation Design Specification

1805.2, 1807.1.4, 2304.10.5.2, 2314.4.7

ANSI/AWC SDPWS—2021

Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic

202, 2305.1, 2305.2, 2305.3, 2306.1, 2306.2, 2306.3, Table 2306.3(1), Table 2306.3(3), 2307.1, 2314.4.7

AWPA

American Wood Protection Association
P.O. Box 361784
BirminghamAL35236-1784

C1—03

All Timber Products-Preservative Treatment by Pressure Processes

1505.6

M4—2015

Standard for the Care of Preservative-Treated Wood Products

1810.3.2.4.1, 2303.1.9, 2314.4.5

U1—20

USE CATEGORY SYSTEM: User Specification for Treated Wood Except Commodity Specification H

1403.6, Table 1507.9.6, 1807.1.4, 1807.3.1, 1809.12, 1810.3.2.4.1, 2303.1.9, 2304.12.1, 2304.12.2, 2304.12.2.7, 2304.2.8, 2304.12.2.9, 2304.12.4, 2304.12.5, 2304.12.6, 2314.4.5

AWS

American Welding Society
8669 NW 36 Street, #130
DoralFL33166

B2.1—B2.1M—2014-AMD1

Specification for Welding Procedure and Performance Qualification

2214.3

D1.1—D1.1M—2020

Structural Welding Code—Steel

2214.3

D1.2

Structural Welding Code—Aluminum

2003.3

D1.3—D1.3M—2018

Structural Welding Code—Sheet Steel

2214.3

D1.4—D1.4M—2018-AMD1

Structural Welding Code—Reinforcing Steel

2214.3

D9.1—D9.1M—2018

Sheet Metal Welding Code

2214.3

BHMA

Builders Hardware Manufacturers’ Association
355 Lexington Avenue, 17th Floor
New YorkNY10017-6603

A156.10—2017

Power Operated Pedestrian Doors

1010.1.3.2

A156.19—2020

Power Assist and Low Energy Operated Doors

1010.1.3.2

A156.27—2019

Power and Manual Operated Revolving Pedestrian Doors

1010.1.3.2

A156.38—2019

Low Energy Power Operated Sliding and Folding Doors

1010.1.3.2

CEN

European Committee for Standardization (CEN)
Central Secretariat
Rue de Stassart 36
B-10 50 Brussels

EN 1081—98

Resilient Floor Coverings—Determination of the Electrical Resistance

406.7.1

BS EN 15250—2007

Slow Heat Release Appliances Fired By Solid Fuel Requirements and Test Methods

2112.2, 2112.5

CGSB

Canadian General Standards Board
Place du Portage 111, 6B1
11 Laurier Street
Gatineau, QuebecCanadaKIA 1G6

37-GP-52M (1984)

Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane, Sheet Applied, Elastomeric

1504.7, 1507.12.2

37-GP-56M (1980)

Membrane, Modified, Bituminous, Prefabricated and Reinforced for Roofing—with December 1985 Amendment

1507.11.2

CAN/CGSB 37.54—95

Polyvinyl Chloride Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane

1507.13.2

CISCA

Ceilings and Interior Systems Construction Association
1010 Jorie Boulevard, Suite 30
Oak BrookIL60523

CISCA—2007

Recommended Test Procedures for Access Floors

3115.4.2, 3115.4.3

CPA

Composite Panel Association
19465 Deerfield Avenue, Suite 306
LeesburgVA20176

ANSI A135.4—2012

Basic Hardboard

1404.3.1, 2303.1.7, 2314.4.1

ANSI A135.5—2012

Prefinished Hardboard Paneling

2303.1.7, 2304.7

ANSI A135.6—2012

Engineered Wood Siding

1404.3.2, 2303.1.7, 2314.4.1

A208.1—2016

Particleboard

2303.1 8, 2303.1. 8.1

CPSC

Consumer Product Safety Commission
4330 East West Highway
BethesdaMD20814-4408

16 CFR Part 1201 (2002)

Safety Standard for Architectural Glazing Material

2406.2, Table 2406.2(1), 2406.3.1, 2407.1, 2407.1.4.1, 2408.2.1, 2408.3, 2409.2, 2409.3, 2409.4.1

16 CFR Part 1209 (2002)

Interim Safety Standard for Cellulose Insulation

720.6

16 CFR Part 1404 (2002)

Cellulose Insulation

720.6

16 CFR Part 1500 (2009)

Hazardous Substances and Articles; Administration and Enforcement Regulations

202

16 CFR Part 1500.44(2009)

Method for Determining Extremely Flammable and Flammable Solids

202

16 CFR Part 1507 (2002)

Fireworks Devices

202

16 CFR Part 1630 (2007)

Standard for the Surface Flammability of Carpets and Rugs

804.4.1, 804.4.2

Pub. No. 362

Safety Barrier Guidelines for Home Pools

454.1.3.1.9

CSA

Canadian Standards Association
8501 East Pleasant Valley
ClevelandOH44131-5516

AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440—08, 11, 17 or 19

North American Fenestration Standard/Specification for Windows, Doors, and Skylights

1010.1.7, 1709.5.1, 2405.5, 2411.3.2.1

CSSB

Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
P. O. Box 1178
SumasWA98295-1178

CSSB—97

Grading and Packing Rules for Western Red Cedar Shakes and Western Red Shingles of the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

Table 1507.8.5, Table 1507.9.6

 

New Roof Construction Manual (2015)

1507.8

DASMA

Door and Access Systems Manufacturers Association International
1300 Summer Avenue
ClevelandOH44115-2851

ANSI/DASMA 107—2012

Room Fire Test Standard for Garage Doors Using Foam Plastic Insulation

2603.4.1.9

ANSI/DASMA 108—2005, 2012 or 2017

Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors, Rolling Doors and Flexible Doors: Determination of Structural Performance Under Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

1709.5.2.1

ANSI/DASMA 115—2005, 2012 or 2017

Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors, Rolling Doors and Flexible Doors: Determination of Structural Performance Under Missile Impact and Cyclic Wind Pressure

1609.1.2, 1609.1.2.3

DECO

Document Engineering Co., Inc.
5210 Stagg Street
Van NuysCA91405

ANSI Z358.1—04

Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment

450.3.11.7

DOC/NIST

U.S. Department of Commerce
National Institute of Standards and Technology
100 Bureau Drive Stop 3460
GaithersburgMD20899

CS236

Mat-Formed Particleboard

2314.4.6

PS 1—19

Structural Plywood

2303.1.5, 2304.7, Table 2304.8(4), 2304.8(5), Table 2306.2(1), Table 2306.2(2), 2314.2, 2314.4.6

PS 2—18

Performance Standard for Wood Structural Panels

2303.1.5, 2304.7, 2304.8(5), Table 2306.2(1), Table 2306.2(2), 2314.2, 2314.4.6

PS 20—05

American Softwood Lumber Standard

202, 1810.3.2.4, 2303.1.1, 2314.4.6

DOL/OSHA

U.S. Department of Labor
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Frances Perkins Building
200 Constitution Avenue, NW
WashingtonDC20210

29 CFR Part 1910.1000 (2015)

Air Contaminants

202

29 CFR 1910.1200

OSHA Hazard Communication Standard

202, 453.6.2

DOTn

U.S. Department of Transportation
c/o Superintendent of Documents
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE
WashingtonDC20402-9325

14 CFR Part 150 (2005)

The Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement Act of 1979

3114.1

49 CFR Parts 100–185—2015

Hazardous Materials Regulations

202

49 CFR Part 172—2015

Hazardous Materials Tables, Special Provisions, Hazardous Materials Communications, Emergency Response Information and Training Requirements

202

49 CFR Parts 173.137 (2009)

Shippers—General Requirements for Shipments and Packaging— Class 8—Assignment of Packing Group

202

49 CFR—Parts 173–178—(2015)

Specification of Transportation of Explosive and Other Dangerous Articles, UN 0335, UN 0336 Shipping Containers

202

FDOE

Florida Office of Educational Facilities
1014 Turlington Building
325 West Gaines Street
TallahasseeFL32399-0400

SREF

Size of Space and Occupant Design Criteria

453.4.1, 453.8.2

SREF

Life Cycle Cost Guidelines for Materials and Building Systems for Florida’s Public Educational Facilities

453.8.7

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency
Federal Center Plaza
500 C Street, SW
WashingtonDC20472

FEMA-TB-11—01

Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas

1805.1.2.1

FGI

The Facility Guidelines Institute
9750 Fall Ridge Trail
St. LouisMO63127

GHCF—22

Guidelines for Design and Construction of Hospitals

449.2.2, 449.3.2, 449.3.3, 449.3.4, 449.3.5, 449.3.6, 449.3.7, 449.3.9, 449.3.11, 449.3.13, 469.2.1.2

GHCF—22

Guidelines for Design and Construction of Outpatient Facilities

451.2.2, 451.3.3, 451.3.3.1, 451.3.4, 451.3.5, 451.3.6, 451.3.8, 451.3.10, 451.3.13, 469.2.1.2

GHCF—22

Guidelines for Design and Construction of Residential Health, Care, andSupport Facilities

450.2.2, 450.3.2, 450.3.4, 450.3.4.3, 450.3.4.4, 450.3.5, 450.3.6, 450.3.7, 450.3.8, 450.3.9, 450.3.11, 450.3.14, 450.3.15

FINA

Federation Internationale de Natation Amateur
Av. de l’ Avant-Poste 4
1005 Lausanne
SWITZERLAND

CHG-22

FINA Handbook 1998—2000

454.1.2.2.1

FINA Handbook 2005—2009

454.1.2.7

Florida Codes

Florida Building Commission
Building Codes and Standards Office
Department of Business and Professional Regulation
2601 Blair Stone Road
TallahasseeFL32399

FBC-A–Eighth Edition (2023)

Accessibility

101.4.8, 202, 412.3.6, 453.10.2.8.7, 453.27.4, 454.1.3.1.2, 457.1.4.1.1, 457.1.4.4.1, 457.1.4.4.2, 466.7.1.1, 467.2.2.2, 467.3.1.4, 467.9.2.1.3, 508.5.11, 907.1.4, 907.9, 1003.3.4, 1003.5.1, 1004.6, 1009.1, 1010.1, 1010.1.9.13, 1010.2.13.1, 1010.7.1, 1011.6, 1011.7.1, 1011.17, 1012.1, 1012.2, 1012.3, 1012.6, 1012.6.1, 1012.6.3, 1012.6.4, 1012.10, 1013.4, 1014.3, 1014.6, 1023.9, 1101.1.1, 3001.3

FBC-B–Eighth Edition (2023)

Building

101.4.9, 102.1.1, 102.2.2, 102.6.1, 117.1, 449.3.3.2, 449.3.5.1, 449.3.11.5, 449.4.2.2.5, 449.4.2.5.4, 449.4.2.6.1.1, 450.4.2.6.1.1, 451.3.10.12, 453.5.5.1, 453.5.5.2, 453.13.7.1, 454.1.4.1, 454.1.4.2.3, 454.1.6.5.16.4.1, 454.1.6.5.16.5.1, 454.1.9.8.5, 454.1.11.7, 454.1.12.2, 454.1.12.7, 454.2.1.2, 454.2.16, 455.3.5, 456.3.5, 457.1.4.1.4, 460.6, 467.2.4, 467.6.1, 1523.2, 1523.5.1, 1524.1, 1609.1.2.4.1, 1625.4, 1905.1.2, 3115.2.4, 3115.4.1, 3115.4.4, B201, B305.2, B306.2, B307.2.1, C406.2.1, C502.1, C602.1.5, E104.2, E201, E305.2, E306

FBC-EC–Eighth Edition (2023)

Energy Conservation

101.4.6, 201.3, 202, 1203.1, Table 1203.3, 1203.4.2, 1301.1.1, 1405.3.1

FBC-EB–Eighth Edition (2023)

Existing Building

101.4.7, 102.2, 102.6, 202, 449.1.3, 450.1.3, 451.1.3, 467.1.3, Table 504.3, Table 504.4, Table 506.2, 1011.5.2, 1507.1.1.1, 1507.3.3, 1511.1.1, 1518.2.1, 2701.1, 3109.1.1

FBC-FG–Eighth Edition (2023)

Fuel Gas

101.4.1, 201.3, 406.1.9, 415.9.2, 454.2.1.2, 454.2.15, 455.3.7, 456.3.6.1, 456.3.6.2, 2113.11.1.2, 2113.15, 2702.2.5, 2801.1, B201, E201

FBC-M–Eighth Edition (2023)

Mechanical

101.4.2, 201.3, 406.1.9, 406.6.2, 406.8.1, 407.2.7, 409.3, 412.6.6, 414.1.2, 414.3, 415.9.1, 415.9.1.7, 415.9.2, 415.9.3, 415.11.12, 416.2.2, 416.3, 417.1, 421.5, 426.1.4, 453.15.5, 454.2.1.2, 460.6.2, 460.7.2, 460.10.2, 508.5.10, 603.1, 603.1.1, 603.1.2, 712.1.6, 717.2.2, 717.5.3, 717.5.4, 717.5.5, 717.6.1, 717.6.2, 717.6.3, 718.5, 720.1, 720.7, 903.2.11.4, 904.2.2, 904.12, 907.3.1, 909.1, 909.10.2, 909.13.1, 910.4.7, 1006.2.2.3, 1011.16, 1020.6.1, 1203.1, 1203.2.1, 1203.5.2, 1203.5.2.1, 1203.6, 1209.3, 2304.5, 2702.2.5, 2801.1, 3111.2, B201, C502.1, E201

FBC-P–Eighth Edition (2023)

Plumbing

101.4.3, 110.3, 201.3, 415.9.3, 449.3.9.1, 451.3.8.1, 452.2.15.1, 454.1.11.2, 454.1.12.2, 454.2.1.2, 454.2.3, 454.2.8.1, 454.2.13.2, 455.3.2.1, 455.4.2, 456.3.1.1, 456.3.2.1, 457.1.4.1.2, 460.6.1, 603.1.2, 718.5, 903.3.5, 904.11.1.3, 904.11.1.4, 912.6, 1206.3.3, 1503.4, 1503.4.1, 1503.4.2.1, 1514.4, 1514.4.2, 1514.4.3, 1524.1, 1805.4.3, 2901.1, Table P2902.1, 3111.2, 3305.1, B201, E201

FBC-R–Eighth Edition (2023)

Residential

101.2, 102.6.1, 105.15, 117.1, 305.2.3, 308.3.4, 308.4.2, 308.6.4, 310, 310.5.1, 310.5.2, 310.6, 1907.2, K111.1

FFPC–Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Fire Prevention Code

101.4.5, 102.6, 102.6.2, 105.3.1.2, 201.3, 202, 307.1, Table 307.1(1), Table 307.1(2), 307.1.1, 403.4.5, 404.2, 406.6.4.4, 406.7, 406.8, 407.2.5, 407.2.7, 407.4, 410.3.6, 411.1, 412, 412.6.1, 413, 414.1.1, 414.1.2, 414.1.2.1, 414.2, 414.2.5, Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.2.5(2), 414.3, 414.5, 414.5.1, Table 414.5.1, 414.5.2, 414.5.3, 414.6, 415, 415.6, 415.6.1, 415.6.1.1, 415.6.1.4, Table 415.6.5, 415.8.2, 415.9, 415.9.1, 415.9.1.3, 415.9.1.4, 415.9.1.6, 415.9.1.7, 415.9.1.8, 415.9.2, 415.9.3, 415.10, 415.11, 415.11.1.7, 415.11.5, 415.11.8.2, 415.11.10.3, 415.11.10.1, 416, 416.4, 421.1, 422.3.1, 422.3.2, 426.1, 426.1.4, 427.1, 451.2.1, 453.1, 453.2.1, 453.3.2, 453.3.3, 453.3.5, 453.3.6, 453.4, 453.5.1, 453.5.13, 453.5.14, 453.6.1, 453.7.7.1, 453.8.1, 453.8.1.3, 453.8.4, 453.8.5, 453.9.1, 453.10.6, 453.12.2, 453.13.1, 453.14.2,453.14.2.1, 453.20.4, 453.21.1, 453.22.1, 453.27.1, 453.27.9.1, 453.27.10.1, 453.27.15.3, 454.2.1.2, 455.4.3, 456.3.4, 457.1.3.1.1, 457.1.4.1.1, 457.1.4.2.13, 457.1.4.13.2, 457.2.2.1.1, 459.2, 459.2.3, 463.4, 467.3.1, 467.9.1, Table 504.3a, Table 504.4a,b, Table 506.2a,b, 507.4, 507.8.1.1.1, 507.8.1.1.2, 507.8.1.1.3, Table 509.1, 705.8.1, 707.1, 901.2, 901.3, 901.5, 901.6.2, 901.6.3, 903.2.7.1, 903.2.11.3.1, Table 903.2.11.6, 903.2.12, 903.3.1.2.2, 903.3.1.2.3, 903.5, 904.2.2, 904.11.3, 905.1, 905.3.6, 905.3.7, 906.1, 906.4, 907.1.1, 907.2.5, 907.2.6, 907.2.13.2, 907.2.15, 907.2.16, 907.2.23, 907.2.24, 907.5.2.2, 907.6.6, 907.6.6.2, 907.8, 909.6.3, 909.12.1, 909.19, 909.20, 910.2.2, 910.5, 912.4.3, 916.2, 916.7, 916.10, 916.11, 917.1, 1001.3, 1001.4, 1001.2.14, 1203.5.2, 1203.6, 1507.16, 1507.18, Table 1604.5, 2603.4.1.12, 2701.1, 2702.1.3, 2702.2.3, 2702.2.7, 2702.2.10, 2702.2.13, 2702.2.14, 2702.4, 3003.3, 3007.9.1, 3008.1.3, 3102.1, 3103.1, 3111.2, 3111.3, 3111.3.4, 3111.3.5, 3302.3, 3303.7, 3309.2, 3601.2, B201, E201

61C-5

Rule 61C, Florida Administrative Code (Bureau of Elevator Safety Regulations)

3001.1

64E

Rule 64E, Florida Administrative Code (Sewage Disposal)

454.1.1, 454.1.2.1, 454.1.9.2.6.2, 454.1.10.3, 457.1.3.2.12, 457.1.4.13.2, 457.1.4.13.6, 457.2.3, 465.1, 465.4.7, 465.5.1, 465.13.1.1, 2901.1

FS

Florida Statutes

102.2, 102.2.1, 105.1.3, 105.1.4, 105.3, 105.3.1.2, 105.3.5, 105.5, 105.6, 105.8, 105.9, 105.14, 105.16, 105.17, 107.1, 107.3, 107.3.4.2, 107.6, 107.6.2, 110.8.2, 110.8.3, 110.8.4.4, 110.8.5, 110.8.6, 110.9, 110.9.3, 117, 202, 307.1.1, 449.1.1, 449.1.4, 449.2, 449.3, 450.1, 450.1.4, 450.2, 451.1.1,451.1.4, 451.2, 451.2.1, 452.1, 453.1, 453.2.2, 453.3.1, 453.3.2, 453.3.3, 453.3.6, 453.4.3, 453.5.3, 453.8.7, 453.10.2.8.7, 453.10.7, 453.13.8.1, 453.16.8, 453.25.6, 453.25.6.1, 453.25.6.2, 453.27.4, 453.27.9, 454.1.1, 454.1.11.1, 454.1.11.9, 454.1.12.1, 454.1.12.9, 455.1, 455.2, 455.3.1, 455.3.4, 455.4.3, 456.1, 456.2, 456.3.4, 457.1.1, 457.1.2, 457.2, 458.1, 458.2.2, 459.1, 461.1, 463.1, 463.5.2, 464.1, 464.2, 464.3, 464.4.1, 464.4.6.5, 465.1, 467.1, 903.2.11.3.1, 1511.1, 1512.2, 1521.4, 1816.1.7, 2901.1, 3001.1, 3001.2, 3001.6, 3010.1.1, 3010.1.3, 3109.2, Appendix B, Appendix C, C501, E102

FBC-TPHVHZ—

Florida Building Code, Test Protocols for High Velocity Hurricane Zones

 

RAS 109

1507.14, 1521.18, 1523.6.2.1

 

RAS 111

1503.2.1, 1504.5, 1507.2.9, 1507.2.9.1, 1507.3.3.1, 1511.6, 1514.2, 1514.2.1, 1514.2.2, 1514.2.3, 1514.2.4, 1514.2.5.2, 1514.3, 1514.4.1, 1515.2.3.2, 1517.6.1, 1517.6.2.1, 1517.6.2.5, 1518.5.3, 1518.6.2, 1518.7.3.4, 1518.9.5, 1519.8, 1519.10, 1519.13, 1519.16.5, 1523.6.5.2.14, 1525

 

RAS 113

1518.8.1.1

 

RAS 115

1507.2, 1518.7, 1523.6.5.2.6.3

 

RAS 117

1519.7, 1519.11, 1520.4, 1520.5, 1521.7.1, 1521.14.3

 

RAS 118

1518.8.1, 1507.3.2, 1507.3.3, 1507.3.3.1, 1507.3.8, 1507.3.9

 

RAS 119

1518.8.1, 1507.3.2, 1507.3.3, 1507.3.3.1, 1507.3.8, 1507.3.9

 

RAS 120

1518.8.1, 1507.3.2, 1507.3.3, 1507.3.3.1, 1507.3.8, 1507.3.9

 

RAS 127

1518.8.5, 1518.8.6, 1523.6.5.2, 1523.6.5.2.2.2, 1523.6.5.2.2.3, 1523.6.5.2.3.2, 1523.6.5.2.3.3, 1523.6.5.2.6.2, 1525

 

RAS 128

1525

 

RAS 130

1507.8, 1507.9, 1518.10

 

RAS 133

1518.9.2

 

RAS 150

1519.1, 1525

 

TAS 100

1523.6.5, 1523.6.5.1, 1523.6.5.2, 1523.6.5.2.4, 1523.6.5.2.4.1, 1523.6.5.2.5, 1523.6.5.2.6, 1523.6.5.2.7

 

TAS 100A

1523.6.5.2.13

 

TAS 101

1523.6.5.2.2, 1523.6.5.2.2.2, 1523.6.5.2.2.3

 

TAS 102

1523.6.5.2.3, 1523.6.5.2.3.2, 1523.6.5.2.3.3, 1523.6.5.2.6.2, 1523.6.5.2.6.3

 

TAS 102A

1523.6.5.2.3, 1523.6.5.2.3.2, 1523.6.5.2.3.3, 1523.6.5.2.6.2, 1523.6.5.2.6.3

 

TAS 103

1523.6.5.2.1

 

TAS 104

1523.6.5.2.1

 

TAS 105

202, 1513.1, 1519.7.1, 1521.7, 1521.11

 

TAS 106

1512.4.2.4, 1523.6.5.2.2.4, 1523.6.5.2.3.4, 1523.6.5.2.6.4

 

TAS 107

1504.3.3, 1507.2.7.1, 1507.17.8, 1518.11.3, 1523.6.5.1

 

TAS 108

1523.6.5.2.2.1, 1523.6.5.2.2.2, 1523.6.5.2.2.3, 1523.6.5.2.3.1, 1523.6.5.2.3.2, 1523.6.5.2.3.3, 1523.6.5.2.6.1, 1523.6.5.2.6.2, 1523.6.5.2.6.3

 

TAS 110

1515.1.3, 1515.1.4, 1515.2.5, 1520.1, 1520.4, 1523.1.1, 1523.6.2, 1523.6.2.1, 1523.6.3, 1523.6.5.2.4.1, 1523.6.5.2.6, 1523.6.5.2.7, 1523.6.5.2.8, 1523.6.5.2.9, 1523.6.5.2.12, 1523.6.5.2.13.1, 1523.6.5.2.14, 1523.6.5.2.15, 1523.6.5.2.16, 1523.6.5.2.17

 

TAS 111A

1523.6.5.2.14

 

TAS 111B

1523.6.5.2.14

 

TAS 111C

1523.6.5.2.14

 

TAS 112

1523.6.5.2

 

TAS 114

1506.5, 1513.1, 1515.1.1, 1515.2.4, 1517.5.1, 1519.5.1, 1517.5.2, 1520.4, 1523.6.2, 1523.6.2.1, 1523.6.3, 1523.6.5.2.9, 1523.6.5.2.10, 1523.6.5.2.11, 1506.6, 1506.7

 

TAS 116

1513.1, 1523.6.5.2.2.1, 1523.6.5.2.3.1, 1523.6.5.2.6.1

 

TAS 117

1523.6.5.2.9

 

TAS 121

1523.6.5.2.12

 

TAS 123

1518.8.1.1, 1523.6.5.2.15, 1523.6.5.2.17

 

TAS 123A

1523.6.5.2.16

 

TAS 124

1521.10, 1523.6.4

 

TAS 125

1504.3.2, 1518.9.1, 1523.6.5.2.4.1

 

TAS 126

1521.12

 

TAS 135

1523.6.5.2.6

 

TAS 201

449.4.2.5.1, 450.4.2.5.1, 1609.1.2, 1618.4.6.4, 1626.2.1, 1626.3, 1626.5.1, 1626.5.2, 1709.5.1, 2411.3.2.4

 

TAS 202

449.4.2.5.1, 450.4.2.5.1, 1010.1.6, 1405.1, 1410.3, 1410.4, 1410.5, 1626.5.1, 1626.5.3, 1709.5.1, 1709.5.2, 1709.5.2.1, 1709.8, 2411.3.2.1, 2411.3.2.1.1

 

TAS 203

1410.3,1410.4, 1410.5, 449.4.2.5.1, 450.4.2.5.1, 1626.2.1, 1626.3.1, 1626.5.1, 1626.5.3, 1709.5.1, 2411.3.2.4

 

TAS 301

1515.1.3

FM

Factory Mutual Global Research
Standards Laboratories Department
1151 Boston-Providence Turnpike
NorwoodMA02062

4430 (2012)

Approval Standard for Heat and Smoke Vents

910.3.1

4470—2016

Approval Standard for Single-Ply Polymer-Modified Bitumen Sheet, Built-Up Roof (BUR) And Liquid Applied Roof Assemblies for use in Class 1 and Noncombustible Roof Deck Construction

1504.7, 1515.1.1, 1515.2.4

4471 (1992)

Approval Standard for Class I Panel Roofs

1515.1.1, Table 1515.2, 1523.6.5.2.4.1

4474 (2011)

American National Standard for Evaluating the Simulated Wind Uplift Resistance of Roof Assemblies Using Static Positive and/or Negative Differential Pressures

1504.2.1.1, 1504.3.1, 1504.3.3

4880—2017

Approval American National Standard for Evaluating the Fire Performance Insulated Building Panel Assemblies and Interior Finish Materials

2603.9

FRSA

Florida Roofing and Sheet Metal Contractors Association
P.O. Box 4850
Winter ParkFL32793

FRSA/TRI Alliance December 2023(12—23)

Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition

1507.3.2, 1507.3.3, 1507.3.3.1, 1507.3.7, 1507.3.8, 1507.3.9

FS

Federal Specification
941 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 104
ArlingtonVA22202

TTC 555B

Test Specification for Wind Driven Rain Infiltration Resistance

1523.6.2.1.1, 1523.6.3.1

GA

Gypsum Association
6525 Belcrest Road, Suite 480
HyattsvilleMD20782

GA-216—2018

Application and Finishing of Gypsum Panel Products

Table 2508.1, 2509.2

GA-600—2018

Fire-Resistance and Sound Control Design Manual, 22nd Edition

Table 721.1(1), Table 721.1(2), Table 721.1(3)

GSA

General Services Administration
1800 F Street, NW
WashingtonDC20405

DD-G-451c (1977)

Standard for Glass, Flat and Corrugated, for Glazing Mirrors and Other Uses

2411.1.2

HPVA

Hardwood Plywood Veneer Association
1825 Michael Faraday Drive
RestonVA20190

ANSI/HPVA HP-1—2016

American National Standard for Hardwood and Decorative Plywood

2303.3, 2304.7

ICC

International Code Council, Inc.
200 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 250
WashingtonDC20001

ICC A117.1—17

Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities

202, 907.5.2.3.3, 1009.8.2, 1009.9, 1009.11, 1010.2.14, 1012.1, 1012.6.5, 1012.10, 1013.4, 1023.9, 1210.1

ICC 300—17

ICC Standard on Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating and Grandstands

1029.1.1, 1029.17 Table 1607.1

ICC 400—17

Standard on Design and Construction of Log Structures

2301.2

ICC 500—20

ICC/NSSA Standard on the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters

202, 423.1, 423.1.1, 423.2, 423.3, 423.4, 453.9.1, 453.10.6, 453.25.4, 453.24.4.3, 1604.5.1

ICC 600—20

Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions

1609.1.1, 1609.1.1.1

ICC 1100—18

Standard for Spray-Applied Foam Plastic Insulation

2603.1.1

SBCCI SSTD 11—97

Test Standard for Determining Wind Resistance of Concrete or Clay Roof Tiles

1504.2.1.1, 1504.2.1.2

IEEE

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
2001 L Street, NW, Suite 700
WashingtonDC20036-4910

IEEE

Appropriate standards for the type of equipment being protected

457.1.4.1.5, 449.3.15.5, 450.3.19.4

IESNA

Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
120 Wall Street, 17th Floor
New YorkNY10005-4001

ANSI/IESNA RP-28-07

Lighting and the Visual Environment for Senior Living

450.3.15.3

ANSI/IESNA TM-15-11 Addendum A

Backlight, Uplight, and Glare (BUG) Ratings

Table 453.10.3.7(2)

ISO

International Organization for Standardization
ISO Central Secretariat
1 ch, de la Voie-Creuse, Case Postale 56
CH-1211 Geneva 20Switzerland

ISO 8115—86

Cotton Bales—Dimensions and Density

Table 307.1(1), Table 415.11.1.1.1

ISO 8336—09

Fiber-Cement Flat Sheets—Product Specification and Test Methods

1404.10, 1405.16.1, 1405.16.2, 1410.4, Table 2509.2

MHI

Material Handling Institute
8720 Red Oak Boulevard, Suite 201
CharlotteNC28217

ANSI MH29.1—2008

Safety Requirements for Industrial Scissors Lifts

Table 3001.2

MIA

Marble Institute of America
28901 Clemens Road, Suite 100
ClevelandOH44145

MIA (1998)

Appropriate standards for marble selection, cutting and design

460.6.4, 460.7.1.3, 460.9.2

NAAMM

National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers
800 Roosevelt Road, Bldg. C, Suite 312
Glen EllynIL60137

FP 1001—17

Guide Specifications for Design of Metal Flag Poles

1609.1.1

NAAMM MBG 531—2017

Metal Grating Manual

2214.3

NCMA

National Concrete Masonry Association
13750 Sunrise Valley
HerndonVA22071-4662

TEK 5—8B(2005)

Detailing Concrete Masonry Fire Walls

Table 721.1(2)

NFPA

National Fire Protection Association
1 Batterymarch Park
QuincyMA02169-7471

10—18

Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers

453.15.3, 906.1, 906.2, 906.3.2, 906.3.4, Table 906.3(1), Table 906.3(2)

11—16

Standard for Low-, Medium-, and High-Expansion Foam

904.7

12—18

Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems

904.8, 904.12

12A—18

Standard on Halon 1301 Fire Extinguishing Systems

904.9

13—19

Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems

105.3.1.2, 461.1, 712.1.3.1, 903.3.1.1, 903.3.1.2, 903.3.2, 903.3.8.2, 903.3.8.5, 904.12, 905.3.4, 907.6.4, 1019.3

13D—19

Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes

903.2.11.3, 903.3.1.3

13R—19

Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low Rise Residential Occupancies

903.2.11.3, 903.3.1.2, 903.3.5.2, 903.4

14—19

Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems

905.2, 905.3.4, 905.4.2, 905.6.2, 905.8, 3002.10, 3007.9.1

16—19

Standard for the Installation of Foam-Water Sprinkler and Foam-Water Spray Systems

904.7, 904.12

17—21

Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems

904.6, 904.12

17A—21

Standard for Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems

904.5, 904.12

20—19

Standard for the Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection

412.3.4.1, 449.3.10, 450.3.13.1, 451.3.9.1, 904.10, 913.1, 913.2.1, 913.5

30—21

Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code

415.6, 468.3.6.5, 507.8.1.1.1, 507.8.1.1.2

30A—21

Code for Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages

406.1.9.2

31—20

Standard for the Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment

2113.15

32—16

Standard for Drycleaning Facilities

415.9.3

40—19

Standard for the Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film

409.1

58—20

Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code

415.9.2

61—20

Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Dust Explosions in Agricultural and Food Processing Facilities

426.1

70—20

National Electrical Code (NEC)

108.3, 202, 406.1.7, 406.1.9, 415.11.1.8, 449.4.2.9.1, 450.4.2.9.1, 450.4.2.9.6.4, 453.17.8, 453.25.5, 453.25.5.2, 454.1.10.4.2, 457.1.4.1.5, 464.4.2.2.1, 469.4.14.1, 469.4.14.7.1, 469.4.14, 453.17.8, Table 509.1, 904.3.1, 907.6.1, 909.12.2, 909.16.3, 910.4.6, 1006.2.2.4, 1010.1.10.1, 1205.4.1, 2701.1, 2702.1.3, 3111.3, H106.1, H106.2, H115, K101, K111.1

72—19

National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code

407.4.4.3, 407.4.4.5, 407.4.4.5.1, 449.3.12.2, 450.3.16.2, 453.7.7, 466.7.1.1, 466.7.1.2, 466.7.2, 466.10.5.1, 466.10.5.2, 469.4.14.10.1, 901.6, 903.4.1, 904.3.5, 907.1.2, 907.2, 907.2.6, 907.2.9.3, 907.2.11, 907.2.13.2, 907.3, 907.3.3, 907.3.4, 907.5.2.1.2, 907.5.2.1.3.1, 907.5.2.2, 907.5.2.2.5, 907.6, 907.6.1, 907.6.2, 907.6.6, 907.6.6.1, 907.7, 907.7.1, 907.7.2, 907.2.9.3, 911.1.6, 2702.2.4, 3002.10, 3005.5, 3007.7

74—89

Standards for the Installation, Maintenance and Use of Household Fire Warning Equipment

461.1

80—19

Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives

410.3.5, 509.4.2, 716.1, 716.5.7, 716.5.8.1, 716.5.9.2, 716.6.4, 717.4.1.2, 1010.3.3

82—19

Standard on Incinerators and Waste and Linen Handling Systems and Equipment

713.13

85—19

Boiler and Combustion Systems Hazards Code

426.1

91—04

Exhaust Systems for Air Conveying of Vapors, Gases, Mists, and Noncombustible Particulate Solids

468.3.6.5

92—18

Standard for Smoke Control Systems

909.7, 909.8

96—21

Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations

466.6.2

99—21

Health Care Facilities Code

407.11, 425.1, 422.6, 449.3.11.10, 449.3.13, 449.3.14.1, 449.3.14.7, 449.4.2.9.1, 450.3.12, 450.3.14.3, 450.3.17, 450.3.18.1, 450.4.2.9.1, 451.3.13.1, 451.3.15, 451.3.16, 469.4.11.1.1, 469.4.11.1.2, 469.4.14.1, 469.4.14.7.1, 469.4.14.9.3

101—21

Life Safety Code

449.2.1, 449.3.14.4, 450.3.18.4, 451.3.13.5, 453.6.1, 453.14.2.1, 453.27.9.1, 453.27.10.1, 457.1.3.1.1, 457.1.4.1.1, 457.1.4.2.13, 457.1.4.13.2, 457.2.2.1.1, 469.3.1, 469.3.2, 469.4.14.10.1, 903.2.11.3.1, 1030.6.2

105—19

Standard for Smoke Door Assemblies and Other Opening Protectives

405.4.2, 710.5.2.2, 716.5.3, 717.4.1.2, 909.20.4.1, 909.20.6.1, 2702.1.3, 3006.3

110—19

Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems

449.3.14.1, 449.3.14.3, 449.3.14.7, 450.3.18.1, 450.3.18.3, 451.3.13.1, 451.3.13.3, 467.2.8.1, 469.4.14.9.2, 2702.1.2

111—19

Standard on Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems

469.4.14.9.2, 2702.1.3

120—20

Standard for Fire Prevention and Control in Coal Mines

426.1

170—18

Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols

1025.2.6.1

211—19

Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances

2112.5

221—21

Standard for High Challenge Fire Walls, Fire Walls, and Fire Barrier Walls

706.2, Table 716.5

252—17

Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies

Table 716.3, 716.3.1, 716.4, 716.5.1, 716.5.3, 716.5.4, 716.5.5.1, 716.5.8.1.1

253—19

Standard Method of Test for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source

406.1.4, 406.8.3, 424.2, 804.2, 804.3

257—17

Standard on Fire Test for Window and Glass Block Assemblies

Table 716.3, 716.4, 716.5.3.2, 716.6, 716.6.1, 716.6.2, 716.6.7.3

259—18

Standard Test Method for Potential Heat of Building Materials

2603.4.1.10, 2603.5.3

265—19

Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Evaluating Room Fire Growth Contribution of Textile or Expanded Vinyl Wall Coverings on Full Height Panels and Walls

803.1.3, 803.1.3.1

268—17

Standard Test Method for Determining Ignitability of Exterior Wall Assemblies Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source

1406.2.1.1, 1406.2.1.1.1, 1406.2.1.1.2, 2603.5.7, D105.1, D106

275—17

Standard Method of Fire Tests for the Evaluation of Thermal Barriers

508.4.4.1, 509.4.1, 1407.10.2, 1409.10.2, 2603.4

276—19

Standard Method of Fire Test for Determining the Heat Release Rate of Roofing Assemblies With Combustible Above-Deck Roofing Components

1508.1, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.5

285—19

Standard Fire Test Method for the Evaluation of Fire Propagation Characteristics of Exterior Nonload-Bearing Wall Assemblies Containing Combustible Components

718.2.6, 1403.5, 1407.10.4, 1409.10.4, 1510.6.2, 2603.5.5

286—19

Standard Methods of Fire Test for Evaluating Contribution of Wall and Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth

402.6.4.4, 803.1.2, 803.1.2.1, 803.11, 1407.10.3, 1409.10.3, 2603.7, 2603.9, 2604.2.4, 2614.4

288—17

Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Horizontal Fire Door Assemblies Installed in Horizontal Fire Resistance-Rated Assemblies

712.1.13.1

289—19

Standard Method of Fire Test for Individual Fuel Packages

402.6.2, 402.6.4.5, 424.2, 806.4

409—16

Standard on Aircraft Hangars

412.4.6, Table 412.4.6, 412.4.6.1, 412.6.5

418—16

Standard for Heliports

412.8.4

484—19

Standard for Combustible Metals

426.1

654—20

Standard for the Prevention of Fire & Dust Explosions from the Manufacturing, Processing and Handling of Combustible Particulate Solids

426.1

655—17

Standard for the Prevention of Sulfur Fires and Explosions

426.1

664—20

Standard for the Prevention of Fires and Explosions in Wood Processing and Woodworking Facilities

426.1

701—19

Standard Method of Fire Tests for Flame-Propagation of Textiles and Films

410.3.6, 424.2, 801.4, 806.1, 806.3, 806.4, 809.2, 3102.3, 3102.3.1, 3102.6.1.1, 3105.3.4.1, 3105.4, 3105.6, D102.2.8, D106, H106.1.1, H115

704—17

Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response

202, 415.5.2

750—19

Standard on Water Mist Fire Protection Systems

202, 904.11.1.1

780—17

Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems

449.3.15.1, 450.3.19.1, 453.17.7

1124—17

Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles

415.6.1.1

2001—20

Standard on Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems

904.10

NSF

NSF International
P.O. Box 130140
789 N. Dixboro Road
Ann ArborMI48113-0140, USA

NSF 50—19

Equipment for Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs, and Other Recreational Water Facilities

454.1.1, 454.1.2.1, 454.1.6.5.1, 454.1.6.5.16, 454.1.6.5.16.4.2, 454.1.6.5.16.5.2, 454.1.9.2.5.2, 454.1.9.8.6.1, 454.1.10.3, 454.1.11.9

NSF 60—05

Drinking Water Treatment Chemicals—Health Effects

454.1.2.1, 454.1.6.5.18, 454.1.11.19

NSF/ANSI 61—2019

Drinking Water System Components—Health Effects

454.1.11.3

PCI

Precast Prestressed Concrete Institute
200 West Adams Street, Suite 2100
ChicagoIL60606-6938

PCI 124—18

Specification for Fire Resistance of Precast Prestressed Concrete

722.2.3.1

MNL 128—19

Specification for Glass Fiber Reinforced Concrete Panels

1903.3

PTI

Post-Tensioning Institute
38800 Country Club Drive
Farmington HillsMI48331

PTI DC—10.5-19

Standard Requirements for Design and Analysis of Shallow Post-Tensioned Concrete Foundations on Expansive and Stable Soils

1808.6.2

RCSC

Research Council on Structural Connections
c/o Stanley D. Lindsey & Assoc. Ltd. 2244 Metro Center Boulevard, Suite 208
NashvilleTN37228-1320

RCSC—20

Specification for Structural Joints Using High-Strength Bolts, 2020

2214.3

RMI

Rack Manufacturers Institute
8720 Red Oak Boulevard, Suite 201
CharlotteNC28217

ANSI MH16.1—12

Specification for Design, Testing and Utilization of Industrial Steel Storage Racks

2209.1

ANSI MH16.3—16

Specification for the Design, Testing, and Utilization of Industrial Steel Cantilevered Storage Racks

2209.2

SBCA

Structural Building Components Association
6300 Enterprise Lane
MadisonWI53719

ANSI/SBCA FS 100—2012(R2018)

Standard Requirements for Wind Pressure Resistance of Foam Plastic Insulating Sheathing Used in Exterior Wall Covering Assemblies

2603.10

SDI

Steel Deck Institute
P. O. Box 25
Fox River GroveIL60021

ANSI/SDI NC—2017

Standard for Noncomposite Steel Floor Deck

2210.1.1.1, 2214.3

ANSI/SDI RD—2017

Standard for Steel Roof Deck

2210.1.1.2, 2214.3

DDM04—15

Diaphragm Design Manual, 4th Edition, 2015, with Addendum 1 (2015) and Addendum 2 (2016)

2214.3, 2222.4

ANSI/SDI C—2017

Standard for Composite Steel Floor Deck Slabs

2210.1.1.3, 2214.3

SJI

Steel Joist Institute
140 W. Evans Street, Suite 203
FlorenceSC29501

SJI-100—15

Standard Specification for K-Series, LH-Series, and DLH-Series Open Web Steel Joists and for Joist Girders, 2015

1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2207.1

SJI-200—15

Standard Specification for Composite Steel Joists, CJ-Series, 2015

1604.3.3, 2203.2, 2207.1

SJI—18

Structural Design of Steel Joist Roofs to Resist Ponding Loads, Technical Digest No. 3, 2018

2214.3

SJI—15

Vibration of Steel Joist-Concrete Floors, Technical Digest No. 5, 2015

2214.3

SJI—12

Design of Steel Joist Roofs to Resist Uplift Loads, Technical Digest No. 6, 2012

2214.3

SJI—20

Welding of Open Web Steel Joist and Joist Girders, Technical Digest No. 8, 2020

2214.3

SJI—08

Handling and Erection of Steel Joists and Joist Girders, Technical Digest No. 9, 2008

2214.3

SJI—20

45th Edition Standard Specifications Load Tables and Weight Tables for Steel Joists and Joist Girders, 2020

2214.3

SJI—18

90 Years of Open Web Steel Joist Construction, 2018

2214.3

SJI—21

Design of Lateral Load Resisting Frames Using Steel Joists and Joist Girders, Technical Digest No. 11, 2021

2214.3

SPRI

Single-Ply Roofing Institute
411 Waverly Oaks Road, Suite 331B
WalthamMA02452

ANSI/SPRI/FM4435-ES-1—2017

Wind Design Standard for Edge Systems Used with Low Slope Roofing Systems

1504.5

ANSI/SPRI RP-4—2019

Wind Design Standard for Ballasted Single-Ply Roofing Systems

1504.4

GT-1—2016

Test Standard for Gutter Systems

1504.5.1

STI

Steel Tube Institute
2516 Waukegan Road, Suite 172
GlenviewIL60025

STI, 2021. HSS Design Manual, Volume 1

Section Properties & Design Information, Steel Tube Institute, 2021

2214.3

STI, 2021. HSS Design Manual, Volume 2A

Member Design 2016, Steel Tube Institute, 2021

2214.3

STI, 2021. HSS Design Manual, Volume 2B

Member Design 2016, Steel Tube Institute, 2021

2214.3

STI, 2021. HSS Design Manual,Volume 3

Connections at HSS Members 2016, Steel Tube Institute, 2021

2214.3

STI, 2021. HSS Design Manual,Volume 4

Truss & Bracing Connections 2016, Steel Tube Institute, 2021

2214.3

TECO

Timber Company, Inc.
2402 Daniels Street
MadisonWI53704

TECO PRP-133

Performance Standards and Policies for Structural Use Panels

2314.4.8

TIA

Telecommunications Industry Association
1320 N. Courthouse Road
ArlingtonVA22201-3834

ANSI/TIA222-H—2017

Structural Standard for Antenna Supporting Structures and Antennas and Small Wind Turbine Support Structures

1609.1.1, 3108.1, 3108.2

TMS

The Masonry Society
105 South Sunset Street, Suite Q
LongmontCO80501

216—14

Standard Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and Masonry Construction Assemblies

Table 721.1(2), 722.1

302—18

Standard Method for Determining the Sound Transmission Ratings for Masonry Assemblies

1207.2.1

402—16

Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures

1405.6, 1405.10, 1604.3.4, 1807.1.6.3.2, 1808.9, 2101.2, 2105.1, 2106.1, 2107.1, 2107.2, 2107.3, 2107.6, 2108.1, 2108.4, 2109.1, 2109.4, 2110.1, 2114.2, 2122.1, 2122.4, 2122.5, 2122.7, 2122.8.2, 2122.8.4, 2122.10

403—17

Direct Design Handbook for Masonry Structures

2101.2

404—16

Standard for the Design of Architectural Cast Stone

2101.2

504—16

Standard for the Fabrication of Architectural Cast Stone

2103.1

604—16

Standard for the Installation of Architectural Cast Stone

2104

602—16

Specification for Masonry Structures

1405.6.1, 1807.1.6.3, 2103.1, 2103.2.1, 2103.3, 2103.4, 2104.1, 2105.1, 2108.1, 2121.1.6, 2122.1, 2122.2.3, 2122.3, 2122.4, 2122.7.4, 2122.8.1, 2122.8.2, 2122.8.3, 2122.8.4, 2122.8.6, 2122.8.8

TPI

Truss Plate Institute
218 N. Lee Street, Suite 312
AlexandriaVA22314

TPI 1—2014

National Design Standard for Metal-Plate-Connected Wood Truss Construction

2303.4.6, 2306.1, 2319.17.2.1.1, 2319.17.2.2.8

UL

UL LLC
333 Pfingsten Road
NorthbrookIL60062-2096

9—2009

Fire Tests of Window Assemblies—with Revisions through February 2015

Table 716.3, 716.3.2, 716.4, 716.5.3.2, 716.6, 716.6.1, 716.6.2, 716.6.7.3

10A—2009

Tin Clad Fire Doors—with Revisions through July 2018

716.5

10B—2008

Fire Tests of Door Assemblies—with Revisions through February 2015

716.3.1, Table 716.3, 716.5.2, 716.5.4, 716.5.5.1, 716.5.8.1.1

10C—2016

Positive Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies

Table 716.3, 716.3.1, 716.5.1, 716.5.3, 716.5.4, 716.5.5.1, 716.5.8.1.1, 1010.1.10.1, 1010.2.9.1

14B—2008

Sliding Hardware for Standard Horizontally Mounted Tin-Clad Fire Doors— with Revisions through July 2017

716.5

14C—2006

Swinging Hardware for Standard Tin Clad Fire Doors Mounted Singly and in Pairs— with Revisions through July 2017

716.5

55A—2004

Materials for Built-Up Roof Coverings

1507.10.2

103—2010

Factory-Built Chimneys, for Residential Type and Building Heating Appliances— with Revisions through July 2017

718.2.5.1

127—2011

Factory-Built Fireplaces—with Revisions through May 2016

718.2.5.1, 2111.12

181—2005

Standard for Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air Connectors

449.3.6.4, 451.3.6.3, 451.3.6.3.4

199E—2004

Outline of Investigation for Fire Testing of Sprinklers and Water Spray Nozzles for Protection of Deep Fat Fryers

904.12.4.1

217—2015

Single and Multiple Station Smoke Alarms—with Revisions through November 2016

907.2.11

263—2011

Standard for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials—with Revisions through March 2018

703.2, 703.2.1.1, 703.2.2, 703.2.1.3, 703.2.1.5, 703.2.2, 703.6, 704.12, 705.7, 705.8.5, 707.6, 712.1.13, 714.4.1.1, 714.5.1, 715.1, 716.2, Table 716.3, 716.5.6, 716.5.8.1.1, Table 716.6, 716.7.1, 717.3.1, 717.5.2, 717.5.3, 717.6.1, 717.6.2.1, Table 721.1(1), 2103.1, 2603.5.1

268—2016

Smoke Detectors for Fire Alarm Systems—with Revisions through July 2016

407.9, 407.9, 907.2.6.2, 907.2.11.7

294—2018

Access Control System Units—with Revisions through October 2018

1010.2.14, 1010.1.9.8, 1010.1.9.9, 1010.1.9.10, 1010.1.9.13, 1010.2.11, 1010.2.12, 1010.2.13, 1010.2.14

300—2005(R2010)

Fire Testing of Fire Extinguishing Systems for Protection of Commercial Cooking Equipment—with Revisions through December 2014

904.12

300A—2006

Outline of Investigation for Extinguishing System Units for Residential Range Top Cooking Surfaces

407.2.6, 407.2.7, 904.13

305—2012

Panic Hardware—with Revisions through March 2017

1010.1.10

325—2017

Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver and Window Operations and Systems

406.1.1, 3110.4

555—2006

Fire Dampers—with Revisions through October 2016

717.3

555C—2014

Ceiling Dampers—with Revisions through May 2017

717.3

555S—2014

Smoke Dampers—with Revisions through October 2016

717.3.1

580—2006

Test for Uplift Resistance of Roof Assemblies—with Revisions through October 2018

1504.3.1, 1504.3.2, 1504.3.3, 2222.4.6

641—2010

Type L Low-Temperature Venting Systems—with Revisions through April 2018

2113.11.1.4

710B—2011

Recirculating Systems—with Revisions through August 2014

904.12

723—2018

Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials

202, 402.6.4.4, 406.7.2, 602.4.1.1, 602.4.2.1, 602.4.3.1, 703.5.1, 720.1, 720.4, 803.1.1, 803.1.4, 803.10, 803.11, 806.7, 1403.5, 1404.12.1, 1407.9, 1407.10.1, 1409.9, 1409.10.1, 1510.6.2, 1510.6.3, 2303.2, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.13, 2603.5.4, 2603.5.5, 2606.3.5.4, 2603.7, 2604.2.4, 2606.4, 2612.3, 2614.3, 3105.3.4.1, 3105.6, D102.2.8, D106

723S—2006

Drop-Out Ceilings Installed Beneath Automatic Sprinklers

2606.7.4

790—2004

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings— with Revisions through October 2018

1505.1, 1513.1, 1516.1, 2603.6, 2610.2, 2610.3

793—2008

Standards for Automatically Operated Roof Vents for Smoke and Heat— with Revisions through March 2017

910.3.1

864—2014

Standards for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems— with Revisions through March 2018

909.12

924—2016

Standard for Safety Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment— with Revisions through May 2018

1013.5, 3006.3

1040—1996

Fire Test of Insulated Wall Construction— with Revisions through April 2017

1407.10.3, 1409.10.3, 2603.9

1069—2007

Hospital Signaling and Nurse Call Equipment, 7th Edition

449.3.13.1, 450.3.17, 451.3.11.1, 467.8.3.6

1256—2002

Fire Test of Roof Deck Construction— with Revisions through August 2018

1508.1, 2603.3, 2603.4.1.5

1479—2015

Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Firestops

202, 714.4.1.2, 714.5.1.2, 714.5.4

1482—2011

Solid-Fuel-Type Room Heaters—with Revisions through August 2015

2112.2, 2112.5

1703—2002

Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels— with Revisions through September 2018

1505.8, 1505.9, 1507.17.6, 1510.7.4, 1518.11.1, 3111.3.1

1715—1997

Fire Test of Interior Finish Material— with Revisions through April 2017

1407.10.3, 1409.10.2, 1409.10.3, 2603.4, 2603.9, 2614.4

1741—2010

Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection System Equipment for Use with Distributed Energy Resources—with Revisions through February 2018

3111.3.1

1777—2007

Chimney Liners—with Revisions through April 2014

2113.11.1, 2113.19

1784—2015

Air Leakage Tests of Door Assemblies

405.4.3, 710.5.2.2, 710.5.2.2.1, 716.5.3.1, 716.5.7.1, 716.5.7.3, 3006.3, 3007.6.3, 3008.6.3

1897—2015

Uplift Tests for Roof Covering Systems

1504.2.1.1, 1504.3.1, 1504.3.3

1975—2006

Fire Test of Foamed Plastics Used for Decorative Purposes

402.6.2, 402.6.4.5, 424.2

1994—2015

Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems

411.7, 1008.2.1, 1025.2.1, 1025.2.3, 1025.2.4, 1025.2.5

2017—2008

Standards for General-Purpose Signaling Devices and Systems— with Revisions through May 2011

454.2.17.1.9

2034—2017

Standard for Single- and Multiple-Station Carbon Monoxide Alarm— with Revisions through September 2018

202

2075—2013

Standard for Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors—with Revisions through December 2017

202

2079—2015

Tests for Fire Resistance of Building Joint Systems

202, 715.3, 715.6, 715.8

2196—2017

Fire Test for Circuit Integrity of Fire-Resistive Power, Instrumentation, Control and Data Cables

909.20.7.1, 913.2.2, 2702.3, 3007.8.1, 3008.8.2

2200—2012

Stationary Engine Generator Assemblies—with Revisions through October 2015

2702.1.1

2202—2009(2012)

Standard for Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging System Equipment— with Revisions through February, 2018

406.1.7

2594—2016

Standard for Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment, 2013

406.1.7

2703—2014

Mounting Systems, Mounting Devices, Clamping/Retention Devices and Ground Lugs for Use with Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels— with Revisions through December 2019

1505.9

ULC

Underwriters Laboratories of Canada
7 Underwriters Road
Toronto, OntarioCanadaM1R3B4

CAN/ULC S 102.2—2018

Standard Method of Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Flooring, Floor Coverings and Miscellaneous Materials and Assemblies

720.2, 720.3, 720.4

USC

United States Code
c/o Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office 
732 North Capitol Street, NW
WashingtonDC20401

18 USC Part 1, Ch.40

Importation, Manufacture, Distribution and Storage of Explosive Materials

202

WCLIB

West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau
P. O. Box 23145
PortlandOR97281

AITC 104—03

Typical Construction Details

2306.1

AITC 110—01

Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2306.1

AITC 113—10

Standard for Dimensions of Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2306.1

AITC 117—10

Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species

2306.1

AITC 119—96

Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Hardwood Species

2306.1

AITC 200—09

Manufacturing Quality Control Systems Manual for Structural Glued Laminated Timber

2306.1

WDMA

Window and Door Manufacturers Association
2025 M Street, NW, Suite 800
WashingtonDC20036-3309

AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440—08, 11 or 17

North American Fenestration Standard/Specification for Windows, Doors and Unit Skylights

1010.1.7, 1709.5.1, 2405.5, 2411.3.2

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710—20

Guidelines for the Full Frame Replacement of Windows without Removal of External Brick Veneer

1405.4

WDMA/I.S.11—2018

Analytical Method for Design Pressure (DP) Ratings of Fenestration Products

1709.5.1

WRI

Wire Reinforcement Institute, Inc.
942 Main Street, Suite 300
HartfordCT06103

WRI/CRSI—81

Design of Slab-on-Ground Foundations—with 1996 Update

1808.6.2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-36]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 36
FLORIDA FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION 3601
3601.1 Scope.

Provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, construction and arrangement of elements to provide a safe means of egress from buildings and structures and to minimize hazard to life and property due to fire and panic.

3601.2

In addition to the provisions of this code, buildings shall comply with the 8th Edition (2023) Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the Florida State Fire Marshal.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-4]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 4
SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED
ON OCCUPANCY AND USE
SECTION 401
SCOPE
401.1 Detailed occupancy and use requirements.

In addition to the occupancy and construction requirements in this code, the provisions of this chapter apply to the occupancies and uses described herein.

401.2 Additional design criteria.
401.2.1 Scope.

In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the following special occupancies, standards, requirements and codes shall conform to the following sections:

Section 449:	Hospitals
Section 450:	Nursing homes
Section 451:	Ambulatory surgical centers
Section 452:	Birthing centers
Section 453:	State requirements for educational facilities
Section 454:	Swimming pools and bathing places
Section 455:	Public lodging establishments
Section 456:	Public food service establishments
Section 457:	Mental health programs
Section 458:	Manufactured buildings
Section 459:	Boot camps for children
Section 460:	Mausoleums and columbariums
Section 461:	Transient public lodging establishments
Section 462:	
Use of asbestos in new public buildings or
buildings newly constructed for lease to
government entities–prohibition
Section 463:	Adult day care
Section 464:	Assisted living facilities
Section 465:	Control of radiation hazards
Section 466:	Day care occupancies
Section 467:	Hospice inpatient facilities and units and hospice residences.
Section 468:	Schools, colleges and universities
Section 469:	Office surgery suite
Chapter 30:	Elevators and conveying systems
Section 3109:	Structures seaward of a coastal construction control line
401.2.2 General.

Where in any specific case, Sections 449 through 469 specify different materials, methods of construction, design criteria or other requirements than found in this code, the requirements of Sections 449 through 469 shall be applicable.

401.2.3 Referenced standards.

Further information concerning the requirements for licensing, maintenance, equipment or other items not related to design and construction may be obtained for all state codes, rules and standards from the State of Florida Bureau of Administrative Codes.

SECTION 402
COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS
402.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings or structures defined herein as covered or open mall buildings not exceeding three floor levels at any point nor more than three stories above grade plane. Except as specifically required by this section, covered and open mall buildings shall meet applicable provisions of this code.

Exceptions:

1.	Foyers and lobbies of Groups B, R-1 and R-2 are not required to comply with this section.

2.	Buildings need not comply with the provisions of this section where they totally comply with other applicable provisions of this code.

402.1.1 Open space.

A covered mall building and attached anchor buildings and parking garages shall be surrounded on all sides by a permanent open space or not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm). An open mall building and anchor buildings and parking garages adjoining the perimeter line shall be surrounded on all sides by a permanent open space of not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm).

Exception: The permanent open space of 60 feet (18 288 mm) shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than 40 feet (12 192 mm), provided the following requirements are met:

1.	The reduced open space shall not be allowed for more than 75 percent of the perimeter of the covered or open mall building and anchor buildings;

2.	The exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours;

3.	Openings in the exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall have opening protectives with a fire protection rating of not less than 3 hours; and

4.	Group E, H, I or R occupancies are not located within the covered or open mall building or anchor buildings.

402.1.2 Open mall building perimeter line.

For the purpose of this code, a perimeter line shall be established. The perimeter line shall encircle all buildings and structures that comprise the open mall building and shall encompass any open-air interior walkways, open-air courtyards or similar open-air spaces. The perimeter line shall define the extent of the open mall building. Anchor buildings and parking structures shall be outside of the perimeter line and are not considered as part of the open mall building.

402.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ANCHOR BUILDING.

COVERED MALL BUILDING.

Mall.

Open mall.

Open mall building.

FOOD COURT.

GROSS LEASABLE AREA.

402.3 Lease plan.

Each owner of a covered mall building or of an open mall building shall provide both the building and fire departments with a lease plan showing the location of each occupancy and its exits after the certificate of occupancy has been issued. No modifications or changes in occupancy or use shall be made from that shown on the lease plan without prior approval of the building official.

402.4 Construction.

The construction of covered and open mall buildings, anchor buildings and parking garages associated with a mall building shall comply with Sections 402.4.1 through 402.4.3.

402.4.1 Area and types of construction.

The building area and type of construction of covered mall or open mall buildings, anchor buildings and parking garages shall comply with this section.

402.4.1.1 Covered and open mall buildings.

The building area of any covered mall or open mall building shall not be limited provided the covered mall or open mall building does not exceed three floor levels at any point nor three stories above grade plane, and is of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

402.4.1.2 Anchor buildings.

The building area and building height of any anchor building shall be based on the type of construction as required by Section 503 as modified by Sections 504 and 506.

Exception: The building area of any anchor building shall not be limited provided the anchor building is not more than three stories above grade plane, and is of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

402.4.1.3 Parking garage.

The building area and building height of any parking garage, open or enclosed, shall be based on the type of construction as required by Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively.

402.4.2 Fire-resistance-rated separation.

Fire-resistance-rated separation is not required between tenant spaces and the mall. Fire-resistance-rated separation is not required between a food court and adjacent tenant spaces or the mall.

402.4.2.1 Tenant separations.

Each tenant space shall be separated from other tenant spaces by a fire partition complying with Section 708. A tenant separation wall is not required between any tenant space and the mall.

402.4.2.2 Anchor building separation.

An anchor building shall be separated from the covered or open mall building by fire walls complying with Section 706.

Exceptions:

1.	Anchor buildings of not more than three stories above grade plane that have an occupancy classification the same as that permitted for tenants of the mall building shall be separated by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barriers complying with Section 707.

2.	The exterior walls of anchor buildings separated from an open mall building by an open mall shall comply with Table 705.5.

402.4.2.2.1 Openings between anchor building and mall.

Except for the separation between Group R-1 sleeping units and the mall, openings between anchor buildings of Type IA, IB, IIA or IIB construction and the mall need not be protected.

402.4.2.3 Parking garages.

An attached garage for the storage of passenger vehicles having a capacity of not more than nine persons and open parking garages shall be considered as a separate building where it is separated from the covered or open mall building or anchor building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Parking garages, open or enclosed, which are separated from covered mall buildings, open mall buildings or anchor buildings, shall comply with the provisions of Table 705.5.

Pedestrian walkways and tunnels that connect garages to mall buildings or anchor buildings shall be constructed in accordance with Section 3104.

402.4.3 Open mall construction.

Floor assemblies in, and roof assemblies over, the open mall of an open mall building shall be open to the atmosphere for not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), measured perpendicular from the face of the tenant spaces on the lowest level, from edge of balcony to edge of balcony on upper floors and from edge of roof line to edge of roof line. The openings within, or the unroofed area of, an open mall shall extend from the lowest/grade level of the open mall through the entire roof assembly. Balconies on upper levels of the mall shall not project into the required width of the opening.

402.4.3.1 Pedestrian walkways.

Pedestrian walkways connecting balconies in an open mall shall be located not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) from any other pedestrian walkway.

[F] 402.5 Automatic sprinkler system.

Covered and open mall buildings and buildings connected shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, which shall comply with all of the following:

1.	The automatic sprinkler system shall be complete and operative throughout occupied space in the mall building prior to occupancy of any of the tenant spaces. Unoccupied tenant spaces shall be similarly protected unless provided with approved alternative protection.

2.	Sprinkler protection for the mall of a covered mall building shall be independent from that provided for tenant spaces or anchor buildings.

3.	Sprinkler protection for the tenant spaces of an open mall building shall be independent from that provided for anchor buildings.

4.	Sprinkler protection shall be provided beneath exterior circulation balconies located adjacent to an open mall.

5.	Where tenant spaces are supplied by the same system, they shall be independently controlled.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in spaces or areas of open parking garages separated from the covered or open mall building in accordance with Section 402.4.2.3 and constructed in accordance with Section 406.5.

402.6 Interior finishes and features.

Interior finishes within the mall and installations within the mall shall comply with Sections 402.6.1 through 402.6.4.

402.6.1 Interior finish.

Interior wall and ceiling finishes within the mall of a covered mall building and within the exits of covered or open mall buildings shall have a minimum flame spread index and smoke-developed index of Class B in accordance with Chapter 8. Interior floor finishes shall meet the requirements of Section 804.

402.6.2 Kiosks.

Kiosks and similar structures (temporary or permanent) located within the mall of a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall meet the following requirements:

1.	Combustible kiosks or other structures shall not be located within a covered or open mall unless constructed of any of the following materials:

1.1.	Fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

1.2.	Foam plastics having a maximum heat release rate not greater than 100 kW (105 Btu/h) when tested in accordance with the exhibit booth protocol in UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289 using the 20 kW ignition source.

1.3.	Aluminum composite material (ACM) meeting the requirements of Class A interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8 when tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended.

2.	Kiosks or similar structures located within the mall shall be provided with approved automatic sprinkler system and detection devices.

3.	The horizontal separation between kiosks or groupings thereof and other structures within the mall shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm).

4.	Each kiosk or similar structure or groupings thereof shall have an area not greater than 300 square feet (28 m2).

402.6.3 Play structures.

Play structures located within a building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall comply with Section 424. The horizontal separation between play structures, kiosks and similar structures within the mall shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm).

402.6.4 Plastic signs.

Plastic signs affixed to the storefront of any tenant space facing a mall or open mall shall be limited as specified in Sections 402.6.4.1 through 402.6.4.5.

402.6.4.1 Area.

Plastic signs shall be not more than 20 percent of the wall area facing the mall.

402.6.4.2 Height and width.

Plastic signs shall be not greater than 36 inches (914 mm) in height, except that where the sign is vertical, the height shall be not greater than 96 inches (2438 mm) and the width shall be not greater than 36 inches (914 mm).

402.6.4.3 Location.

Plastic signs shall be located not less than 18 inches (457 mm) from adjacent tenants.

402.6.4.4 Plastics other than foam plastics.

Plastics other than foam plastics used in signs shall be light-transmitting plastics complying with Section 2606.4 or shall have a self-ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D1929, and a flame spread index not greater than 75 and smoke-developed index not greater than 450 when tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 or meet the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286.

402.6.4.4.1 Encasement.

Edges and backs of plastic signs in the mall shall be fully encased in metal.

402.6.4.5 Foam plastics.

Foam plastics used in signs shall have flame-retardant characteristics such that the sign has a maximum heat-release rate of 150 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289 using the 20 kW ignition source, and the foam plastics shall have the physical characteristics specified in this section. Foam plastics used in signs installed in accordance with Section 402.6.4 shall not be required to comply with the flame spread and smoke-developed indices specified in Section 2603.3.

402.6.4.5.1 Density.

The density of foam plastics used in signs shall be not less than 20 pounds per cubic foot (pcf) (320 kg/ m3).

402.6.4.5.2 Thickness.

The thickness of foam plastic signs shall not be greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).

402.7 Emergency systems.

Covered and open mall buildings, anchor buildings and associated parking garages shall be provided with emergency systems complying with Sections 402.7.1 through 402.7.5.

[F] 402.7.1 Standpipe system.

Covered and open mall buildings shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.3.

[F] 402.7.2 Smoke control.

Atriums connecting three ormore stories in covered mall buildings shall be providedwith a smoke control system in accordance with Section 909.

[F] 402.7.3 Emergency power.

Covered mall buildings greater than 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) in area and open mall buildings greater than 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) within the established perimeter line shall be provided with emergency power that is capable of operating the emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 2702.

[F] 402.7.4 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.

Where the total floor area is greater than 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) within either a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building, an emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be provided.

Emergency voice/alarm communication systems serving a mall, required or otherwise, shall be accessible to the fire department. The systems shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 402.7.5 Fire department access to equipment.

Rooms or areas containing controls for air-conditioning systems, automatic fire-extinguishing systems, automatic sprinkler systems or other detection, suppression or control elements shall be identified for use by the fire department.

402.8 Means of egress.

Covered mall buildings, open mall buildings and each tenant space within a mall building shall be provided with means of egress as required by this section and this code. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of this code and the requirements of Sections 402.8.1 through 402.8.8, the requirements of Sections 402.8.1 through 402.8.8 shall apply.

402.8.1 Mall width.

For the purpose of providing required egress, malls are permitted to be considered as corridors but need not comply with the requirements of Section 1005.1 of this code where the width of the mall is as specified in this section.

402.8.1.1 Minimum width.

The aggregate clear egress width of the mall in either a covered or open mall building shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm). The mall width shall be sufficient to accommodate the occupant load served. No portion of the minimum required aggregate egress width shall be less than 10 feet (3048 mm) measured to a height of 8 feet (2438 mm) between any projection of a tenant space bordering the mall and the nearest kiosk, vending machine, bench, display opening, food court or other obstruction to means of egress travel.

402.8.2 Determination of occupant load.

The occupant load permitted in any individual tenant space in a covered or open mall building shall be determined as required by this code. Means of egress requirements for individual tenant spaces shall be based on the occupant load thus determined.

402.8.2.1 Occupant formula.

In determining required means of egress of the mall, the number of occupants for whom means of egress are to be provided shall be based on gross leasable area of the covered or open mall building (excluding anchor buildings) and the occupant load factor as determined by Equation 4-1.

(Equation 4-1)

where:

OLF = The occupant load factor (square feet per person).

GLA = The gross leasable area (square feet).

Exception: Tenant spaces attached to a covered or open mall building but with a means of egress system that is totally independent of the open mall of an open mall building or of a covered mall building shall not be considered as gross leasable area for determining the required means of egress for the mall building.

402.8.2.2 OLF range.

The occupant load factor (OLF) is not required to be less than 30 and shall not exceed 50.

402.8.2.3 Anchor buildings.

The occupant load of anchor buildings opening into the mall shall not be included in computing the total number of occupants for the mall.

402.8.2.4 Food courts.

The occupant load of a food court shall be determined in accordance with Section 1004. For the purposes of determining the means of egress requirements for the mall, the food court occupant load shall be added to the occupant load of the covered or open mall building as calculated above.

402.8.3 Number of means of egress.

Wherever the distance of travel to the mall from any location within a tenant space used by persons other than employees is greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) or the tenant space has an occupant load of 50 or more, no fewer than two means of egress shall be provided.

402.8.4 Arrangements of means of egress.

Assembly occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more located within a covered mall building shall be so located such that their entrance will be immediately adjacent to a principal entrance to the mall and shall have not less than one-half of their required means of egress opening directly to the exterior of the covered mall building. Assembly occupancies located within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall be permitted to have their main exit open to the open mall.

402.8.4.1 Anchor building means of egress.

Required means of egress for anchor buildings shall be provided independently from the mall means of egress system. The occupant load of anchor buildings opening into the mall shall not be included in determining means of egress requirements for the mall. The path of egress travel of malls shall not exit through anchor buildings. Malls terminating at an anchor building where no other means of egress has been provided shall be considered as a dead-end mall.

402.8.5 Distance to exits.

Within each individual tenant space in a covered or open mall building, the distance of travel from any point to an exit or entrance to the mall shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm).

The distance of travel from any point within a mall of a covered mall building to an exit shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm). The maximum distance of travel from any point within an open mall to the perimeter line of the open mall building shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm).

402.8.6 Access to exits.

Where more than one exit is required, they shall be so arranged that it is possible to travel in either direction from any point in a mall of a covered mall building to separate exits or from any point in an open mall of an open mall building to two separate locations on the perimeter line, provided neither location is an exterior wall of an anchor building or parking garage. The width of an exit passageway or corridor from a mall shall be not less than 66 inches (1676 mm).

Exception: Access to exits is permitted by way of a dead-end mall that does not exceed a length equal to twice the width of the mall measured at the narrowest location within the dead-end portion of the mall.

402.8.6.1 Exit passageways.

Where exit passageways provide a secondary means of egress from a tenant space, the exit passageways shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1024.

402.8.7 Service areas fronting on exit passageways.

Mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, building service areas and service elevators are permitted to open directly into exit passageways, provided the exit passageway is separated from such rooms with not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire protection rating of openings in the fire barriers shall be not less than 1 hour.

402.8.8 Security grilles and doors.

Horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles or doors that are a part of a required means of egress shall conform to the following:

1.	Doors and grilles shall remain in the full open position during the period of occupancy by the general public.

2.	Doors or grilles shall not be brought to the closed position when there are 10 or more persons occupying spaces served by a single exit or 50 or more persons occupying spaces served by more than one exit.

3.	The doors or grilles shall be openable from within without the use of any special knowledge or effort where the space is occupied.

4.	Where two or more exits are required, not more than one-half of the exits shall be permitted to include either a horizontal sliding or vertical rolling grille or door.

SECTION 403
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
403.1 Applicability.

High-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.2 through 403.6.

Exception: The provisions of Sections 403.2 through 403.6 shall not apply to the following buildings and structures:

1.	Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Section 412.3.

2.	Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.

3.	The portion of a building containing a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance with Section 303.6.

4.	Special industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1.

5.	Buildings with:

5.1.	A Group H-1 occupancy;

5.2.	A Group H-2 occupancy in accordance with Section 415.8, 415.9.2, 415.9.3 or 426.1; or,

5.3.	A Group H-3 occupancy in accordance with Section 415.8.

403.2 Construction.

The construction of high-rise buildings shall comply with the provisions of Sections 403.2.1 through 403.2.4.

403.2.1 Reduction in fire-resistance rating.

The fire-resistance-rating reductions listed in Sections 403.2.1.1 and 403.2.1.2 shall be allowed in buildings that have sprinkler control valves equipped with supervisory initiating devices and water-flow initiating devices for each floor.

403.2.1.1 Type of construction.

The following reductions in the minimum fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Table 601 shall be permitted as follows:

1.	For buildings not greater than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height, the fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Type IA construction shall be permitted to be reduced to the minimum fire-resistance ratings for the building elements in Type IB.

Exception: The required fire-resistance rating of columns supporting floors shall not be reduced.

2.	In other than Group F-1, M and S-1 occupancies, the fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Type IB construction shall be permitted to be reduced to the fire-resistance ratings in Type IIA.

3.	The building height and building area limitations of a building containing building elements with reduced fire-resistance ratings shall be permitted to be the same as the building without such reductions.

403.2.1.2 Shaft enclosures.

For buildings not greater than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height, the required fire-resistance rating of the fire barriers enclosing vertical shafts, other than interior exit stairway and elevator hoistway enclosures, is permitted to be reduced to 1 hour where automatic sprinklers are installed within the shafts at the top and at alternate floor levels.

403.2.2 Seismic considerations.

Reserved.

403.2.3 Structural integrity of interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures.

For high-rise buildings of Risk Category III or IV in accordance with Section 1604.5, and for all buildings that are more than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height, enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall comply with Sections 403.2.3.1 through 403.2.3.4.

403.2.3.1 Wall assembly materials—Soft BodyImpact.

The panels making up the enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall meet or exceed Soft Body Impact Classification Level 2 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M when tested from the exteriorside of the enclosures.

403.2.3.2 Wall assembly materials—Hard BodyImpact.

The panels making up the enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosuresthat are not exposed to the interior of the enclosuresshall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.	The wall assembly shall incorporate no fewer than two layers of impact-resistant panels, each of which meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classification Level 2 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

2.	The wall assembly shall incorporate no fewer than one layer of impact-resistant panels that meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

3.	The wall assembly incorporates multiple layers of any material, tested in tandem, that meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

403.2.3.3 Concrete and masonry walls.

Concrete or masonry walls shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of Sections 403.2.3.1 and 403.2.3.2.

403.2.3.4 Other wall materials.

Any other wall materials that provide impact resistance equivalent to that required by Sections 403.2.3.1 for Soft Body Impact Classification Level 2 and 403.2.3.2 for Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3, as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M, shall be permitted.

403.2.4 Sprayed fire-resistive materials (SFRM).

The bond strength of the SFRM installed throughout the building shall be in accordance with Table 403.2.4.

TABLE 403.2.4 MINIMUM BOND STRENGTH

HEIGHT OF BUILDINGa	SFRM MINIMUM BOND STRENGTH
Up to 420 feet	430 psf
Greater than 420 feet	1,000 psf

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot (psf) = 0.0479 kW/m2.

a.	Above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

[F] 403.3 Automatic sprinkler system.

Buildings and structures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in spaces or areas of:

1.	Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.

2.	Telecommunications equipment buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided that those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 403.3.1 Number of sprinkler risers and system design.

Each sprinkler system zone in buildings that are more than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height shall be supplied by no fewer than two risers. Each riser shall supply sprinklers on alternate floors. If more than two risers are provided for a zone, sprinklers on adjacent floors shall not be supplied from the same riser.

[F] 403.3.1.1 Riser location.

Sprinkler risers shall be placed in interior exit stairways and ramps that are remotely located in accordance with Section 1007.1.

[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps.

In buildings that are more than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.

Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through no fewer than one of the connections.

[F] 403.3.3 Secondary water supply.

Reserved.

[F] 403.3.4 Fire pump room.

Fire pumps shall be located in rooms protected in accordance with Section 913.2.1.

[F] 403.4 Emergency systems.

The detection, alarm and emergency systems of high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.4.1 through 403.4.8.

[F] 403.4.1 Smoke detection.

Smoke detection shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.

[F] 403.4.2 Fire alarm system.

A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.

[F] 403.4.3 Standpipe system.

A high-rise building shall be equipped with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.

[F] 403.4.4 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.

An emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 403.4.5 Emergency responder radio coverage.

Emergency responder radio coverage shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 403.4.6 Fire command.

A fire command center complying with Section 911 shall be provided in a location approved by the fire department.

403.4.7 Smoke removal.

To facilitate smoke removal in post-fire salvage and overhaul operations, buildings and structures shall be equipped with natural or mechanical ventilation for removal of products of combustion in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Easily identifiable, manually operable windows or panels shall be distributed around the perimeter of each floor at not more than 50-foot (15 240 mm) intervals. The area of operable windows or panels shall be not less than 40 square feet (3.7 m2) per 50 linear feet (15 240 mm) of perimeter.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group R-1 occupancies, each sleeping unit or suite having an exterior wall shall be permitted to be provided with 2 square feet (0.19 m2) of venting area in lieu of the area specified in Item 1.

2.	Windows shall be permitted to be fixed provided that glazing can be cleared by fire fighters.

2.	Mechanical air-handling equipment providing one exhaust air change every 15 minutes for the area involved. Return and exhaust air shall be moved directly to the outside without recirculation to other portions of the building.

3.	Any other approved design that will produce equivalent results.

[F] 403.4.8 Standby and emergency power.

A standby power system complying with Section 2702 and Section 3003 shall be provided for the standby power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.3. An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.4.

[F] 403.4.8.1 Equipment room.

If the standby or emergency power system includes a generator set inside a building, the system shall be located in a separate room enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. System supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the fire command center.

Exception: In Group I-2, Condition 2, manual start and transfer features for the critical branch of the emergency power are not required to be provided at the fire command center.

[F] 403.4.8.2 Fuel line piping protection.

Fuel lines supplying a generator set inside a building shall be separated from areas of the building other than the room the generator is located in by an approved method or assembly that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Where the building is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the required fire-resistance rating shall be reduced to 1 hour.

[F] 403.4.8.3 Standby power loads.

The following are classified as standby power loads:

1.	Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smokeproof enclosures.

2.	Elevators.

3.	Where elevators are provided in a high-rise building for accessible means of egress, fire service access or occupant self-evacuation, the standby power system shall also comply with Sections 1009, 3007 or 3008, as applicable.

[F] 403.4.8.4 Emergency power loads.

The following are classified as emergency power loads:

1.	Exit signs and means of egress illumination required by Chapter 10.

2.	Elevator car lighting.

3.	Emergency voice/alarm communications systems.

4.	Automatic fire detection systems.

5.	Fire alarm systems.

6.	Electrically powered fire pumps.

7.	Power and lighting for the fire command center required by Section 403.4.6.

403.5 Means of egress and evacuation.

The means of egress in high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.6.

403.5.1 Remoteness of interior exit stairways.

Required interior exit stairways shall be separated by a distance not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) or not less than one-fourth of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be served, whichever is less. The distance shall be measured in a straight line between the nearest points of the enclosure surrounding the interior exit stairways. In buildings with three or more interior exit stairways, no fewer than two of the interior exit stairways shall comply with this section. Interlocking or scissor stairways shall be counted as one interior exit stairway.

403.5.2 Additional interior exit stairway.

For buildings other than Group R-2 that are more than 420 feet (128 000 mm) in building height, one additional interior exit stairway meeting the requirements of Sections 1011 and 1023 shall be provided in addition to the minimum number of exits required by Section 1006.3. The total width of any combination of remaining interior exit stairways with one interior exit stairway removed shall be not less than the total width required by Section 1005.1. Scissor stairways shall not be considered the additional interior exit stairway required by this section.

Exception: An additional interior exit stairway shall not be required to be installed in buildings having elevators used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance with Section 3008.

403.5.3 Stairway door operation.

Stairway doors other than the exit discharge doors shall be permitted to be locked from the stairway side. Stairway doors that are locked from the stairway side shall be capable of being unlocked simultaneously without unlatching upon a signal from the fire command center.

403.5.3.1 Stairway communication system.

A telephone or other two-way communications system connected to an approved constantly attended station shall be provided at not less than every fifth floor in each stairway where the doors to the stairway are locked.

403.5.4 Smokeproof enclosures.

Every required interior exit stairway serving floors more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be a smokeproof enclosure in accordance with Sections 909.20 and 1023.11.

403.5.5 Luminous egress path markings.

Luminous egress path markings shall be provided in accordance with Section 1025.

403.5.6 Emergency escape and rescue.

Emergency escape and rescue openings specified in Section 1030 are not required.

403.6 Elevators.

Elevator installation and operation in high-rise buildings shall comply with Chapter 30 and Sections 403.6.1 and 403.6.2.

403.6.1 Fire service access elevator.

In buildings with an occupied floor more than 120 feet (36 576 mm), measured from the elevation of street-level access to the level of the highest occupiable floor, no fewer than two fire service access elevators shall be provided in accordance with Section 3007. All remaining elevators, if any, shall be provided with Phase I and II emergency operation. Each fire service access elevator shall have a capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (1588 kg).

403.6.2 Occupant evacuation elevators.

Where installed in accordance with Section 3008, passenger elevators for general public use shall be permitted to be used for occupant self-evacuation.

SECTION 404
ATRIUMS
404.1 General.

In other than Group H occupancies, the provisions of Sections 404.1 through 404.11 shall apply to buildings or structures containing vertical openings defined as “Atriums.”

Exception: Vertical openings that comply with Sections 712.1.1 through 712.1.3 and Sections 712.1.9 through 712.1.14.

404.1.1 Definition.

The following term is defined in Chapter 2:

ATRIUM.

404.2 Use.

The floor of the atrium shall not be used for other than low fire hazard uses and only approved materials and decorations in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be used in the atrium space.

Exception: The atrium floor area is permitted to be used for any approved use where the individual space is provided with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

[F] 404.3 Automatic sprinkler protection.

An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building.

Exceptions:

1.	That area of a building adjacent to or above the atrium need not be sprinklered provided that portion of the building is separated from the atrium portion by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

2.	Where the ceiling of the atrium is more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the floor, sprinkler protection at the ceiling of the atrium is not required.

[F] 404.4 Fire alarm system.

A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.14.

404.5 Smoke control.

A smoke control system shall be installed in accordance with Section 909.

Exceptions:

1.	In other than Group I-2, and Group I-1, Condition 2, smoke control is not required for atriums that connect only two stories.

2.	A smoke control system is not required for atriumsconnecting more than two stories when all of the following are met:

2.1.	Only the two lowest stories shall be permitted to be open to the atrium.

2.2.	All stories above the lowest two storiesshall be separated from the atrium in accordance with the provision for a shaft in Section 713.4.

404.6 Enclosure of atriums.

Atrium spaces shall be separated from adjacent spaces by a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exceptions:

1.	A fire barrier is not required where a glass wall forming a smoke partition is provided. The glass wall shall comply with all of the following:

1.1.	Automatic sprinklers are provided along both sides of the separation wall and doors, or on the room side only if there is not a walkway on the atrium side. The sprinklers shall be located between 4 inches and 12 inches (102 mm and 305 mm) away from the glass and at intervals along the glass not greater than 6 feet (1829 mm). The sprinkler system shall be designed so that the entire surface of the glass is wet upon activation of the sprinkler system without obstruction;

1.2.	The glass wall shall be installed in a gasketed frame in a manner that the framing system deflects without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates; and

1.3.	Where glass doors are provided in the glass wall, they shall be either self-closing or automatic-closing.

2.	A fire barrier is not required where a glass-block wall assembly complying with Section 2110 and having a 3/4-hour fire protection rating is provided.

3.	A fire barrier is not required between the atrium and the adjoining spaces of any three floors of the atrium provided such spaces are accounted for in the design of the smoke control system.

4.	A horizontal assembly is not required between theatrium and openings for escalators complying withSection 712.1.3.

5.	A horizontal assembly is not required between theatrium and openings for exit access stairways andramps complying with Item 4 of Section 1019.3.

[F] 404.7 Standby power.

Equipment required to provide smoke control shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 909.11.

404.8 Interior finish.

The interior finish of walls and ceilings of the atrium shall be not less than Class B with no reduction in class for sprinkler protection.

404.9 Exit access travel distance.

Exit access travel distance for areas open to an atrium shall comply with the requirements of this section.

404.9.1 Egress not through the atrium.

Where required access to the exits is not through the atrium, exit access travel distance shall comply with Section 1017.

404.9.2 Exit access travel distance at the level of exit discharge.

Where the path of egress travel is through an atrium space, exit access travel distance at the level of exit discharge shall be determined in accordance with Section 1017.

404.9.3 Exit access travel distance at other than the level of exit discharge.

Where the path of egress travel is not at the level of exit discharge from the atrium, that portion of the total permitted exit access travel distance that occurs within the atrium shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm).

404.10 Exit stairways in an atrium.

Where an atrium contains an interior exit stairway all the following shall be met:

1.	The entry to the exit stairway is the edge of the closestriser of the exit stairway.

2.	The entry of the exit stairway shall have access from aminimum of two directions.

3.	The distance between the entry to an exit stairway in anatrium and the entrance to a minimum of one exit stairway enclosed in accordance with Section 1023.2 shallcomply with the separation required by Section 1007.1.1.

4.	Exit access travel distance shall be measured to theclosest riser of the exit stairway.

5.	Not more than 50 percent of the exit stairways shall belocated in the same atrium.

404.11 Interior exit stairways discharge.

A maximum of 50 percent of interior exit stairways are permitted to egress through an atrium on the level of exit discharge in accordance with Section 1028.

SECTION 405
UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS
405.1 General.

The provisions of Sections 405.2 through 405.9 apply to building spaces having a floor level used for human occupancy more than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge.

Exceptions: The provisions of Section 405 are not applicable to the following buildings or portions of buildings:

1.	One- and two-family dwellings, sprinklered in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.

2.	Parking garages provided with automatic sprinkler systems in compliance with Section 405.3.

3.	Fixed guideway transit systems.

4.	Grandstands, bleachers, stadiums, arenas and similar facilities.

5.	Where the lowest story is the only story that would qualify the building as an underground building and has an area not greater than 1,500 square feet (139 m2) and has an occupant load less than 10.

6.	Pumping stations and other similar mechanical spaces intended only for limited periodic use by service or maintenance personnel.

405.2 Construction requirements.

The underground portion of the building shall be of Type I construction.

[F] 405.3 Automatic sprinkler system.

The highest level of exit discharge serving the underground portions of the building and all levels below shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Water-flow switches and control valves shall be supervised in accordance with Section 903.4.

405.4 Compartmentation.

Compartmentation shall be in accordance with Sections 405.4.1 through 405.4.3.

405.4.1 Number of compartments.

A building having a floor level more than 60 feet (18 288 mm) below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge shall be divided into no fewer than two compartments of approximately equal size. Such compartmentation shall extend through the highest level of exit discharge serving the underground portions of the building and all levels below.

Exception: The lowest story need not be compartmented where the area is not greater than 1,500 square feet (139 m2) and has an occupant load of less than 10.

405.4.2 Smoke barrier penetration.

The compartments shall be separated from each other by a smoke barrier in accordance with Section 709. Penetrations between the two compartments shall be limited to plumbing and electrical piping and conduit that are firestopped in accordance with Section 714. Doorways shall be protected by fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716 and shall be automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4 and are installed in accordance with NFPA 105 and Section 716.5.3. Where provided, each compartment shall have an air supply and an exhaust system independent of the other compartments.

405.4.3 Elevators.

Where elevators are provided, each compartment shall have direct access to an elevator. Where an elevator serves more than one compartment, an elevator lobby shall be provided and shall be separated from each compartment by a smoke barrier in accordance with Section 709. Doorways in the smoke barrier shall be protected by fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716, shall comply with the smoke and draft control assembly requirements of Section 716.5.3 with the UL 1784 test conducted without an artificial bottom seal, and shall be automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

405.5 Smoke control system.

A smoke control system shall be provided in accordance with Sections 405.5.1 and 405.5.2.

405.5.1 Control system.

A smoke control system is required to control the migration of products of combustion in accordance with Section 909 and the provisions of this section. Smoke control shall restrict movement of smoke to the general area of fire origin and maintain means of egress in a usable condition.

405.5.2 Compartment smoke control system.

Where compartmentation is required, each compartment shall have an independent smoke control system. The system shall be automatically activated and capable of manual operation in accordance with Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19.

[F] 405.6 Fire alarm systems.

A fire alarm system shall be provided where required by Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19.

405.7 Means of egress.

Means of egress shall be in accordance with Sections 405.7.1 and 405.7.2.

405.7.1 Number of exits.

Each floor level shall be provided with no fewer than two exits. Where compartmentation is required by Section 405.4, each compartment shall have no fewer than one exit and shall also have no fewer than one exit access doorway into the adjoining compartment.

405.7.2 Smokeproof enclosure.

Every required stairway serving floor levels more than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the finished floor of its level of exit discharge shall comply with the requirements for a smokeproof enclosure as provided in Section 1023.11.

[F] 405.8 Standby and emergency power.

A standby power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the standby power loads specified in Section 405.8.1. An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 405.8.2.

[F] 405.8.1 Standby power loads.

The following loads are classified as standby power loads:

1.	Smoke control system.

2.	Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smokeproof enclosures.

3.	Elevators, as required in Section 3003.

[F] 405.8.2 Emergency power loads.

The following loads are classified as emergency power loads:

1.	Emergency voice/alarm communications systems.

2.	Fire alarm systems.

3.	Automatic fire detection systems.

4.	Elevator car lighting.

5.	Means of egress and exit sign illumination as required by Chapter 10.

6.	Fire pumps.

[F] 405.9 Standpipe system.

The underground building shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system in accordance with Section 905.

SECTION 406
MOTOR-VEHICLE-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
406.1 General.

All motor-vehicle-related occupancies shall comply with Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3. Private garages and carports shall also comply with Section 406.3. Open public parking garages shall also comply with Sections 406.4 and 406.5. Enclosed public parking garages shall also comply with Sections 406.4 and 406.6. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall also comply with Section 406.7. Repair garages shall also comply with Section 406.8.

406.1.1 Automatic garage door openers and vehicular gates.

Where provided, automatic garage door openers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 325. Where provided, automatic vehicular gates shall comply with Section 3110.

406.1.2 Clear height.

The clear height of each floor level in vehicle and pedestrian traffic areas shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm). Canopies under which fuels are dispensed shall have a clear height in accordance with Section 406.7.2.

Exception: A lower clear height is permitted for a parking tier in mechanical-access open parking garages where approved by the building official.

406.1.3 Accessible parking spaces.

Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 11.

406.1.4 Floor surfaces.

Floor surfaces shall be of concrete or similar approved noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials. The area of floor used for the parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway. The surface of vehicle fueling pads in motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with Section 406.7.1.

Exceptions:

1. Asphalt parking surfaces shall be permitted at ground level for public parking garages and private carports.

2. Floors of Group S-2 parking garages shall not be required to have a sloped surface.

3. Slip-resistant, nonabsorbent, interior floor finishes having a critical radiant flux not more than 0.45 W/cm2, as determined by ASTM E648 or NFPA 253, shall be permitted in repair garages.

406.1.5 Sleeping rooms.

Openings between a motor vehicle-related occupancy and a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.

406.1.6 Fuel dispensing.

The dispensing of fuel shall only be permitted in motor fuel-dispensing facilities in accordance with Section 406.7.

406.1.7 Electric vehicle charging stations.

Where provided, electric vehicle charging stations shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 70. Electric vehicle charging system equipment shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2202. Electric vehicle supply equipment shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2594. Accessibility to electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 11.

406.1.8 Mixed occupancies and separation.

Mixed uses shall be allowed in the same building as public parking garages and repair garages in accordance with Section 508.1. Mixed uses in the same building as an open parking garage are subject to Sections 402.4.2.3, 406.5.11, 508.1, 510.3, 510.4 and 510.7.

406.1.9 Equipment and appliances.

Equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with Sections 406.1.9.1 through 406.1.9.3 and the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas and NFPA 70.

406.1.9.1 Elevation of ignition sources.

Equipment and appliances having an ignition source and located in hazardous locations and public garages, private garages, repair garages, automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor surface on which the equipment or appliance rests. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage.

Exception: Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed as flammable vapor ignition resistant.

406.1.9.1.1 Parking garages.

Connection of a parking garage with any room in which there is a fuelfired appliance shall be by means of a vestibule providing a two-doorway separation, except that a single door is permitted where the sources of ignition in the appliance are elevated in accordance with Section 406.1.9.1.

Exception: This section shall not apply to appliance installations complying with Section 406.1.9.2 or 406.1.9.3.

406.1.9.2 Public garages.

Appliances located in public garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities, repair garages or other areas frequented by motor vehicles shall be installed not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) above the floor. Where motor vehicles are capable of passing under an appliance, the appliance shall be installed at the clearances required by the appliance manufacturer and not less than 1 foot (305 mm) higher than the tallest vehicle garage door opening.

Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply where the appliances are protected from motor vehicle impact and installed in accordance with Section 406.1.9.1 and NFPA 30A.

406.1.9.3 Private garages.

Appliances located in private garages and carports shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor.

Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply where the appliances are protected from motor vehicle impact and installed in accordance with Section 406.1.9.1.

406.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES.

OPEN PARKING GARAGE.

PRIVATE GARAGE.

RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES.

406.3 Private garages and carports.

Private garages and carports shall comply with Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3.

406.3.1 Classification.

Private garages and carports shall be classified as Group U occupancies. Each private garage shall be not greater than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in area. Multiple private garages are permitted in a building where each private garage is separated from the other private garages by 1-hour fire barriers in accordance with Section 707, or 1-hour horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711, or both.

406.3.2 Separation.

For other than private garages adjacent to dwelling units, the separation of private garages from other occupancies shall comply with Section 508. Separation of private garages from dwelling units shall comply with Sections 406.3.2.1 and 406.3.2.2.

406.3.2.1 Dwelling unit separation.

The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of gypsum board, not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in thickness, applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than a 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board or equivalent and 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board applied to structures supporting the separation from habitable rooms above the garage. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) in thickness, or doors in compliance with Section 716.5.3 with a fire protection rating of not less than 20 minutes. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching.

406.3.2.2 Ducts.

Ducts in a private garage and ducts penetrating the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling unit from the garage, including its attic area, shall be constructed of sheet steel of not less than 0.019 inch (0.48 mm) in thickness and shall have no openings into the garage.

406.3.3 Carports.

Carports shall be open on at least two sides. Carports not open on at least two sides shall be considered a garage and shall comply with the requirements for private garages.

The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.

406.3.3.1 Carport separation.

A separation is not required between a Group R-3 and U carport, provided the carport is entirely open on two or more sides and there are not enclosed areas above.

406.4 Public parking garages.

Parking garages, other than private garages, shall be classified as public parking garages and shall comply with the provisions of Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3 and shall be classified as either an open parking garage or an enclosed parking garage. Open parking garages shall also comply with Section 406.5. Enclosed parking garages shall also comply with Section 406.6. See Section 510 for special provisions for parking garages.

406.4.1 Guards.

Guards shall be provided in accordance with Section 1015. Guards serving as vehicle barriers shall comply with Sections 406.4.2 and 1015.

406.4.2 Vehicle barriers.

Vehicle barriers not less than 2 feet 9 inches (835 mm) in height shall be placed where the vertical distance from the floor of a drive lane or parking space to the ground or surface directly below is greater than 1 foot (305 mm). Vehicle barriers shall comply with the loading requirements of Section 1607.9.3.

Exception: Vehicle barriers are not required in vehicle storage compartments in a mechanical-access parking garage.

406.4.3 Ramps.

Vehicle ramps shall not be considered as required exits unless pedestrian facilities are provided. Vehicle ramps that are utilized for vertical circulation as well as for parking shall not exceed a slope of 1:15 (6.67 percent).

406.5 Open parking garages.

Open parking garages shall comply with Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3, 406.4 and 406.5.

406.5.1 Construction.

Open parking garages shall be of Type I, II or IV construction. Open parking garages shall meet the design requirements of Chapter 16. For vehicle barriers, see Section 406.4.2.

406.5.2 Openings.

For natural ventilation purposes, the exterior side of the structure shall have uniformly distributed openings on two or more sides. The area of such openings in exterior walls on a tier shall be not less than 20 percent of the total perimeter wall area of each tier. The aggregate length of the openings considered to be providing natural ventilation shall be not less than 40 percent of the perimeter of the tier. Interior walls shall be not less than 20 percent open with uniformly distributed openings.

Exception: Openings are not required to be distributed over 40 percent of the building perimeter where the required openings are uniformly distributed over two opposing sides of the building.

406.5.2.1 Openings below grade.

Where openings below grade provide required natural ventilation, the outside horizontal clear space shall be one and one-half times the depth of the opening. The width of the horizontal clear space shall be maintained from grade down to the bottom of the lowest required opening.

406.5.3 Uses.

Mixed uses shall be allowed in the same building as an open parking garage subject to the provisions of Sections 402.4.2.3, 406.5.11, 508.1, 510.3, 510.4 and 510.7.

406.5.4 Area and height.

Area and height of open parking garages shall be limited as set forth in Chapter 5 for Group S-2 occupancies and as further provided for in Section 508.1.

TABLE 406.5.4

OPEN PARKING GARAGES AREA AND HEIGHT

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION	
AREA PER TIER
(square feet)	HEIGHT (in tiers)
Ramp access	Mechanical access
Automatic sprinkler system
No	Yes
IA	Unlimited	Unlimited	Unlimited	Unlimited
IB	Unlimited	12 tiers	12 tiers	18 tiers
IIA	50,000	10 tiers	10 tiers	15 tiers
IIB	50,000	8 tiers	8 tiers	12 tiers
IV	50,000	4 tiers	4 tiers	4 tiers

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

406.5.4.1 Single use.

Where the open parking garage is used exclusively for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles, with no other uses in the building, the area and height shall be permitted to comply with Table 406.5.4, along with increases allowed by Section 406.5.5.

Exception: The grade-level tier is permitted to contain an office, waiting and toilet rooms having a total combined area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93 m2). Such area need not be separated from the open parking garage.

In open parking garages having a spiral or sloping floor, the horizontal projection of the structure at any cross section shall not exceed the allowable area per parking tier. In the case of an open parking garage having a continuous spiral floor, each 9 feet 6 inches (2896 mm) of height, or portion thereof, shall be considered a tier.

406.5.5 Area and height increases.

The allowable area and height of open parking garages shall be increased in accordance with the provisions of this section. Garages with sides open on three-fourths of the building’s perimeter are permitted to be increased by 25 percent in area and one tier in height. Garages with sides open around the entire building’s perimeter are permitted to be increased by 50 percent in area and one tier in height. For a side to be considered open under the above provisions, the total area of openings along the side shall not be less than 50 percent of the interior area of the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally distributed along the length of the tier. For purposes of calculating the interior area of the side, the height shall not exceed 7 feet (2134 mm).

Allowable tier areas in Table 406.5.4 shall be increased for open parking garages constructed to heights less than the table maximum. The gross tier area of the garage shall not exceed that permitted for the higher structure. No fewer than three sides of each such larger tier shall have continuous horizontal openings not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in clear height extending for not less than 80 percent of the length of the sides and no part of such larger tier shall be more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) horizontally from such an opening. In addition, each such opening shall face a street or yard accessible to a street with a width of not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) for the full length of the opening, and standpipes shall be provided in each such tier.

Open parking garages of Type II construction, with all sides open, shall be unlimited in allowable area where the building height does not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm). For a side to be considered open, the total area of openings along the side shall be not less than 50 percent of the interior area of the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally distributed along the length of the tier. For purposes of calculating the interior area of the side, the height shall not exceed 7 feet (2134 mm). All portions of tiers shall be within 200 feet (60 960 mm) horizontally from such openings or other natural ventilation openings as defined in Section 406.5.2. These openings shall be permitted to be provided in courts with a minimum dimension of 20 feet (6096 mm) for the full width of the openings.

406.5.6 Fire separation distance.

Exterior walls and openings in exterior walls shall comply with Tables 601 and 705.5. The distance to an adjacent lot line shall be determined in accordance with Table 705.5 and Section 705.

406.5.7 Means of egress.

Where persons other than parking attendants are permitted, open parking garages shall meet the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10. Where no persons other than parking attendants are permitted, there shall be no fewer than two exit stairways. Each exit stairway shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in width. Lifts shall be permitted to be installed for use of employees only, provided they are completely enclosed by noncombustible materials.

[F] 406.5.8 Standpipe system.

An open parking garage shall be equipped with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.

406.5.9 Enclosure of vertical openings.

Enclosure shall not be required for vertical openings except as specified in Section 406.5.7.

406.5.10 Ventilation.

Ventilation, other than the percentage of openings specified in Section 406.5.2, shall not be required.

406.5.11 Prohibitions.

The following uses and alterations are not permitted:

1.	Vehicle repair work.

2.	Parking of buses, trucks and similar vehicles.

3.	Partial or complete closing of required openings in exterior walls by tarpaulins or any other means.

4.	Dispensing of fuel.

406.6 Enclosed parking garages.

Enclosed parking garages shall comply with Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3, 406.4 and 406.6.

406.6.1 Heights and areas.

Enclosed vehicle parking garages and portions thereof that do not meet the definition of open parking garages shall be limited to the allowable heights and areas specified in Sections 504 and 506 as modified by Section 507. Roof parking is permitted.

406.6.2 Ventilation.

A mechanical ventilation system shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 406.6.3 Automatic sprinkler system.

An enclosed parking garage shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.10.

406.6.4 Mechanical-access enclosed parking garages.

Mechanical-access enclosed parking garages shall be inaccordance with Sections 406.6.4.1 through 406.6.4.4.

406.6.4.1 Separation.

Mechanical-access enclosedparking garages shall be separated from other occupancies and accessory uses by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or bynot less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructedin accordance with Section 711, or both.

406.6.4.2 Smoke removal.

A mechanical smokeremoval system, installed in accordance with Section910.4, shall be provided for all areas containing amechanical-access enclosed parking garage.

406.6.4.3 Fire control equipment room.

Fire controlequipment, consisting of the fire alarm control unit,mechanical ventilation controls and an emergency shutdown switch, shall be provided in a room located wherethe equipment is able to be accessed by the fire servicefrom a secured exterior door of the building. The roomshall be not less than 50 square feet (4.65 m2) in areaand shall be in a location that is approved by the firecode official.

406.6.4.3.1 Emergency shutdown switch.

Themechanical parking system shall be provided with amanually activated emergency shutdown switch foruse by emergency personnel. The switch shall beclearly identified and shall be in a location approvedby the fire code official.

406.6.4.4 Fire department access doors.

Access doorsshall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

406.7 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities.

Motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3 and 406.7.

406.7.1 Vehicle fueling pad.

The vehicle shall be fueled on noncoated concrete or other approved paving material having a resistance not exceeding 1 megohm as determined by the methodology in EN 1081.

406.7.2 Canopies.

Canopies under which fuels are dispensed shall have a clear, unobstructed height of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm) to the lowest projecting element in the vehicle drive-through area. Canopies and their supports over pumps shall be of noncombustible materials, fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Chapter 23, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11, or of construction providing 1-hour fire resistance. Combustible materials used in or on a canopy shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Shielded from the pumps by a noncombustible element of the canopy, or heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11;

2.	Plastics covered by aluminum facing having a thickness of not less than 0.010 inch (0.30 mm) or corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.016 inch (0.41 mm). The plastic shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in the form intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and a self-ignition temperature of 650°F (343°C) or greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D1929; or

3.	Panels constructed of light-transmitting plastic materials shall be permitted to be installed in canopies erected over motor vehicle fuel-dispensing station fuel dispensers, provided the panels are located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from any building on the same lot and face yards or streets not less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in width on the other sides. The aggregate areas of plastics shall be not greater than 1,000 square feet (93 m2). The maximum area of any individual panel shall be not greater than 100 square feet (9.3 m2).

406.7.2.1 Canopies used to support gaseous hydrogen systems.

Canopies that are used to shelter dispensing operations where flammable compressed gases are located on the roof of the canopy shall be in accordance with the following:

1.	The canopy shall meet or exceed Type I construction requirements.

2.	Operations located under canopies shall be limited to refueling only.

3.	The canopy shall be constructed in a manner that prevents the accumulation of hydrogen gas.

406.8 Repair garages.

Repair garages shall be constructed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.9.3 and 406.8. This occupancy shall not include motor fuel-dispensing facilities, as regulated in Section 406.7.

406.8.1 Ventilation.

Repair garages shall be mechanically ventilated in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. The ventilation system shall be controlled at the entrance to the garage.

[F] 406.8.2 Gas detection system.

Repair garages used for repair of vehicles fueled by nonodorized gases, including but not limited to hydrogen and nonodorized LNG, shall be provided with a gas detection system that complies with Section 916. The gas detection system shall be designed to detect leakage of nonodorized gaseous fuel. Where lubrication or chassis service pits are provided in garages used for repairing nonodorized LNG-fueled vehicles, gas sensors shall be provided in such pits.

[F] 406.8.2.1 System activation.

Activation of a gas detection alarm shall result in all of the following:

1.	Initiation of distinct audible and visual alarm signals in the repair garage, where the ventilation system is interlocked with gas detection.

2.	Deactivation of all heating systems located in the repair garage.

3.	Activation of the mechanical ventilation system, where the system is interlocked with gas detection.

[F] 406.8.2.2 Failure of the gas detection system.

Failure of the gas detection system shall automatically deactivate the heating system, activate the mechanical ventilation system where the system is interlocked with the gas detection system and cause a trouble signal to sound at an approved location.

[F] 406.8.3 Automatic sprinkler system.

A repair garage shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.9.1.

SECTION 407
GROUP I-2
407.1 General.

Occupancies in Group I-2 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 407.1 through 407.10 and other applicable provisions of this code.

407.2 Corridors continuity and separation.

Corridors in occupancies in Group I-2 shall be continuous to the exits and shall be separated from other areas in accordance with Section 407.3 except spaces conforming to Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.6.

407.2.1 Waiting and similar areas.

Waiting areas and similar spaces constructed as required for corridors shall be permitted to be open to a corridor, only where all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The spaces are not occupied as care recipient’s sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, or hazardous uses.

2.	The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

3.	The corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

4.	The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

407.2.2 Care providers’ stations.

Spaces for care providers’, supervisory staff, doctors’ and nurses’ charting, communications and related clerical areas shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where such spaces are constructed as required for corridors.

407.2.3 Psychiatric treatment areas.

Areas wherein psychiatric care recipients who are not capable of self-preservation are housed, or group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces other than incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, under continuous supervision by facility staff, shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where the following criteria are met:

1.	Each area does not exceed 1,500 square feet (140 m2).

2.	The area is located to permit supervision by the facility staff.

3.	The area is arranged so as not to obstruct any access to the required exits.

4.	The area is equipped with an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.2.

5.	Not more than one such space is permitted in any one smoke compartment.

6.	The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

407.2.4 Gift shops.

Gift shops and associated storage that are less than 500 square feet (455 m2) in area shall be permitted to be open to the corridor where such spaces are constructed as required for corridors.

407.2.5 Nursing home housing units.

In Group I-2, Condition 1, occupancies, in areas where nursing home residents are housed, shared living spaces, group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

2.	The spaces are not occupied as resident sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, or hazardous uses.

3.	The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

4.	The corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

5.	The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

407.2.6 Nursing home cooking facilities.

In Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies, rooms or spaces that contain a cooking facility with domestic cooking appliances shall be permitted to be open to the corridor where all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The number of care recipients housed in the smoke compartment is not greater than 30.

2.	The number of care recipients served by the cooking facility is not greater than 30.

3.	Only one cooking facility area is permitted in a smoke compartment.

4.	The corridor is a clearly identified space delineated by construction or floor pattern, material or color.

5.	The space containing the domestic cooking facility shall be arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exit.

6.	The cooking appliances shall comply with Section 407.2.7

407.2.7 Domestic cooking appliances.

In Group I-2,Condition 1 occupancies, installation of cooking appliances used in domestic cooking facilities shall complywith all of the following:

1.	The types of domestic cooking appliances permittedare limited to ovens, cooktops, ranges, warmers andmicrowaves.

2.	A domestic cooking hood installed and constructedin accordance with Section 505 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical is provided over the cooktopor range.

3.	The domestic cooking hood provided over the cooktop or range shall be equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system of a type recognized for protection of domestic cooking equipment. Preengineered automatic extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300A and listed and labeled for the intended application. The system shall be installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

4.	A manual actuation device for the hood suppression system shall be installed in accordance with Sections 904.12.1 and 904.12.2.

5.	An interlock device shall be provided such that upon activation of the hood suppression system, the power or fuel supply to the cooktop or range will be turned off.

6.	A shut-off for the fuel and electrical power supply to the cooking equipment shall be provided in a location that is accessible only to staff.

7.	A timer shall be provided that automatically deactivates the cooking appliances within a period of not more than 120 minutes.

8.	A portable fire extinguisher shall be installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

407.3 Corridor wall construction.

Corridor walls shall be constructed as smoke partitions in accordance with Section 710.

407.3.1 Corridor doors.

Corridor doors, other than those in a wall required to be rated by Section 509.4 or for the enclosure of a vertical opening or an exit, shall not have a required fire protection rating and shall not be required to be equipped with self-closing or automatic-closing devices, but shall provide an effective barrier to limit the transfer of smoke and shall be equipped with positive latching. Roller latches are not permitted. Other doors shall conform to Section 716.

407.4 Means of egress.

Group I-2 occupancies shall be provided with means of egress complying with Chapter 10 and Sections 407.4.1 through 407.4.4. The fire safety and evacuation plans provided in accordance with Section 1001.4 shall identify the building components necessary to support a defend-in-place emergency response in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

407.4.1 Direct access to a corridor.

Habitable rooms in Group I-2 occupancies shall have an exit access door leading directly to a corridor.

Exceptions:

1.	Rooms with exit doors opening directly to the outside at ground level.

2.	Rooms arranged as care suites complying with Section 407.4.4.

407.4.1.1 Locking devices.

Locking devices that restrict access to a care recipient’s room from the corridor and that are operable only by staff from the corridor side shall not restrict the means of egress from the care recipient’s room.

Exceptions:

1.	This section shall not apply to rooms in psychiatric treatment and similar care areas.

2.	Locking arrangements in accordance with Section 1010.2.14.

407.4.2 Distance of travel.

The distance of travel between any point in a Group I-2 occupancy sleeping room, not located in a care suite, and an exit access door in that room shall be not greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm).

407.4.3 Projections in nursing home corridors.

In Group I-2, Condition 1, occupancies, where the corridor width is a minimum of 96 inches (2440 mm), projections shall be permitted for furniture where all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The furniture is attached to the floor or to the wall.

2.	The furniture does not reduce the clear width of the corridor to less than 72 inches (1830 mm) except where other encroachments are permitted in accordance with Section 1005.7.

3.	The furniture is positioned on only one side of the corridor.

4.	Each arrangement of furniture is 50 square feet (4.6 m2) maximum in area.

5.	Furniture arrangements are separated by 10 feet (3048 mm) minimum.

6.	Placement of furniture is considered as part of the fire and safety plans in accordance with Section 1001.4.

407.4.4 Group I-2 care suites.

Care suites in Group I-2 shall comply with Sections 407.4.4.1 through 407.4.4.4 and either Section 407.4.4.5 or 407.4.4.6.

407.4.4.1 Exit access through care suites.

Exit access from all other portions of a building not classified as a care suite shall not pass through a care suite.

407.4.4.2 Separation.

Care suites shall be separated from other portions of the building, including other care suites, by a smoke partition complying with Section 710.

407.4.4.3 Access to corridor.

Every care suite shallhave a door leading directly to an exit access corridoror horizontal exit. Movement from habitable roomswithin the care suite shall not require more than 100feet (30 480 mm) of travel within the care suite to adoor leading to the exit access corridor or horizontalexit. Where a care suite is required to have more thanone exit access door by Section 407.4.4.5.2 or407.4.4.6.2, the additional door shall lead directly to anexit access corridor, exit or an adjacent suite.

407.4.4.4 Doors within care suites.

Doors in care suites serving habitable rooms shall be permitted to comply with one of the following:

1.	Manually operated horizontal sliding doors permitted in accordance with Exception 9 to Section 1010.1.2.

2.	Power-operated doors permitted in accordance with Exception 7 to Section 1010.1.2.

3.	Means of egress doors complying with Section 1010.

407.4.4.5 Care suites containing sleeping room areas.

Sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be grouped into care suites where one of the following criteria is met:

1.	The care suite is not used as an exit access for more than eight care recipient beds.

2.	The arrangement of the care suite allows for direct and constant visual supervision into the sleeping rooms by care providers.

3.	An automatic smoke detection system is provided in the sleeping rooms and installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

407.4.4.5.1 Area.

Care suites containing sleeping rooms shall be not greater than 7,500 square feet (696 m2) in area.

Exception: Care suites containing sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be not greater than 10,000 square feet (929 m2) in area where an automatic smoke detection system is provided throughout the care suite and installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

407.4.4.5.2 Exit access.

Any sleeping room, or any care suite that contains sleeping rooms, of more than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) shall have no fewer than two exit access doors from the care suite located in accordance with Section 1007.

407.4.4.6 Care suites not containing sleeping rooms.

Areas not containing sleeping rooms, but only treatment areas and the associated rooms, spaces or circulation space, shall be permitted to be grouped into care suites and shall conform to the limitations in Sections 407.4.4.6.1 and 407.4.4.6.2.

407.4.4.6.1 Area.

Care suites of rooms, other than sleeping rooms, shall have an area not greater than 12,500 square feet (1161 m2).

Exception: Care suites not containing sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be not greater than 15,000 square feet (1394 m2) in area where an automatic smoke detection system is provided throughout the care suite in accordance with Section 907.

407.4.4.6.2 Exit access.

Care suites, other than sleeping rooms, with an area of more than 2,500 square feet (232 m2) shall have no fewer than two exit access doors from the care suite located in accordance with Section 1007.1.

407.5 Smoke barriers.

Smoke barriers shall be provided to subdivide every story used by persons receiving care, treatment or sleeping and to divide other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into no fewer than two smoke compartments. Such stories shall be divided into smoke compartments with an area of not more than 22,500 square feet (2092 m2) in Group I-2, Condition 1, and not more than 40,000 square feet (3716 m2) in Group I-2, Condition 2, and the distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm). The smoke barrier shall be in accordance with Section 709.

407.5.1 Refuge area.

Refuge areas shall be provided within each smoke compartment. The size of the refuge area shall accommodate the occupants and care recipients from the adjoining smoke compartment. Where a smoke compartment is adjoined by two or more smoke compartments, the minimum area of the refuge area shall accommodate the largest occupant load of the adjoining compartments. The size of the refuge area shall provide the following:

1.	Not less than 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) for each care recipient confined to bed or stretcher.

2.	Not less than 6 square feet (0.56 m2) for each ambulatory care recipient not confined to bed or stretcher and for other occupants.

Areas or spaces permitted to be included in the calculation of refuge area are corridors, sleeping areas, treatment rooms, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas.

407.5.2 Independent egress.

A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originated.

407.5.3 Horizontal assemblies.

Horizontal assemblies supporting smoke barriers required by this section shall be designed to resist the movement of smoke. Elevator lobbies shall be in accordance with Section 3006.2.

407.6 Automatic-closing doors.

Automatic-closing doorswith hold-open devices shall comply with Sections 709.5 and716.5.

407.6.1 Activation of automatic-closing doors.

Automatic-closing doors on hold-open devices in accordancewith Section 716.5.9.4 shall also close upon activation of afire alarm system, an automatic sprinkler system, or both.The automatic release of the hold open device on one doorshall release all such doors within the same smoke compartment.

[F] 407.7 Automatic sprinkler system.

Smoke compartments containing sleeping rooms shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance withSections 903.3.1.1 and 903.3.2.

[F] 407.8 Fire alarm system.

A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.

[F] 407.9 Automatic fire detection.

Corridors in Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies and spaces permitted to be open to the corridors by Section 407.2 shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system.

Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies shall be equipped with smoke detection as required in Section 407.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Corridor smoke detection is not required where sleeping rooms are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall provide a visual display on the corridor side of each sleeping room and an audible and visual alarm at the care provider’s station attending each unit.

2.	Corridor smoke detection is not required where sleeping room doors are equipped with automatic door-closing devices with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance with their listing, provided that the integral detectors perform the required alerting function.

407.10 Secured yards.

Grounds are permitted to be fenced and gates therein are permitted to be equipped with locks, provided that safe dispersal areas having 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) for bed and stretcher care recipients and 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) for ambulatory care recipients and other occupants are located between the building and the fence. Such provided safe dispersal areas shall be located not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the building they serve.

407.11 Electrical systems.

In Group I-2 occupancies, the essential electrical system for electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 and NFPA 99.

SECTION 408
GROUP I-3
408.1 General.

Occupancies in Group I-3 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 408.1 through 408.11 and other applicable provisions of this code (see Section 308.5).

408.1.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

CELL.

CELL TIER.

HOUSING UNIT.

SALLYPORT.

408.2 Other occupancies.

Buildings or portions of buildings in Group I-3 occupancies where security operations necessitate the locking of required means of egress shall be permitted to be classified as a different occupancy. Occupancies classified as other than Group I-3 shall meet the applicable requirements of this code for that occupancy where provisions are made for the release of occupants at all times.

Means of egress from detention and correctional occupancies that traverse other use areas shall, as a minimum, conform to requirements for detention and correctional occupancies.

Exception: It is permissible to exit through a horizontal exit into other contiguous occupancies that do not conform to detention and correctional occupancy egress provisions but that do comply with requirements set forth in the appropriate occupancy, as long as the occupancy is not a Group H use.

408.3 Means of egress.

Except as modified or as provided for in this section, the means of egress provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply.

408.3.1 Door width.

Doors to resident sleeping units shall have a clear width of not less than 28 inches (711 mm).

408.3.2 Sliding doors.

Where doors in a means of egress are of the horizontal-sliding type, the force to slide the door to its fully open position shall be not greater than 50 pounds (220 N) with a perpendicular force against the door of 50 pounds (220 N).

408.3.3 Guard tower doors.

A hatch or trap door not less than 16 square feet (610 m2) in area through the floor and having dimensions of not less than 2 feet (610 mm) in any direction shall be permitted to be used as a portion of the means of egress from guard towers.

408.3.4 Spiral stairways.

Spiral stairways that conform to the requirements of Section 1011.10 are permitted for access to and between staff locations.

408.3.5 Ship’s ladders.

Ship’s ladders shall be permitted for egress from control rooms or elevated facility observation rooms in accordance with Section 1011.15.

408.3.6 Exit discharge.

Exits are permitted to discharge into a fenced or walled courtyard. Enclosed yards or courts shall be of a size to accommodate all occupants, be located not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the building and have an area of not less than 15 square feet (1.4 m2) per person.

408.3.7 Sallyports.

A sallyport shall be permitted in a means of egress where there are provisions for continuous and unobstructed passage through the sallyport during an emergency egress condition.

408.3.8 Interior exit stairway and ramp construction.

One interior exit stairway or ramp in each building shall be permitted to have glazing installed in doors and interior walls at each landing level providing access to the interior exit stairway or ramp, provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	The interior exit stairway or ramp shall not serve more than four floor levels.

2.	Exit doors shall be not less than 3/4-hour fire door assemblies complying with Section 716.

3.	The total area of glazing at each floor level shall not exceed 5,000 square inches (3.2 m2) and individual panels of glazing shall not exceed 1,296 square inches (0.84 m2).

4.	The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system shall be designed to wet completely the entire surface of any glazing affected by fire when actuated.

5.	The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates.

6.	Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse rods, curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be installed between the automatic sprinklers and the glazing.

408.4 Locks.

Egress doors are permitted to be locked in accordance with the applicable use condition. Doors from a refuge area to the outside are permitted to be locked with a key in lieu of locking methods described in Section 408.4.1. The keys to unlock the exterior doors shall be available at all times and the locks shall be operable from both sides of the door.

408.4.1 Remote release.

Remote release of locks on doors in a means of egress shall be provided with reliable means of operation, remote from the resident living areas, to release locks on all required doors. In Occupancy Condition 3 or 4, the arrangement, accessibility and security of the release mechanisms required for egress shall be such that with the minimum available staff at any time, the lock mechanisms are capable of being released within 2 minutes.

Exception: Provisions for remote locking and unlocking of occupied rooms in Occupancy Condition 4 are not required provided that not more than 10 locks are necessary to be unlocked in order to move occupants from one smoke compartment to a refuge area within 3 minutes. The opening of necessary locks shall be accomplished with not more than two separate keys.

[F] 408.4.2 Power-operated doors and locks.

Power-operated sliding doors or power-operated locks for swinging doors shall be operable by a manual release mechanism at the door. Emergency power shall be provided for the doors and locks in accordance with Section 2702.

Exceptions:

1.	Emergency power is not required in facilities with 10 or fewer locks complying with the exception to Section 408.4.1.

2.	Emergency power is not required where remote mechanical operating releases are provided.

408.4.3 Redundant operation.

Remote release, mechanically operated sliding doors or remote release, mechanically operated locks shall be provided with a mechanically operated release mechanism at each door, or shall be provided with a redundant remote release control.

408.4.4 Relock capability.

Doors remotely unlocked under emergency conditions shall not automatically relock when closed unless specific action is taken at the remote location to enable doors to relock.

408.5 Protection of vertical openings.

Any vertical opening shall be protected by a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713, or shall be in accordance with Section 408.5.1.

408.5.1 Floor openings.

Openings in floors within a housing unit are permitted without a shaft enclosure, provided all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The entire normally occupied areas so interconnected are open and unobstructed so as to enable observation of the areas by supervisory personnel;

2.	Means of egress capacity is sufficient for all occupants from all interconnected cell tiers and areas;

3.	The height difference between the floor levels of the highest and lowest cell tiers shall not exceed 23 feet (7010 mm); and

4.	Egress from any portion of the cell tier to an exit or exit access door shall not require travel on more than one additional floor level within the housing unit.

408.5.2 Shaft openings in communicating floor levels.

Where a floor opening is permitted between communicating floor levels of a housing unit in accordance with Section 408.5.1, plumbing chases serving vertically stacked individual cells contained with the housing unit shall be permitted without a shaft enclosure.

408.6 Smoke barrier.

Occupancies in Group I-3 shall have smoke barriers complying with Sections 408.7 and 709 to divide every story occupied by residents for sleeping, or any other story having an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into no fewer than two smoke compartments.

Exception: Spaces having a direct exit to one of the following, provided that the locking arrangement of the doors involved complies with the requirements for doors at the smoke barrier for the use condition involved:

1.	A public way.

2.	A building separated from the resident housing area by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly or 50 feet (15 240 mm) of open space.

3.	A secured yard or court having a holding space 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the housing area that provides 6 square feet (0.56 m2) or more of refuge area per occupant, including residents, staff and visitors.

408.6.1 Smoke compartments.

The number of residents in any smoke compartment shall be not more than 200. The distance of travel to a door in a smoke barrier from any room door required as exit access shall be not greater than 150 feet (45 720 mm). The distance of travel to a door in a smoke barrier from any point in a room shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm).

408.6.2 Refuge area.

Not less than 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) per occupant shall be provided on each side of each smoke barrier for the total number of occupants in adjoining smoke compartments. This space shall be readily available wherever the occupants are moved across the smoke barrier in a fire emergency.

408.6.3 Independent egress.

A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originates.

408.7 Security glazing.

In occupancies in Group I-3, windows and doors in 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707, fire partitions constructed in accordance with Section 708 and smoke barriers constructed in accordance with Section 709 shall be permitted to have security glazing installed provided that the following conditions are met.

1.	Individual panels of glazing shall not exceed 1,296 square inches (0.84 m2).

2.	The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system shall be designed to, when actuated, wet completely the entire surface of any glazing affected by fire.

3.	The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates.

4.	Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse rods, curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be installed between the automatic sprinklers and the glazing.

408.8 Subdivision of resident housing areas.

Sleeping areas and any contiguous day room, group activity space or other common spaces where residents are housed shall be separated from other spaces in accordance with Sections 408.8.1 through 408.8.4.

408.8.1 Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4.

Each sleeping area in Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4 shall be separated from the adjacent common spaces by a smoke-tight partition where the distance of travel from the sleeping area through the common space to the corridor exceeds 50 feet (15 240 mm).

408.8.2 Occupancy Condition 5.

Each sleeping area in Occupancy Condition 5 shall be separated from adjacent sleeping areas, corridors and common spaces by a smoketight partition. Additionally, common spaces shall be separated from the corridor by a smoke-tight partition.

408.8.3 Openings in room face.

The aggregate area of openings in a solid sleeping room face in Occupancy Conditions 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall not exceed 120 square inches (0.77 m2). The aggregate area shall include all openings including door undercuts, food passes and grilles. Openings shall be not more than 36 inches (914 mm) above the floor. In Occupancy Condition 5, the openings shall be closeable from the room side.

408.8.4 Smoke-tight doors.

Doors in openings in partitions required to be smoke tight by Section 408.8 shall be substantial doors, of construction that will resist the passage of smoke. Latches and door closures are not required on cell doors.

408.9 Windowless buildings.

For the purposes of this section, a windowless building or portion of a building is one with nonopenable windows, windows not readily breakable or without windows. Windowless buildings shall be provided with an engineered smoke control system to provide a tenable environment for exiting from the smoke compartment in the area of fire origin in accordance with Section 909 for each windowless smoke compartment.

[F] 408.10 Fire alarm system.

A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.3.

[F] 408.11 Automatic sprinkler system.

Group I-3 occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6.

SECTION 409
MOTION PICTURE PROJECTION ROOMS
409.1 General.

The provisions of Sections 409.1 through 409.5 shall apply to rooms in which ribbon-type cellulose acetate or other safety film is utilized in conjunction with electric arc, xenon or other light-source projection equipment that develops hazardous gases, dust or radiation. Where cellulose nitrate film is utilized or stored, such rooms shall comply with NFPA 40.

409.1.1 Projection room required.

Every motion picture machine projecting film as mentioned within the scope of this section shall be enclosed in a projection room. Appurtenant electrical equipment, such as rheostats, transformers and generators, shall be within the projection room or in an adjacent room of equivalent construction.

409.2 Construction of projection rooms.

Every projection room shall be of permanent construction consistent with the construction requirements for the type of building in which the projection room is located. Openings are not required to be protected.

The room shall have a floor area of not less than 80 square feet (7.44 m2) for a single machine and not less than 40 square feet (3.7 m2) for each additional machine. Each motion picture projector, floodlight, spotlight or similar piece of equipment shall have a clear working space of not less than 30 inches by 30 inches (762 mm by 762 mm) on each side and at the rear thereof, but only one such space shall be required between two adjacent projectors. The projection room and the rooms appurtenant thereto shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286 mm). The aggregate of openings for projection equipment shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the wall between the projection room and the auditorium. Openings shall be provided with glass or other approved material, so as to close completely the opening.

409.3 Projection room and equipment ventilation.

Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

409.3.1 Supply air.

Each projection room shall be provided with adequate air supply inlets so arranged as to provide well-distributed air throughout the room. Air inlet ducts shall provide an amount of air equivalent to the amount of air being exhausted by projection equipment. Air is permitted to be taken from the outside; from adjacent spaces within the building, provided the volume and infiltration rate is sufficient; or from the building air-conditioning system, provided it is so arranged as to provide sufficient air when other systems are not in operation.

409.3.2 Exhaust air.

Projection rooms are permitted to be exhausted through the lamp exhaust system. The lamp exhaust system shall be positively interconnected with the lamp so that the lamp will not operate unless there is the required airflow. Exhaust air ducts shall terminate at the exterior of the building in such a location that the exhaust air cannot be readily recirculated into any air supply system. The projection room ventilation system is permitted to also serve appurtenant rooms, such as the generator and rewind rooms.

409.3.3 Projection machines.

Each projection machine shall be provided with an exhaust duct that will draw air from each lamp and exhaust it directly to the outside of the building. The lamp exhaust is permitted to serve to exhaust air from the projection room to provide room air circulation. Such ducts shall be of rigid materials, except for a flexible connector approved for the purpose. The projection lamp or projection room exhaust system, or both, is permitted to be combined but shall not be interconnected with any other exhaust or return system, or both, within the building.

409.4 Lighting control.

Provisions shall be made for control of the auditorium lighting and the means of egress lighting systems of theaters from inside the projection room and from not less than one other convenient point in the building.

409.5 Miscellaneous equipment.

Each projection room shall be provided with rewind and film storage facilities.

SECTION 410
STAGES, PLATFORMS AND
TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS
410.1 Applicability.

The provisions of Sections 410.1 through 410.8 shall apply to all parts of buildings and structures that contain stages or platforms and similar appurtenances as herein defined.

410.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

PLATFORM.

PROSCENIUM WALL.

STAGE.

TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREA.

410.3 Stages.

Stage construction shall comply with Sections 410.3.1 through 410.3.7.

410.3.1 Stage construction.

Stages shall be constructed of materials as required for floors for the type of construction of the building in which such stages are located.

Exception: Stages need not be constructed of the same materials as required for the type of construction provided the construction complies with one of the following:

1.	Stages of Type IIB or IV construction with a nominal 2-inch (51 mm) wood deck, provided that the stage is separated from other areas in accordance with Section 410.3.4.

2.	In buildings of Type IIA, IIIA and VA construction, a fire-resistance-rated floor is not required, provided the space below the stage is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 903 or 904.

3.	In all types of construction, the finished floor shall be constructed of wood or approved noncombustible materials. Openings through stage floors shall be equipped with tight-fitting, solid wood trap doors with approved safety locks.

410.3.1.1 Stage height and area.

Stage areas shall be measured to include the entire performance area and adjacent backstage and support areas not separated from the performance area by fire-resistance-rated construction. Stage height shall be measured from the lowest point on the stage floor to the highest point of the roof or floor deck above the stage.

410.3.2 Technical production areas: galleries, gridirons and catwalks.

Beams designed only for the attachment of portable or fixed theater equipment, gridirons, galleries and catwalks shall be constructed of approved materials consistent with the requirements for the type of construction of the building; and a fire-resistance rating shall not be required. These areas shall not be considered to be floors, stories, mezzanines or levels in applying this code.

Exception: Floors of fly galleries and catwalks shall be constructed of any approved material.

410.3.3 Exterior stage doors.

Where protection of openings is required, exterior exit doors shall be protected with fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716. Exterior openings that are located on the stage for means of egress or loading and unloading purposes, and that are likely to be open during occupancy of the theater, shall be constructed with vestibules to prevent air drafts into the auditorium.

410.3.4 Proscenium wall.

Where the stage height is greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm), all portions of the stage shall be completely separated from the seating area by a proscenium wall with not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating extending continuously from the foundation to the roof.

410.3.5 Proscenium curtain.

Where a proscenium wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating, the stage opening shall be provided with a fire curtain complying with NFPA 80, horizontal sliding doors complying with Section 716 having a fire protection rating of at least 1 hour, or an approved water curtain complying with Section 903.3.1.1 or, in facilities not utilizing the provisions of smoke-protected assembly seating in accordance with Section 1029.6.2, a smoke control system complying with Section 909 or natural ventilation designed to maintain the smoke level not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor of the means of egress.

410.3.6 Scenery.

Combustible materials used in sets and scenery shall meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701, in accordance with Section 806 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Foam plastics and materials containing foam plastics shall comply with Section 2603 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

410.3.7 Stage ventilation.

Emergency ventilation shall be provided for stages larger than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) in floor area, or with a stage height greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm). Such ventilation shall comply with Section 410.3.7.1 or 410.3.7.2.

410.3.7.1 Roof vents.

Two or more vents constructed to open automatically by approved heat-activated devices and with an aggregate clear opening area of not less than 5 percent of the area of the stage shall be located near the center and above the highest part of the stage area. Supplemental means shall be provided for manual operation of the ventilator. Curbs shall be provided as required for skylights in Section 2610.2. Vents shall be labeled.

[F] 410.3.7.2 Smoke control.

Smoke control in accordance with Section 909 shall be provided to maintain the smoke layer interface not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the highest level of the assembly seating or above the top of the proscenium opening where a proscenium wall is provided in compliance with Section 410.3.4.

410.4 Platform construction.

Permanent platforms shall be constructed of materials as required for the type of construction of the building in which the permanent platform is located. Permanent platforms are permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood for Types I, II and IV construction where the platforms are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the main floor, and not more than one-third of the room floor area and not more than 3,000 square feet (279 m2) in area. Where the space beneath the permanent platform is used for storage or any purpose other than equipment, wiring or plumbing, the floor assembly shall be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Where the space beneath the permanent platform is used only for equipment, wiring or plumbing, the underside of the permanent platform need not be protected.

410.4.1 Temporary platforms.

Platforms installed for a period of not more than 30 days are permitted to be constructed of any materials permitted by this code. The space between the floor and the platform above shall only be used for plumbing and electrical wiring to platform equipment.

410.5 Dressing and appurtenant rooms.

Dressing and appurtenant rooms shall comply with Sections 410.5.1 and 410.5.2.

410.5.1 Separation from stage.

The stage shall be separated from dressing rooms, scene docks, property rooms, workshops, storerooms and compartments appurtenant to the stage and other parts of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than 2 hours for stage heights greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) and not less than 1 hour for stage heights of 50 feet (15 240 mm) or less.

410.5.2 Separation from each other.

Dressing rooms, scene docks, property rooms, workshops, storerooms and compartments appurtenant to the stage shall be separated from each other by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

410.6 Means of egress.

Except as modified or as provided for in this section, the provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply.

410.6.1 Arrangement.

Where two or more exits or exit access doorways from the stage are required in accordance with Section 1006.2, no fewer than one exit or exit access doorway shall be provided on each side of a stage.

410.6.2 Stairway and ramp enclosure.

Exit access stairways and ramps serving a stage or platform are not required to be enclosed. Exit access stairways and ramps serving technical production areas are not required to be enclosed.

410.6.3 Technical production areas.

Technical production areas shall be provided with means of egress and means of escape in accordance with Sections 410.6.3.1 through 410.6.3.5.

410.6.3.1 Number of means of egress.

No fewer than one means of egress shall be provided from technical production areas.

410.6.3.2 Exit access travel distance.

The exit access travel distance shall be not greater than 300 feet (91 440 mm) for buildings without a sprinkler system and 400 feet (121 900 mm) for buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

410.6.3.3 Two means of egress.

Where two means of egress are required, the common path of travel shall be not greater than 100 feet (30 480 mm).

Exception: A means of escape to a roof in place of a second means of egress is permitted.

410.6.3.4 Path of egress travel.

The following exit access components are permitted where serving technical production areas:

1.	Stairways.

2.	Ramps.

3.	Spiral stairways.

4.	Catwalks.

5.	Alternating tread devices.

6.	Permanent ladders.

410.6.3.5 Width.

The path of egress travel within and from technical support areas shall be not less than 22 inches (559 mm).

[F] 410.7 Automatic sprinkler system.

Stages shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Sprinklers shall be installed under the roof and gridiron and under all catwalks and galleries over the stage. Sprinklers shall be installed in dressing rooms, performer lounges, shops and storerooms accessory to such stages.

Exceptions:

1.	Sprinklers are not required under stage areas less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in clear height that are utilized exclusively for storage of tables and chairs, provided the concealed space is separated from the adjacent spaces by Type X gypsum board not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) in thickness.

2.	Sprinklers are not required for stages 1,000 square feet (93 m2) or less in area and 50 feet (15 240 mm) or less in height where curtains, scenery or other combustible hangings are not retractable vertically. Combustible hangings shall be limited to a single main curtain, borders, legs and a single backdrop.

3.	Sprinklers are not required within portable orchestra enclosures on stages.

[F] 410.8 Standpipes.

Standpipe systems shall be provided in accordance with Section 905.

SECTION 411
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
411.1 General.

Special amusement buildings having an occupant load of 50 or more shall comply with the requirements for the appropriate Group A occupancy and Sections 411.1 through 411.8. Special amusement buildings having an occupant load of less than 50 shall comply with the requirements for a Group B occupancy and Sections 411.1 through 411.8.

Exception: Special amusement buildings or portions thereof that are without walls or a roof and constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke need not comply with this section.

For flammable decorative materials, see the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

411.2 Definition.

The following term is defined in Chapter 2:

SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING.

[F] 411.3 Automatic fire detection.

Special amusement buildings shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.

[F] 411.4 Automatic sprinkler system.

Special amusement buildings shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where the special amusement building is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an approved temporary means.

Exception: Automatic sprinklers are not required where the total floor area of a temporary special amusement building is less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) and the exit access travel distance from any point to an exit is less than 50 feet (15 240 mm).

[F] 411.5 Alarm.

Actuation of a single smoke detector, the automatic sprinkler system or other automatic fire detection device shall immediately sound an alarm at the building at a constantly attended location from which emergency action can be initiated including the capability of manual initiation of requirements in Section 907.2.12.2.

[F] 411.6 Emergency voice/alarm communications system.

An emergency voice/alarm communications system shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.12 and 907.5.2.2, which is also permitted to serve as a public address system and shall be audible throughout the entire special amusement building.

411.7 Exit marking.

Exit signs shall be installed at the required exit or exit access doorways of amusement buildings in accordance with this section and Section 1013. Approved directional exit markings shall also be provided. Where mirrors, mazes or other designs are utilized that disguise the path of egress travel such that they are not apparent, approved and listed low-level exit signs that comply with Section 1013.5, and directional path markings listed in accordance with UL 1994, shall be provided and located not more than 8 inches (203 mm) above the walking surface and on or near the path of egress travel. Such markings shall become visible in an emergency. The directional exit marking shall be activated by the automatic fire detection system and the automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 907.2.12.2.

411.7.1 Photoluminescent exit signs.

Where photoluminescent exit signs are installed, activating light source and viewing distance shall be in accordance with the listing and markings of the signs.

411.8 Interior finish.

The interior finish shall be Class A in accordance with Section 803.1.

SECTION 412
AIRCRAFT-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
412.1 General.

Aircraft-related occupancies shall comply with Sections 412.1 through 412.8 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

412.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO).

HELIPORT.

HELISTOP.

RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR.

TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT.

412.3 Airport traffic control towers.

The provisions of Sections 412.3.1 through 412.3.8 shall apply to airport traffic control towers occupied only for the following uses:

1.	Airport traffic control cab.

2.	Electrical and mechanical equipment rooms.

3.	Airport terminal radar and electronics rooms.

4.	Office spaces incidental to the tower operation.

5.	Lounges for employees, including sanitary facilities.

412.3.1 Construction.

The construction of airport traffic control towers shall comply with the provisions of Sections 412.3.1.1 through 412.3.1.3.

412.3.1.1 Type of construction.

Airport traffic control towers shall be constructed to comply with the height limitations of Table 412.3.1.1.

TABLE 412.3.1.1

HEIGHT LIMITATIONS FOR AIRPORT TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWERS

TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION	
HEIGHTa
(feet)
IA	Unlimited
IB	240
IIA	100
IIB	85
IIIA	65

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Height to be measured from grade plane to cab floor.

[BS] 412.3.1.2 Structural integrity of interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures.

Enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall comply with Section 403.2.3 in airport traffic control towers where the control cab is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

412.3.1.3 Sprayed fire-resistive materials (SFRM).

The bond strength of the SFRM installed in airport traffic control towers shall be in accordance with Section 403.2.4 where the control cab is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

412.3.2 Means of egress and evacuation.

The means of egress in airport traffic control towers shall comply with Sections 412.3.2.1 through 412.3.2.3.

412.3.2.1 Stairways.

Stairways in airport traffic control towers shall be in accordance with Section 1011. Exit stairways shall be smokeproof enclosures complying with one of the alternatives provided in Section 909.20.

Exception: Stairways in airport traffic control towers are not required to comply with Section 1011.12.

412.3.2.2 Exit access.

From observation levels, airport traffic control towers shall be permitted to have a single means of exit access for a distance of travel not greater than 100 feet (30 480 mm). Exit access stairways from the observation level need not be enclosed.

412.3.2.3 Number of exits.

Not less than one exit stairway shall be permitted for airport traffic control towers of any height provided that the occupant load per floor is not greater than 15 and the area per floor does not exceed 1,500 square feet (140 m2).

412.3.2.3.1 Interior finish.

Where an airport traffic control tower is provided with only one exit stairway, interior wall and ceiling finishes shall be either Class A or Class B.

412.3.3 Emergency systems.

The detection, alarm and emergency systems of airport traffic control towers shall comply with Sections 412.3.3.1 through 412.3.3.3.

[F] 412.3.3.1 Automatic smoke detection systems.

Airport traffic control towers shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.2.22.

[F] 412.3.3.2 Fire command center.

A fire command center shall be provided in airport traffic control towers where the control cab is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. The fire command center shall comply with Section 911.

Exceptions:

1.	The fire command center shall be located in the airport control tower or an adjacent contiguous building where building functions are interdependent.

2.	The room shall be not less than 150 square feet (14 m2) in area with a minimum dimension of 10 feet (3048 mm).

3.	The following features shall not be required in an airport traffic control tower fire command center.

3.1.	Emergency voice/alarm control unit.

3.2.	Public address system.

3.3.	Status indicators and controls for the air distributions centers.

3.4.	Generator supervision devices, manual start and transfer features.

3.5.	Elevator emergency or standby power switches where emergency or standby power is provided.

412.3.3.3 Smoke removal.

Smoke removal in airport traffic control towers shall be provided in accordance with Section 403.4.7.

412.3.4 Automatic sprinkler system.

Where an occupied floor is located more than 35 feet (10 668 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, airport traffic control towers shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

412.3.4.1 Fire pump room.

Fire pumps shall be located in rooms that are separated from all other areas of the building by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exception: Separation is not required for fire pumps physically separated in accordance with NFPA 20.

412.3.5 Protection of elevator wiring and cables.

Cables serving elevators in airport traffic control towers shall be protected in accordance with Section 3007.8.1.

412.3.5.1 Elevators for occupant evacuation.

Where provided in addition to an exit stairway, occupant evacuation elevators shall be in accordance with Section 3008.

412.3.6 Accessibility.

Airport traffic control towers shall be accessible except as specified in the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

412.4 Aircraft hangars.

Aircraft hangars shall be in accordance with Sections 412.4.1 through 412.4.6.

412.4.1 Exterior walls.

Exterior walls located less than 30 feet (9144 mm) from lot lines or a public way shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than 2 hours.

412.4.2 Basements.

Where hangars have basements, floors over basements shall be of Type IA construction and shall be made tight against seepage of water, oil or vapors. There shall be no opening or communication between basements and the hangar. Access to basements shall be from outside only.

412.4.3 Floor surface.

Floors shall be graded and drained to prevent water or fuel from remaining on the floor. Floor drains shall discharge through an oil separator to the sewer or to an outside vented sump.

Exception: Aircraft hangars with individual lease spaces not exceeding 2,000 square feet (186 m2) each in which servicing, repairing or washing is not conducted and fuel is not dispensed shall have floors that are graded toward the door, but shall not require a separator.

412.4.4 Heating equipment.

Heating equipment shall be placed in another room separated by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Entrance shall be from the outside or by means of a vestibule providing a two-doorway separation.

Exceptions:

1.	Unit heaters and vented infrared radiant heating equipment suspended not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) above the upper surface of wings or engine enclosures of the highest aircraft that are permitted to be housed in the hangar need not be located in a separate room provided they are mounted not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) above the floor in shops, offices and other sections of the hangar communicating with storage or service areas.

2.	Entrance to the separated room shall be permitted by a single interior door provided the sources of ignition in the appliances are not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor.

412.4.5 Finishing.

The process of “doping,” involving use of a volatile flammable solvent, or of painting, shall be carried on in a separate detached building equipped with automatic fire-extinguishing equipment in accordance with Section 903.

[F] 412.4.6 Fire suppression.

Aircraft hangars shall be provided with a fire suppression system designed in accordance with NFPA 409, based upon the classification for the hangar given in Table 412.4.6.

Exception: Where a fixed base operator has separate repair facilities on site, Group II hangars operated by a fixed base operator used for storage of transient aircraft only shall have a fire suppression system, but the system is exempt from foam requirements.

[F] TABLE 412.4.6 HANGAR FIRE SUPPRESSION REQUIREMENTSa, b, c

MAXIMUM SINGLE
FIRE AREA
(square feet)	TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
IA	IB	IIA	IIB	IIIA	IIIB	IV	VA	VB
≥ 40,001	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I	Group I
40,000	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II
30,000	Group III	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II
20,000	Group III	Group III	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II	Group II
15,000	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group II	Group III	Group II	Group III	Group II	Group II
12,000	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group II	Group II
8,000	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group II
5,000	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III	Group III

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Aircraft hangars with a door height greater than 28 feet shall be provided with fire suppression for a Group I hangar regardless of maximum fire area.

b.	Groups shall be as classified in accordance with NFPA 409.

c.	Membrane structures complying with Section 3102 shall be classified as a Group IV hangar.

[F] 412.4.6.1 Hazardous operations.

Any Group III aircraft hangar according to Table 412.4.6 that contains hazardous operations including, but not limited to, the following shall be provided with a Group I or II fire suppression system in accordance with NFPA 409 as applicable:

1.	Doping.

2.	Hot work including, but not limited to, welding, torch cutting and torch soldering.

3.	Fuel transfer.

4.	Fuel tank repair or maintenance not including defueled tanks in accordance with NFPA 409, inerted tanks or tanks that have never been fueled.

5.	Spray finishing operations.

6.	Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the unsprinklered single fire area in excess of 1,600 gallons (6057 L).

7.	Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the maximum single fire area in excess of 7,500 gallons (28 390 L) for a hangar with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

[F] 412.4.6.2 Separation of maximum single fire areas.

Maximum single fire areas established in accordance with hangar classification and construction type in Table 412.4.6 shall be separated by 2-hour fire walls constructed in accordance with Section 706. In determining the maximum single fire area as set forth in Table 412.4.6, ancillary uses that are separated from aircraft servicing areas by a fire barrier of not less than 1 hour, constructed in accordance with Section 707, shall not be included in the area.

412.5 Residential aircraft hangars.

Residential aircraft hangars shall comply with Sections 412.5.1 through 412.5.5.

412.5.1 Fire separation.

A hangar shall not be attached to a dwelling unless separated by a fire barrier having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Such separation shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof and unpierced except for doors leading to the dwelling unit. Doors into the dwelling unit shall be equipped with self-closing devices and conform to the requirements of Section 716 with a noncombustible raised sill not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height. Openings from a hangar directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.

412.5.2 Egress.

A hangar shall provide two means of egress. One of the doors into the dwelling shall be considered as meeting only one of the two means of egress.

[F] 412.5.3 Smoke alarms.

Smoke alarms shall be provided within the hangar in accordance with Section 907.2.21.

412.5.4 Independent systems.

Electrical, mechanical and plumbing drain, waste and vent (DWV) systems installed within the hangar shall be independent of the systems installed within the dwelling. Building sewer lines shall be permitted to be connected outside the structures.

Exception: Smoke detector wiring and feed for electrical subpanels in the hangar.

412.5.5 Height and area limits.

Residential aircraft hangars shall be not greater than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) in area and 20 feet (6096 mm) in building height.

[F] 412.6 Aircraft paint hangars.

Aircraft painting operations where flammable liquids are used in excess of the maximum allowable quantities per control area listed in Table 307.1(1) shall be conducted in an aircraft paint hangar that complies with the provisions of Sections 412.6.1 through 412.6.6.

[F] 412.6.1 Occupancy group.

Aircraft paint hangars shall be classified as Group H-2. Aircraft paint hangars shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code for such occupancy.

412.6.2 Construction.

The aircraft paint hangar shall be of Type I or II construction.

[F] 412.6.3 Operations.

Only those flammable liquids necessary for painting operations shall be permitted in quantities less than the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1). Spray equipment cleaning operations exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) shall be conducted in a liquid use, dispensing and mixing room.

[F] 412.6.4 Storage.

Storage of flammable or combustible liquids exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) shall be in a liquid storage room.

[F] 412.6.5 Fire suppression.

Aircraft paint hangars shall be provided with fire suppression as required by NFPA 409.

[F] 412.6.6 Ventilation.

Aircraft paint hangars shall be provided with ventilation as required in the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

412.7 Aircraft manufacturing facilities.

In buildings used for the manufacturing of aircraft, exit access travel distances indicated in Section 1017.1 shall be increased in accordance with the following:

1.	The building shall be of Type I or II construction.

2.	Exit access travel distance shall not exceed the distances given in Table 412.7.

TABLE 412.7

AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE

HEIGHT (feet) b	MANUFACTURING AREA (sq. ft.) a
≥ 150,000	≥ 200,000	≥ 250,000	≥ 500,000	≥ 750,000	≥ 1,000,000
≥ 25	400	450	500	500	500	500
≥ 50	400	500	600	700	700	700
≥ 75	400	500	700	850	1,000	1,000
≥ 100	400	500	750	1,000	1,250	1,500

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Contiguous floor area of the aircraft manufacturing facility having the indicated height.

b.	Minimum height from finished floor to bottom of ceiling or roof slab or deck.

412.7.1 Ancillary areas.

Rooms, areas and spaces ancillary to the primary manufacturing area shall be permitted to egress through such area having a minimum height as indicated in Table 412.7. Exit access travel distance within the ancillary room, area or space shall not exceed that indicated in Table 1017.2 based on the occupancy classification of that ancillary area. Total exit access travel distance shall not exceed that indicated in Table 412.7.

[F] 412.8 Heliports and helistops.

Heliports and helistops shall be permitted to be erected on buildings or other locations where they are constructed in accordance with Sections 412.8.1 through 412.8.5.

[F] 412.8.1 Size.

The landing area for helicopters less than 3,500 pounds (1588 kg) shall be not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length and width. The landing area shall be surrounded on all sides by a clear area having a minimum average width at roof level of 15 feet (4572 mm) but with no width less than 5 feet (1524 mm).

[F] 412.8.2 Design.

Helicopter landing areas and the supports thereof on the roof of a building shall be noncombustible construction. Landing areas shall be designed to confine any flammable liquid spillage to the landing area itself and provisions shall be made to drain such spillage away from any exit or stairway serving the helicopter landing area or from a structure housing such exit or stairway. For structural design requirements, see Section 1607.6.

[F] 412.8.3 Means of egress.

The means of egress from heliports and helistops shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 10. Landing areas located on buildings or structures shall have two or more exits or access to exits. For landing areas less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in length or less than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) in area, the second means of egress is permitted to be a fire escape, alternating tread device or ladder leading to the floor below.

[F] 412.8.4 Rooftop heliports and helistops.

Rooftop heliports and helistops shall comply with NFPA 418.

[F] 412.8.5 Standpipe system.

In buildings equipped with a standpipe system, the standpipe shall extend to the roof level in accordance with Section 905.3.6.

SECTION 413
COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE
413.1 General.

High-piled stock or rack storage in any occupancy group shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

413.2 Attic, under-floor and concealed spaces.

Attic, under-floor and concealed spaces used for storage of combustible materials shall be protected on the storage side as required for 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Openings shall be protected by assemblies that are self-closing and are of noncombustible construction or solid wood core not less than 13/4 inch (45 mm) in thickness.

Exception: Neither fire-resistance-rated construction nor opening protectives are required in any of the following locations:

1.	Areas protected by approved automatic sprinkler systems.

2.	Group R-3 and U occupancies.

SECTION 414
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
[F] 414.1 General.

The provisions of Sections 414.1 through 414.6 shall apply to buildings and structures occupied for the manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of hazardous materials.

[F] 414.1.1 Other provisions.

Buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H shall comply with this section and the applicable provisions of Section 415 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.1.2 Materials.

The safe design of hazardous material occupancies is material dependent. Individual material requirements are also found in Sections 307 and 415, and in the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.1.2.1 Aerosol products.

Level 2 and 3 aerosol products shall be stored and displayed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. See Section 311.2 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code for occupancy group requirements.

[F] 414.1.3 Information required.

A report shall be submitted to the building official identifying the maximum expected quantities of hazardous materials to be stored, used in a closed system and used in an open system, and subdivided to separately address hazardous material classification categories based on Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). The methods of protection from such hazards, including but not limited to control areas, fire protection systems and Group H occupancies shall be indicated in the report and on the construction documents. The opinion and report shall be prepared by a qualified person, firm or corporation approved by the building official and provided without charge to the enforcing agency.

For buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H, separate floor plans shall be submitted identifying the locations of anticipated contents and processes so as to reflect the nature of each occupied portion of every building and structure.

[F] 414.2 Control areas.

Control areas shall comply with Sections 414.2.1 through 414.2.5 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.2.1 Construction requirements.

Control areas shall be separated from each other by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 414.2.2 Percentage of maximum allowable quantities.

The percentage of maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area permitted at each floor level within a building shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2.

[F] TABLE 414.2.2 DESIGN AND NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS

FLOOR LEVEL	PERCENTAGE OF THE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE
QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREAa
	NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS
PER FLOOR
	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING FOR
FIRE BARRIERS IN HOURSb


Above grade
plane	Higher than 9	5	1	2
7-9	5	2	2
6	12.5	2	2
5	12.5	2	2
4	12.5	2	2
3	50	2	1
2	75	3	1
1	100	4	1

Below grade
plane	1	75	3	1
2	50	2	1
Lower than 2	Not Allowed	Not Allowed	Not Allowed

a.	Percentages shall be of the maximum allowable quantity per control area shown in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2), with all increases allowed in the notes to those tables.

b.	Separation shall include fire barriers and horizontal assemblies as necessary to provide separation from other portions of the building.

[F] 414.2.3 Number.

The maximum number of control areas within a building shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2. For the purposes of determining the number ofcontrol areas within a building, each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls complying with Section 706 shall be considered a separate building.

[F] 414.2.4 Fire-resistance-rating requirements.

The required fire-resistance rating for fire barriers shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2. The floor assembly of the control area and the construction supporting the floor of the control area shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

Exception: The floor assembly of the control area and the construction supporting the floor of the control area are allowed to be 1-hour fire-resistance rated in buildings of Types IIA, IIIA, IV and VA construction, provided that both of the following conditions exist:

1.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; and

2.	The building is three or fewer stories above grade plane.

[F] 414.2.5 Hazardous material in Group M display and storage areas and in Group S storage areas.

The aggregate quantity of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials permitted within a single control area of a Group M display and storage area, a Group S storage area or an outdoor control area is permitted to exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area specified in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) without classifying the building or use as a Group H occupancy, provided that the materials are displayed and stored in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and quantities do not exceed the maximum allowable specified in Table 414.2.5(1).

In Group M occupancy wholesale and retail sales uses, indoor storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area as indicated in Table 414.2.5(2), provided that the materials are displayed and stored in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

The maximum quantity of aerosol products in Group M occupancy retail display areas, storage areas adjacent to retail display areas and retail storage areas shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] TABLE 414.2.5(1)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER INDOOR AND OUTDOOR CONTROL AREA IN GROUP M AND S OCCUPANCIES NONFLAMMABLE SOLIDS AND NONFLAMMABLE AND NONCOMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDSd, e, f

CONDITION	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA
Materiala	Class	
Solids
pounds	
Liquids
gallons
A. Health-hazard materials—nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids
1. Corrosivesb,c	Not Applicable	9,750	975
2. Highly toxics	Not Applicable	20b,c	2b,c
3. Toxicsb,c	Not Applicable	1,000k	100
B. Physical-hazard materials—nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids
1. Oxidizersb,c	4	Not Allowed	Not Allowed
3	1,150g	115
2	2,250h	225
1	18,000 i, j	1,800 i, j
2. Unstable (reactives)b,c	4	Not Allowed	Not Allowed
3	550	55
2	1,150	115
1	Not Limited	Not Limited
3. Water reactives	3b,c	550	55
2b,c	1,150	115
1	Not Limited	Not Limited

For SI: 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.

a.	Hazard categories are as specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

b.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings that are sprinklered in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. When Note c also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

c.	Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. When Note b also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

d.	See Table 414.2.2 for design and number of control areas.

e.	Allowable quantities for other hazardous material categories shall be in accordance with Section 307.

f.	Maximum quantities shall be increased 100 percent in outdoor control areas.

g.	Maximum amounts shall be increased to 2,250 pounds when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or packager and do not exceed 10 pounds each.

h.	Maximum amounts shall be increased to 4,500 pounds when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or packager and do not exceed 10 pounds each.

i.	The permitted quantities shall not be limited in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

j.	Quantities are unlimited in an outdoor control area.

k.	Maximum allowable quantity of consumer products shall be increased to 10,000 pounds where individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer and the toxic classification is exclusively based on the LC50 threshold and no other hazardous materials classifications apply.

[F] TABLE 414.2.5(2)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN WHOLESALE AND RETAIL SALES OCCUPANCIES PER CONTROL AREAa

TYPE OF LIQUID	MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA (gallons)

Sprinklered in accordance with note b
densities and arrangements	
Sprinklered in accordance with the
Florida Fire Prevention Code	Nonsprinklered
Class IA	60	60	30
Class IB, IC, II and IIIA	7,500c	15,000c	1,600
Class IIIB	Unlimited	Unlimited	13,200

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 gallon per minute per square foot = 40.75 L/min/m2.

a.	Control areas shall be separated from each other by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier wall.

b.	To be considered as sprinklered, a building shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system with a design providing minimum densities as follows:

1.	For uncartoned commodities on shelves 6 feet or less in height where the ceiling height does not exceed 18 feet, quantities are those permitted with a minimum sprinkler design density of Ordinary Hazard Group 2.

2.	For cartoned, palletized or racked commodities where storage is 4 feet 6 inches or less in height and where the ceiling height does not exceed 18 feet, quantities are those permitted with a minimum sprinkler design density of 0.21 gallon per minute per square foot over the most remote 1,500-square-foot area.

c.	Where wholesale and retail sales or storage areas exceed 50,000 square feet in area, the maximum allowable quantities are allowed to be increased by 2 percent for each 1,000 square feet of area in excess of 50,000 square feet, up to a maximum of 100 percent of the table amounts. A control area separation is not required. The cumulative amounts, including amounts attained by having an additional control area, shall not exceed 30,000 gallons.

[F] 414.3 Ventilation.

Rooms, areas or spaces in which explosive, corrosive, combustible, flammable or highly toxic dusts, mists, fumes, vapors or gases are or may be emitted due to the processing, use, handling or storage of materials shall be mechanically ventilated where required by this code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code or the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

Emissions generated at workstations shall be confined to the area in which they are generated as specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code and the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 414.4 Hazardous material systems.

Systems involving hazardous materials shall be suitable for the intended application. Controls shall be designed to prevent materials from entering or leaving process or reaction systems at other than the intended time, rate or path. Automatic controls, where provided, shall be designed to be fail safe.

[F] 414.5 Inside storage, dispensing and use.

The inside storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with Sections 414.5.1 through 414.5.3 of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.5.1 Explosion control.

Explosion control shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code as required by Table 414.5.1 where quantities of hazardous materials specified in that table exceed the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1) or where a structure, room or space is occupied for purposes involving explosion hazards as required by Section 415 or the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

TABLE 414.5.1 EXPLOSION CONTROL REQUIREMENTSa, h

MATERIAL	CLASS	EXPLOSION CONTROL METHODS
Barricade construction	Explosion (deflagration) venting
or explosion (deflagration)
prevention systemsb
HAZARD CATEGORY	
Combustible dustsc	—	Not Required	Required
Cryogenic flammables	—	Not Required	Required
Explosives	Division 1.1	Required	Not Required
Division 1.2	Required	Not Required
Division 1.3	Not Required	Required
Division 1.4	Not Required	Required
Division 1.5	Required	Not Required
Division 1.6	Required	Not Required
Flammable gas	Gaseous	Not Required	Required
Liquefied	Not Required	Required
Flammable liquid	IAd	Not Required	Required
IBe	Not Required	Required
Organic peroxides	U	Required	Not Permitted
I	Required	Not Permitted
Oxidizer liquids and solids	4	Required	Not Permitted
Pyrophoric gas	—	Not Required	Required
Unstable (reactive)	4	Required	Not Permitted
3 Detonable	Required	Not Permitted
3 Nondetonable	Not Required	Required
Water-reactive liquids and solids	3	Not Required	Required
2g	Not Required	Required
SPECIAL USES	
Acetylene generator rooms	—	Not Required	Required
Energy Storage Systemsi		Not Required	Required
Grain processing	—	Not Required	Required
Liquefied petroleum gas-
distribution facilities
	—	Not Required	Required
Where explosion hazards existf	Detonation	Required	Not Permitted
Deflagration	Not Required	Required

a.	See Section 414.1.3.

b.	See the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

c.	Combustible dusts where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. See definition of “Combustible dust” in Chapter 2.

d.	Storage or use.

e.	In open use or dispensing.

f.	Rooms containing dispensing and use of hazardous materials when an explosive environment can occur because of the characteristics or nature of the hazardous materials or as a result of the dispensing or use process.

g.	A method of explosion control shall be provided when Class 2 water-reactive materials can form potentially explosive mixtures.

h.	Explosion venting is not required for Group H-5 fabrication areas complying with Section 415.11.1 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

i.	Where explosion control is required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.5.2 Emergency or standby power.

Where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code or this code, mechanical ventilation, treatment systems, temperature control, alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems shall be provided with emergency or standby power in accordance with Section 2702. For storage and use areas for highly toxic or toxic materials, see the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.5.2.1 Exempt applications.

Emergency or standby power is not required for the mechanical ventilation systems provided for any of the following:

1.	Storage of Class IB and IC flammable and combustible liquids in closed containers not exceeding 6.5 gallons (25 L) capacity.

2.	Storage of Class 1 and 2 oxidizers.

3.	Storage of Class II, III, IV and V organic peroxides.

4.	Storage of asphyxiant, irritant and radioactive gases.

[F] 414.5.2.2 Fail-safe engineered systems.

Standby power for mechanical ventilation, treatment systems and temperature control systems shall not be required where an approved fail-safe engineered system is installed.

[F] 414.5.3 Spill control, drainage and containment.

Rooms, buildings or areas occupied for the storage of solid and liquid hazardous materials shall be provided with a means to control spillage and to contain or drain off spillage and fire protection water discharged in the storage area where required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code. The methods of spill control shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.6 Outdoor storage, dispensing and use.

The outdoor storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 414.6.1 Weather protection.

Where weather protection is provided for sheltering outdoor hazardous material storage or use areas, such areas shall be considered outdoor storage or use when the weather protection structure complies with Sections 414.6.1.1 through 414.6.1.3.

[F] 414.6.1.1 Walls.

Walls shall not obstruct more than one side of the structure.

Exception: Walls shall be permitted to obstruct portions of multiple sides of the structure, provided that the obstructed area is not greater than 25 percent of the structure’s perimeter.

[F] 414.6.1.2 Separation distance.

The distance from the structure to buildings, lot lines, public ways or means of egress to a public way shall be not less than the distance required for an outside hazardous material storage or use area without weather protection.

[F] 414.6.1.3 Noncombustible construction.

The overhead structure shall be of approved noncombustible construction with a maximum area of 1,500 square feet (140 m2).

Exception: The maximum area is permitted to be increased as provided by Section 506.

SECTION 415
GROUPS H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 AND H-5
[F] 415.1 Scope.

The provisions of Sections 415.1 through 415.11 shall apply to the storage and use of hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities per control area listed in Section 307.1. Buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H shall also comply with the applicable provisions of Section 414 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

DETACHED BUILDING.

EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION.

EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE.

FABRICATION AREA.

FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES.

GAS CABINET.

GAS DETECTION SYSTEM.

GAS ROOM.

HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION MATERIAL (HPM).

HPM FLAMMABLE LIQUID.

HPM ROOM.

IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND HEALTH (IDLH).

LIQUID.

LIQUID STORAGE ROOM.

LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM.

LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL).

NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE (NTP).

PHYSIOLOGICAL WARNING THRESHOLD LEVEL.

SERVICE CORRIDOR.

SOLID.

STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.

USE (MATERIAL).

WORKSTATION.

[F] 415.3 Automatic fire detection systems.

Group H occupancies shall be provided with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.

[F] 415.4 Automatic sprinkler system.

Group H occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

[F] 415.5 Emergency alarms.

Emergency alarms for the detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group H occupancies shall be provided as set forth herein.

[F] 415.5.1 Storage.

An approved manual emergency alarm system shall be provided in buildings, rooms or areas used for storage of hazardous materials. Emergency alarm-initiating devices shall be installed outside of each interior exit or exit access door of storage buildings, rooms or areas. Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device shall sound a local alarm to alert occupants of an emergency situation involving hazardous materials.

[F] 415.5.2 Dispensing, use and handling.

Where hazardous materials having a hazard ranking of 3 or 4 in accordance with NFPA 704 are transported through corridors, interior exit stairways or ramps, or exit passageways, there shall be an emergency telephone system, a local manual alarm station or an approved alarm-initiating device at not more than 150-foot (45 720 mm) intervals and at each exit and exit access doorway throughout the transport route. The signal shall be relayed to an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or constantly attended on-site location and shall initiate a local audible alarm.

[F] 415.5.3 Supervision.

Emergency alarm systems required by Section 415.5.1 or 415.5.2 shall be electrically supervised and monitored by an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or shall initiate an audible and visual signal at a constantly attended on-site location.

[F] 415.5.4 Emergency alarm systems.

Emergency alarm systems required by Section 415.5.1 or 415.5.2 shall be provided with emergency or standby power in accordance with Section 2702.2.

[F] 415.6 Fire separation distance.

Group H occupancies shall be located on property in accordance with the other provisions of this chapter. In Groups H-2 and H-3, not less than 25 percent of the perimeter wall of the occupancy shall be an exterior wall.

[F] 415.6.1 Rooms for flammable or combustible liquiduse, dispensing or mixing in open systems.

Rooms forflammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixingin open systems having a floor area of not more than 500square feet (46.5 m2) need not be located on the outerperimeter of the building where they are in accordancewith the Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 30.

[F] 415.6.2 Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems.

Liquidstorage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems, having a floor area of not morethan 1,000 square feet (93 m2) need not be located on theouter perimeter where they are in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 30.

[F] 415.6.3 Spray paint booths.

Spray paint booths thatcomply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code need notbe located on the outer perimeter.

[F] 415.6.4 Group H occupancy minimum fire separation distance.

Regardless of any other provisions, buildings containing Group H occupancies shall be set back to the minimum fire separation distance as set forth in Sections 415.6.4.1 through 415.6.4.4. Distances shall be measured from the walls enclosing the occupancy to lot lines, including those on a public way. Distances to assumed lot lines established for the purpose of determining exterior wall and opening protection are not to be used to establish the minimum fire separation distance for buildings on sites where explosives are manufactured or used when separation is provided in accordance with the quantity distance tables specified for explosive materials in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.6.4.1 Group H-1.

Group H-1 occupancies shallbe set back not less than 75 feet (22 860 mm) and notless than required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

Exception: Fireworks manufacturing buildings separated in accordance with NFPA 1124.

[F] 415.6.4.2 Group H-2.

Group H-2 occupancies shall be set back not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) where the area of the occupancy is greater than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) and it is not required to be located in a detached building.

[F] 415.6.4.3 Groups H-2 and H-3.

Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be set back not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) where a detached building is required (see Table 415.6.5).

[F] 415.6.4.4 Explosive materials.

Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing materials with explosive characteristics shall be separated as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Where separations are not specified, the distances required shall be determined by a technical report issued in accordance with Section 414.1.3.

[F] 415.6.5 Detached buildings for Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 occupancy.

The storage or use of hazardous materialsin excess of those amounts listed in Table 415.6.5 shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 415.7 and 415.8.

[F] TABLE 415.6.5 DETACHED BUILDING REQUIRED

A DETACHED BUILDING IS REQUIRED WHEN THE QUANTITY OF MATERIAL EXCEEDS THAT LISTED HEREIN
Material	Class	Solids and Liquids (tons)a, b	Gases (cubic feet)a, b
Explosives	Division 1.1	Maximum Allowable Quantity	Not Applicable
Division 1.2	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Division 1.3	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Division 1.4	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Division 1.4c	1
Division 1.5	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Division 1.6	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Oxidizers	Class 4	Maximum Allowable Quantity	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Unstable (reactives) detonable	Class 3 or 4	Maximum Allowable Quantity	Maximum Allowable Quantity
Oxidizer, liquids and solids	Class 3	1,200	Not Applicable
Class 2	2,000	Not Applicable
Organic peroxides	Detonable	Maximum Allowable Quantity	Not Applicable
Class I	Maximum Allowable Quantity	Not Applicable
Class II	25	Not Applicable
Class III	50	Not Applicable
Unstable (reactives) nondetonable	Class 3	1	2,000
Class 2	25	10,000
Water reactives	Class 3	1	Not Applicable
Class 2	25	Not Applicable
Pyrophoric gasesd	Not Applicable	Not Applicable	2,000

For SI: 1 ton = 906 kg, 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	For materials that are detonable, the distance to other buildings or lot lines shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code based on trinitrotoluene (TNT) equivalence of the material. For materials classified as explosives, see the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

b.	“Maximum Allowable Quantity” means the maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 307.1(1).

c.	Limited to Division 1.4 materials and articles, including articles packaged for shipment, that are not regulated as an explosive under Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (BATF) regulations or unpackaged articles used in process operations that do not propagate a detonation or deflagration between articles, provided the net explosive weight of individual articles does not exceed 1 pound.

d.	Detached buildings are not required, for gases in gas rooms that support H-5 fabrication facilities where the gas room is separated from other areas by a fire barrier with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours and the gas is located in a gas cabinet that is internally sprinklered, equipped with continuous leak detection, automatic shutdown and is not manifolded upstream of pressure controls. Additionally, the gas supply is limited to cylinders that do not exceed 125-pound (57 kg) water capacity in accordance with 49 CFR 173.192 for Hazard Zone A toxic gases.

[F] 415.6.5.1 Wall and opening protection.

Where a detached building is required by Table 415.6.5, there are no requirements for wall and opening protection based on fire separation distance.

[F] 415.7 Special provisions for Group H-1 occupancies.

Group H-1 occupancies shall be in detached buildings used for no other purpose. Roofs shall be of lightweight construction with suitable thermal insulation to prevent sensitive material from reaching its decomposition temperature. Group H-1 occupancies containing materials that are in themselves both physical and health hazards in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(2) shall comply with requirements for both Group H-1 and H-4 occupancies.

[F] 415.7.1 Floors in storage rooms.

Floors in storage areas for organic peroxides, pyrophoric materials and unstable (reactive) materials shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

[F] 415.8 Special provisions for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing quantities of hazardous materials in excess of those set forth in Table 415.6.2 shall be in detached buildings used for manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of hazardous materials. Materials listed for Group H-1 occupancies in Section 307.3 are permitted to be located within Group H-2 or H-3 detached buildings provided the amount of materials per control area do not exceed the maximum allowed quantity specified in Table 307.1(1).

[F] 415.8.1 Multiple hazards.

Group H-2 or H-3 occupancies containing materials that are in themselves both physical and health hazards in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(2) shall comply with requirements for Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancies as applicable.

[F] 415.8.2 Separation of incompatible materials.

Hazardous materials other than those listed in Table 415.6.5 shall be allowed in manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage areas when separated from incompatible materials in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.8.3 Water reactives.

Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing water-reactive materials shall be resistant to water penetration. Piping for conveying liquids shall not be over or through areas containing water reactives, unless isolated by approved liquid-tight construction.

Exception: Fire protection piping shall be permitted over or through areas containing water reactives without isolating it with liquid-tight construction.

[F] 415.8.4 Floors in storage rooms.

Floors in storage areas for organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophoric materials, unstable (reactive) materials and water-reactive solids and liquids shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

[F] 415.8.5 Waterproof room.

Rooms or areas used for the storage of water-reactive solids and liquids shall be constructed in a manner that resists the penetration of water through the use of waterproof materials. Piping carrying water for other than approved automatic sprinkler systems shall not be within such rooms or areas.

[F] 415.9 Group H-2.

Occupancies in Group H-2 shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 415.9.1 through 415.9.3 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1 Flammable and combustible liquids.

The storage, handling, processing and transporting of flammable and combustible liquids in Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be in accordance with Sections 415.9.1.1 through 415.9.1.9, the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1.1 Mixed occupancies.

Where the storage tank area is located in a building of two or more occupancies and the quantity of liquid exceeds the maximum allowable quantity for one control area, the use shall be completely separated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with the requirements of Section 508.4.

[F] 415.9.1.1.1 Height exception.

Where storage tanks are located within a building no more than one story above grade plane, the height limitation of Section 504 shall not apply for Group H.

[F] 415.9.1.2 Tank protection.

Storage tanks shall be noncombustible and protected from physical damage. Fire barriers or horizontal assemblies or both around the storage tanks shall be permitted as the method of protection from physical damage.

[F] 415.9.1.3 Tanks.

Storage tanks shall be approved tanks conforming to the requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1.4 Leakage containment.

A liquid-tight containment area compatible with the stored liquid shall be provided. The method of spill control, drainage control and secondary containment shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

Exception: Rooms where only double-wall storage tanks conforming to Section 415.9.1.3 are used to store Class I, II and IIIA flammable and combustible liquids shall not be required to have a leakage containment area.

[F] 415.9.1.5 Leakage alarm.

An approved automatic alarm shall be provided to indicate a leak in a storage tank and room. The alarm shall sound an audible signal, 15 dBa above the ambient sound level, at every point of entry into the room in which the leaking storage tank is located. An approved sign shall be posted on every entry door to the tank storage room indicating the potential hazard of the interior room environment, or the sign shall state: WARNING, WHEN ALARM SOUNDS, THE ENVIRONMENT WITHIN THE ROOM MAY BE HAZARDOUS. The leakage alarm shall also be supervised in accordance with Chapter 9 to transmit a trouble signal.

[F] 415.9.1.6 Tank vent.

Storage tank vents for Class I, II or IIIA liquids shall terminate to the outdoor air in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1.7 Room ventilation.

Storage tank areas storing Class I, II or IIIA liquids shall be provided with mechanical ventilation. The mechanical ventilation system shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1.8 Explosion venting.

Where Class I liquids are being stored, explosion venting shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.9.1.9 Tank openings other than vents.

Tank openings other than vents from tanks inside buildings shall be designed to ensure that liquids or vapor concentrations are not released inside the building.

[F] 415.9.2 Liquefied petroleum gas facilities.

The construction and installation of liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas and NFPA 58.

[F] 415.9.3 Dry cleaning plants.

The construction and installation of dry cleaning plants shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, the Florida Building Code, Plumbing and NFPA 32. Dry cleaning solvents and systems shall be classified in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.10 Groups H-3 and H-4.

Groups H-3 and H-4 shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.10.1 Flammable and combustible liquids.

The storage, handling, processing and transporting of flammable and combustible liquids in Group H-3 occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 415.9.1.

[F] 415.10.2 Gas rooms.

Where gas rooms are provided, such rooms shall be separated from other areas by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 415.10.3 Floors in storage rooms.

Floors in storage areas for corrosive liquids and highly toxic or toxic materials shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

[F] 415.10.4 Separation-highly toxic solids and liquids.

Highly toxic solids and liquids not stored in approved hazardous materials storage cabinets shall be isolated from other hazardous materials storage by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 415.11 Group H-5.

In addition to the requirements set forth elsewhere in this code, Group H-5 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 415.11.1 through 415.11.12 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.11.1 Fabrication areas.

Fabrication areas shall comply with Sections 415.11.1.1 through 415.11.1.8.

[F] 415.11.1.1 Hazardous materials.

Hazardous materials and hazardous production materials (HPM) shall comply with Sections 415.11.1.1.1 and 415.11.1.1.2.

[F] 415.11.1.1.1 Aggregate quantities.

The aggregate quantities of hazardous materials stored and used in a single fabrication area shall not exceed the quantities set forth in Table 415.11.1.1.1.

Exception: The quantity limitations for any hazard category in Table 415.11.1.1.1 shall not apply where the fabrication area contains quantities of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area established by Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2).

[F] TABLE 415.11.1.1.1

QUANTITY LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN A SINGLE FABRICATION AREA IN GROUP H-5a

HAZARD CATEGORY	SOLIDS
(pounds per square foot)
	LIQUIDS
(gallons per square foot)
	GAS
(cubic feet @ NTP/square foot)

PHYSICAL-HAZARD MATERIALS
Combustible dust	Note b	Not Applicable	Not Applicable
Combustible fiber	Loose	Note b	Not Applicable	Not Applicable
Baled	Notes b, c
Combustible liquid	II	Not Applicable	0.01	Not Applicable
IIIA	0.02
IIIB	Not Limited
Combination Class	I, II and IIIA	0.04
Cryogenic gas	Flammable	Not Applicable	Not Applicable	Note d
Oxidizing	1.25
Explosives	Note b	Note b	Note b
Flammable gas	Gaseous	Not Applicable	Not Applicable	Note d
Liquefied	Note d
Flammable liquid	IA	Not Applicable	0.0025	Not Applicable
IB	0.025
IC	0.025
Combination Class	IA, IB and IC	0.025
Combination Class	I, II and IIIA	0.04
Flammable solid	0.001	Not Applicable	Not Applicable
Organic peroxide	Unclassified detonable	Note b	Not Applicable	Not Applicable
Class I	Note b
Class II	0.025
Class III	0.1
Class IV	Not Limited
Class V	Not Limited
Oxidizing gas	Gaseous	Not Applicable	Not Applicable	1.25
Liquefied	1.25
Combination of gaseous and liquefied	1.25
Oxidizer	Class 4	Note b	Note b	Not Applicable
Class 3	0.003	0.03
Class 2	0.003	0.03
Class 1	0.003	0.03
Combination Class	1, 2, 3	0.003	0.03
Pyrophoric materials	0.01	0.00125	Notes d and e
Unstable (reactive)	Class 4	Note b	Note b	Note b
Class 3	0.025	0.0025	Note b
Class 2	0.1	0.01	Note b
Class 1	Not Limited	Not Limited	Not Limited
Water reactive	Class 3	0.01f	0.00125	Not Applicable
Class 2	0.25	0.025
Class 1	Not Limited	Not Limited
HEALTH-HAZARD MATERIALS
Corrosives	Not Limited	Not Limited	Not Limited
Highly toxic	Not Limited	Not Limited	Note d
Toxics	Not Limited	Not Limited	Note d

For SI: 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2, 1 gallon per square foot = 40.7 L/m2, 1 cubic foot @ NTP/square foot = 0.305 m3 @ NTP/m2, 1 cubic foot = 0.02832 m3.

a.	Hazardous materials within piping shall not be included in the calculated quantities.

b.	Quantity of hazardous materials in a single fabrication shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2).

c.	Densely packed baled cotton that complies with the packing requirements of ISO 8115 shall not be included in this material class.

d.	The aggregate quantity of flammable, pyrophoric, toxic and highly toxic gases shall not exceed 9,000 cubic feet at NTP.

e.The aggregate quantity of pyrophoric gases in the building shall not exceed the amounts set forth in Table 415.6.5.

f.Quantity of Class 3 water reactive solids in a single tool shall not exceed 1 pound.

[F] 415.11.1.1.2 Hazardous production materials.

The maximum quantities of hazardous production materials (HPM) stored in a single fabrication area shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area established by Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2).

[F] 415.11.1.2 Separation.

Fabrication areas, whose sizes are limited by the quantity of hazardous materials allowed by Table 415.11.1.1.1, shall be separated from each other, from corridors and from other parts of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exceptions:

1.	Doors within such fire barrier walls, including doors to corridors, shall be only self-closing fire door assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

2.	Windows between fabrication areas and corridors are permitted to be fixed glazing listed and labeled for a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour in accordance with Section 716.

[F] 415.11.1.3 Location of occupied levels.

Occupied levels of fabrication areas shall be located at or above the first story above grade plane.

[F] 415.11.1.4 Floors.

Except for surfacing, floors within fabrication areas shall be of noncombustible construction.

Openings through floors of fabrication areas are permitted to be unprotected where the interconnected levels are used solely for mechanical equipment directly related to such fabrication areas (see also Section 415.11.1.6).

Floors forming a part of an occupancy separation shall be liquid tight.

[F] 415.11.1.5 Shafts and openings through floors.

Elevator hoistways, vent shafts and other openings through floors shall be enclosed where required by Sections 712 and 713. Mechanical, duct and piping penetrations within a fabrication area shall not extend through more than two floors. The annular space around penetrations for cables, cable trays, tubing, piping, conduit or ducts shall be sealed at the floor level to restrict the movement of air. The fabrication area, including the areas through which the ductwork and piping extend, shall be considered a single conditioned environment.

[F] 415.11.1.6 Ventilation.

Mechanical exhaust ventilation at the rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot [0.0051 m3/(s · m2)] of floor area shall be provided throughout the portions of the fabrication area where HPM are used or stored. The exhaust air duct system of one fabrication area shall not connect to another duct system outside that fabrication area within the building.

A ventilation system shall be provided to capture and exhaust gases, fumes and vapors at workstations.

Two or more operations at a workstation shall not be connected to the same exhaust system where either one or the combination of the substances removed could constitute a fire, explosion or hazardous chemical reaction within the exhaust duct system.

Exhaust ducts penetrating fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 shall be contained in a shaft of equivalent fire-resistance-rated construction. Exhaust ducts shall not penetrate fire walls.

Fire dampers shall not be installed in exhaust ducts.

[F] 415.11.1.7 Transporting hazardous production materials to fabrication areas.

HPM shall be transported to fabrication areas through enclosed piping or tubing systems that comply with Section 415.11.7, through service corridors complying with Section 415.11.3, or in corridors as permitted in the exception to Section 415.11.2. The handling or transporting of HPM within service corridors shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.11.1.8 Electrical.

Electrical equipment and devices within the fabrication area shall comply with NFPA 70. The requirements for hazardous locations need not be applied where the average air change is at least four times that set forth in Section 415.11.1.7 and where the number of air changes at any location is not less than three times that required by Section 415.11.1.7. The use of recirculated air shall be permitted.

[F] 415.11.1.8.1 Workstations.

Workstations shall not be energized without adequate exhaust ventilation. See Section 415.11.1.6 for workstation exhaust ventilation requirements.

[F] 415.11.2 Corridors.

Corridors shall comply with Chapter 10 and shall be separated from fabrication areas as specified in Section 415.11.1.2. Corridors shall not contain HPM and shall not be used for transporting such materials except through closed piping systems as provided in Section 415.11.7.4

Exception: Where existing fabrication areas are altered or modified, HPM is allowed to be transported in existing corridors, subject to the following conditions:

1.	Nonproduction HPM is allowed to be transported in corridors if utilized for maintenance, lab work and testing.

2.	Where existing fabrication areas are altered or modified, HPM is allowed to be transported in existing corridors, subject to the following conditions:

2.1.	Corridors. Corridors adjacent to the fabrication area where the alteration work is to be done shall comply with Section 1020 for a length determined as follows:

2.1.1.	The length of the common wall of the corridor and the fabrication area; and

2.1.2.	For the distance along the corridor to the point of entry of HPM into the corridor serving that fabrication area.

2.2.	Emergency alarm system. There shall be an emergency telephone system, a local manual alarm station or other approved alarm-initiating device within corridors at not more than 150-foot (45 720 mm) intervals and at each exit and doorway. The signal shall be relayed to an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or the emergency control station and shall also initiate a local audible alarm.

2.3.	Pass-throughs. Self-closing doors having a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour shall separate pass-throughs from existing corridors. Pass-throughs shall be constructed as required for the corridors and protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.

[F] 415.11.3 Service corridors.

Service corridors within a Group H-5 occupancy shall comply with Sections 415.11.3.1 through 415.11.3.4.

[F] 415.11.3.1 Use conditions.

Service corridors shall be separated from corridors as required by Section 415.11.1.2. Service corridors shall not be used as a required corridor.

[F] 415.11.3.2 Mechanical ventilation.

Service corridors shall be mechanically ventilated as required by Section 415.11.1.6 or at not less than six air changes per hour.

[F] 415.11.3.3 Means of egress.

The distance of travel from any point in a service corridor to an exit, exit access corridor or door into a fabrication area shall be not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm). Dead ends shall be not greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) in length. There shall be not less than two exits, and not more than onehalf of the required means of egress shall require travel into a fabrication area. Doors from service corridors shall swing in the direction of egress travel and shall be self-closing.

[F] 415.11.3.4 Minimum width.

The clear width of a service corridor shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm), or 33 inches (838 mm) wider than the widest cart or truck used in the service corridor, whichever is greater.

[F] 415.11.4 Emergency alarm system.

Emergency alarm systems shall be provided in accordance with this section and Sections 415.5.1 and 415.5.2. The maximum allowable quantity per control area provisions shall not apply to emergency alarm systems required for HPM.

[F] 415.11.4.1 Service corridors.

An emergency alarm system shall be provided in service corridors, with no fewer than one alarm device in each service corridor.

[F] 415.11.4.2 Corridors and interior exit stairways and ramps.

Emergency alarms for corridors, interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall comply with Section 415.5.2.

[F] 415.11.4.3 Liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms.

Emergency alarms for liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms shall comply with Section 415.5.1.

[F] 415.11.4.4 Alarm-initiating devices.

An approved emergency telephone system, local alarm manual pull stations, or other approved alarm-initiating devices are allowed to be used as emergency alarm-initiating devices.

[F] 415.11.4.5 Alarm signals.

Activation of the emergency alarm system shall sound a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station.

[F] 415.11.5 Storage of hazardous production materials.

Storage of hazardous production materials (HPM) in fabrication areas shall be within approved or listed storage cabinets or gas cabinets or within a workstation. The storage of HPM in quantities greater than those listed in the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be in liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms or gas rooms as appropriate for the materials stored. The storage of other hazardous materials shall be in accordance with other applicable provisions of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.11.6 HPM rooms, gas rooms, liquid storage room construction.

HPM rooms, gas rooms and liquid shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 415.11.6.1 through 415.11.6.9.

[F] 415.11.6.1 HPM rooms and gas rooms.

HPM rooms and gas rooms shall be separated from other areas by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than 2 hours where the area is 300 square feet (27.9 m2) or more and not less than 1 hour where the area is less than 300 square feet (27.9 m2).

[F] 415.11.6.2 Liquid storage rooms.

Liquid storage rooms shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	Rooms greater than 500 square feet (46.5 m2) in area, shall have no fewer than one exterior door approved for fire department access.

2.	Rooms shall be separated from other areas by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than 1 hour for rooms up to 150 square feet (13.9 m2) in area and not less than 2 hours where the room is more than 150 square feet (13.9 m2) in area.

3.	Shelving, racks and wainscotting in such areas shall be of noncombustible construction or wood of not less than 1-inch (25 mm) nominal thickness or fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

4.	Rooms used for the storage of Class I flammable liquids shall not be located in a basement.

[F] 415.11.6.3 Floors.

Except for surfacing, floors of HPM rooms and liquid storage rooms shall be of noncombustible liquid-tight construction. Raised grating over floors shall be of noncombustible materials.

[F] 415.11.6.4 Location.

Where HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms are provided, they shall have no fewer than one exterior wall and such wall shall be not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) from lot lines, including lot lines adjacent to public ways.

[F] 415.11.6.5 Explosion control.

Explosion control shall be provided where required by Section 414.5.1.

[F] 415.11.6.6 Exits.

Where two exits are required from HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms, one shall be directly to the outside of the building.

[F] 415.11.6.7 Doors.

Doors in a fire barrier wall, including doors to corridors, shall be self-closing fire door assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

[F] 415.11.6.8 Ventilation.

Mechanical exhaust ventilation shall be provided in liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms at the rate of not less than 1 cubic foot per minute per square foot (0.044 L/s/m2) of floor area or six air changes per hour.

Exhaust ventilation for gas rooms shall be designed to operate at a negative pressure in relation to the surrounding areas and direct the exhaust ventilation to an exhaust system.

[F] 415.11.6.9 Emergency alarm system.

An approved emergency alarm system shall be provided for HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms.

Emergency alarm-initiating devices shall be installed outside of each interior exit door of such rooms.

Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device shall sound a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station.

An approved emergency telephone system, local alarm manual pull stations or other approved alarm-initiating devices are allowed to be used as emergency alarm-initiating devices.

[F] 415.11.7 Piping and tubing.

Hazardous production materials piping and tubing shall comply with this section and ASME B31.3.

[F] 415.11.7.1 HPM having a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4.

Systems supplying HPM liquids or gases having a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4 shall be welded throughout, except for connections, to the systems that are within a ventilated enclosure if the material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage or containment is provided for the connections if the material is a liquid.

[F] 415.11.7.2 Location in service corridors.

Hazardous production materials supply piping or tubing in service corridors shall be exposed to view.

[F] 415.11.7.3 Excess flow control.

Where HPM gases or liquids are carried in pressurized piping above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (103.4 kPa), excess flow control shall be provided. Where the piping originates from within a liquid storage room, HPM room or gas room, the excess flow control shall be located within the liquid storage room, HPM room or gas room. Where the piping originates from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located as close to the bulk source as practical.

[F] 415.11.7.4 Installations in corridors and above other occupancies.

The installation of HPM piping and tubing within the space defined by the walls of corridors and the floor or roof above, or in concealed spaces above other occupancies, shall be in accordance with Sections 415.11.7.1 through 415.11.7.3 and the following conditions:

1.	Automatic sprinklers shall be installed within the space unless the space is less than 6 inches (152 mm) in the least dimension.

2.	Ventilation not less than six air changes per hour shall be provided. The space shall not be used to convey air from any other area.

3.	Where the piping or tubing is used to transport HPM liquids, a receptor shall be installed below such piping or tubing. The receptor shall be designed to collect any discharge or leakage and drain it to an approved location. The 1-hour enclosure shall not be used as part of the receptor.

4.	HPM supply piping and tubing and nonmetallic waste lines shall be separated from the corridor and from occupancies other than Group H-5 by fire barriers or by an approved method or assembly that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Access openings into the enclosure shall be protected by approved fire-protection-rated assemblies.

5.	Readily accessible manual or automatic remotely activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall be installed on piping and tubing other than waste lines at the following locations:

5.1.	At branch connections into the fabrication area.

5.2.	At entries into corridors.

Exception: Transverse crossings of the corridors by supply piping that is enclosed within a ferrous pipe or tube for the width of the corridor need not comply with Items 1 through 5.

[F] 415.11.7.5 Identification.

Piping, tubing and HPM waste lines shall be identified in accordance with ANSI A13.1 to indicate the material being transported.

[F] 415.11.8 Gas detection systems.

A gas detection system complying with Section 916 shall be provided for HPM gases where the physiological warning threshold level of the gas is at a higher level than the accepted permissible exposure limit (PEL) for the gas and for flammable gases in accordance with Sections 415.11.8.1 through 415.11.8.2.

[F] 415.11.8.1 Where required.

A gas detection system shall be provided in the areas identified in Sections 415.11.8.1.1 through 415.11.8.1.4.

[F] 415.11.8.1.1 Fabrication areas.

A gas detection system shall be provided in fabrication areas where HPM gas is used in the fabrication area.

[F] 415.11.8.1.2 HPM rooms.

A gas detection system shall be provided in HPM rooms where HPM gas is used in the room.

[F] 415.11.8.1.3 Gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures and gas rooms.

A gas detection system shall be provided in gas cabinets and exhausted enclosures for HPM gas. A gas detection system shall be provided in gas rooms where HPM gases are not located in gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures.

[F] 415.11.8.1.4 Corridors.

Where HPM gases are transported in piping placed within the space defined by the walls of a corridor and the floor or roof above the corridor, a gas detection system shall be provided where piping is located and in the corridor.

Exception: A gas detection system is not required for occasional transverse crossings of the corridors by supply piping that is enclosed in a ferrous pipe or tube for the width of the corridor.

[F] 415.11.8.2 Gas detection system operation.

The gas detection system shall be capable of monitoring the room, area or equipment in which the HPM gas is located at or below all the following gas concentrations:

1.	Immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) values where the monitoring point is within an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

2.	Permissible exposure limit (PEL) levels where the monitoring point is in an area outside an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

3.	For flammable gases, the monitoring detection threshold level shall be vapor concentrations in excess of 25 percent of the lower flammable limit (LFL) where the monitoring is within or outside an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

4.	Except as noted in this section, monitoring for highly toxic and toxic gases shall also comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.11.8.2.1 Alarms.

The gas detection system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station when a short-term hazard condition is detected. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall provide warning both inside and outside the area where the gas is detected. The audible alarm shall be distinct from all other alarms.

[F] 415.11.8.2.2 Shutoff of gas supply.

The gas detection system shall automatically close the shutoff valve at the source on gas supply piping and tubing related to the system being monitored for which gas is detected when a short-term hazard condition is detected. Automatic closure of shutoff valves shall comply with the following:

1.	Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure, the shutoff valve in the gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure for the specific gas detected shall automatically close.

2.	Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a room and compressed gas containers are not in gas cabinets or an exhausted enclosure, the shutoff valves on all gas lines for the specific gas detected shall automatically close.

3.	Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a piping distribution manifold enclosure, the shutoff valve supplying the manifold for the compressed gas container of the specific gas detected shall automatically close.

Exception: Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is at the use location or within a gas valve enclosure of a branch line downstream of a piping distribution manifold, the shutoff valve for the branch line located in the piping distribution manifold enclosure shall automatically close.

[F] 415.11.9 Manual fire alarm system.

An approved manual fire alarm system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group H-5. Activation of the alarm system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station. The fire alarm system shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 907.

[F] 415.11.10 Emergency control station.

An emergency control station shall be provided in accordance with Sections 415.11.10.1 through 415.11.10.3.

[F] 415.11.10.1 Location.

The emergency control station shall be located on the premises at an approved location outside the fabrication area.

[F] 415.11.10.2 Staffing.

Trained personnel shall continuously staff the emergency control station.

[F] 415.11.10.3 Signals.

The emergency control station shall receive signals from emergency equipment and alarm and detection systems. Such emergency equipment and alarm and detection systems shall include, but not be limited to, the following where such equipment or systems are required to be provided either in this chapter or elsewhere in this code:

1.	Automatic sprinkler system alarm and monitoring systems.

2.	Manual fire alarm systems.

3.	Emergency alarm systems.

4.	Gas detection systems.

5.	Smoke detection systems.

6.	Emergency power system.

7.	Automatic detection and alarm systems for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

8.	Exhaust ventilation flow alarm devices for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids cabinet exhaust ventilation systems required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 415.11.11 Emergency power system.

An emergency power system shall be provided in Group H-5 occupancies in accordance with Section 2702. The emergency power system shall supply power automatically to the electrical systems specified in Section 415.11.11.1 when the normal electrical supply system is interrupted.

[F] 415.11.11.1 Required electrical systems.

Emergency power shall be provided for electrically operated equipment and connected control circuits for the following systems:

1.	HPM exhaust ventilation systems.

2.	HPM gas cabinet ventilation systems.

3.	HPM exhausted enclosure ventilation systems.

4.	HPM gas room ventilation systems.

5.	HPM gas detection systems.

6.	Emergency alarm systems.

7.	Manual and automatic fire alarm systems.

8.	Automatic sprinkler system monitoring and alarm systems.

9.	Automatic alarm and detection systems for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

10.	Flow alarm switches for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids cabinet exhaust ventilation systems required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

11.	Electrically operated systems required elsewhere in this code or in the Florida Fire Prevention Code applicable to the use, storage or handling of HPM.

[F] 415.11.11.2 Exhaust ventilation systems.

Exhaust ventilation systems are allowed to be designed to operate at not less than one-half the normal fan speed on the emergency power system where it is demonstrated that the level of exhaust will maintain a safe atmosphere.

[F] 415.11.12 Automatic sprinkler system protection in exhaust ducts for HPM.

An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in exhaust ducts conveying gases, vapors, fumes, mists or dusts generated from HPM in accordance with Sections 415.11.12.1 through 415.10.12.3 and the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 415.11.12.1 Metallic and noncombustible non-metallic exhaust ducts.

An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in metallic and noncombustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts where all of the following conditions apply:

1.	Where the largest cross-sectional diameter is equal to or greater than 10 inches (254 mm).

2.	The ducts are within the building.

3.	The ducts are conveying flammable gases, vapors or fumes.

[F] 415.11.12.2 Combustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts.

Automatic sprinkler system protection shall be provided in combustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts where the largest cross-sectional diameter of the duct is equal to or greater than 10 inches (254 mm).

Exception: Ducts need not be provided with automatic sprinkler protection as follows:

1.	Ducts listed or approved for applications without automatic sprinkler system protection.

2.	Ducts not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) in length installed below ceiling level.

[F] 415.11.12.3 Automatic sprinkler locations.

Sprinkler systems shall be installed at 12-foot (3658 mm) intervals in horizontal ducts and at changes in direction. In vertical ducts, sprinklers shall be installed at the top and at alternate floor levels.

SECTION 416
APPLICATION OF FLAMMABLE FINISHES
[F] 416.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, installation and use of buildings and structures, or parts thereof, for the application of flammable finishes. Such construction and equipment shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 416.2 Spray rooms.

Spray rooms shall be enclosed with not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Floors shall be waterproofed and drained in an approved manner.

[F] 416.2.1 Surfaces.

The interior surfaces of spray rooms shall be smooth and shall be so constructed to permit the free passage of exhaust air from all parts of the interior and to facilitate washing and cleaning, and shall be so designed to confine residues within the room. Aluminum shall not be used.

[F] 416.2.2 Ventilation.

Mechanical ventilation and interlocks with the spraying operation shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 416.3 Spraying spaces.

Spraying spaces shall be ventilated with an exhaust system to prevent the accumulation of flammable mist or vapors in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Where such spaces are not separately enclosed, noncombustible spray curtains shall be provided to restrict the spread of flammable vapors.

[F] 416.3.1 Surfaces.

The interior surfaces of spraying spaces shall be smooth and continuous without edges; shall be so constructed to permit the free passage of exhaust air from all parts of the interior and to facilitate washing and cleaning; and shall be so designed to confine residues within the spraying space. Aluminum shall not be used.

[F] 416.4 Spray booths.

Spray booths shall be designed, constructed and operated in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 416.5 Fire protection.

An automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system shall be provided in all spray, dip and immersing spaces and storage rooms and shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 9.

SECTION 417
DRYING ROOMS
[F] 417.1 General.

A drying room or dry kiln installed within a building shall be constructed entirely of approved noncombustible materials or assemblies of such materials regulated by the approved rules or as required in the general and specific sections of this chapter for special occupancies and where applicable to the general requirements of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 417.2 Piping clearance.

Overhead heating pipes shall have a clearance of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from combustible contents in the dryer.

[F] 417.3 Insulation.

Where the operating temperature of the dryer is 175°F (79°C) or more, metal enclosures shall be insulated from adjacent combustible materials by not less than 12 inches (305 mm) of airspace, or the metal walls shall be lined with 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) insulating mill board or other approved equivalent insulation.

[F] 417.4 Fire protection.

Drying rooms designed for high-hazard materials and processes, including special occupancies as provided for in Chapter 4, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with the provisions of Chapter 9.

SECTION 418
ORGANIC COATINGS
[F] 418.1 Building features.

Manufacturing of organic coatings shall be done only in buildings that do not have pits or basements.

[F] 418.2 Location.

Organic coating manufacturing operations and operations incidental to or connected therewith shall not be located in buildings having other occupancies.

[F] 418.3 Process mills.

Mills operating with close clearances and that process flammable and heat-sensitive materials, such as nitrocellulose, shall be located in a detached building or noncombustible structure.

[F] 418.4 Tank storage.

Storage areas for flammable and combustible liquid tanks inside of structures shall be located at or above grade and shall be separated from the processing area by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 418.5 Nitrocellulose storage.

Nitrocellulose storage shall be located on a detached pad or in a separate structure or a room enclosed with not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 418.6 Finished products.

Storage rooms for finished products that are flammable or combustible liquids shall be separated from the processing area by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

SECTION 419
ARTIFICIAL DECORATIVE VEGETATION
419.1 Artificial decorative vegetation.

Artificial decorativevegetation exceeding 6 feet (1830 mm) in height and permanently installed outdoors within 5 feet (1524 mm) of a building, or on the roof of a building, shall comply with theFlorida Fire Prevention Code.

Exception: Artificial decorative vegetation located morethan 30 feet (9144 mm) from the exterior wall of a building.

SECTION 420
GROUPS I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 AND R-4
420.1 General.

Occupancies in Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 420.1 through 420.6 and other applicable provisions of this code.

420.2 Separation walls.

Walls separating dwelling units in the same building, walls separating sleeping units in the same building and walls separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building shall be constructed as fire partitions in accordance with Section 708.

420.3 Horizontal separation.

Floor assemblies separating dwelling units in the same buildings, floor assemblies separating sleeping units in the same building and floor assemblies separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building shall be constructed as horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711.

420.4 Smoke barriers in Group I-1, Condition 2.

Smoke barriers shall be provided in Group I-1, Condition 2, to subdivide every story used by persons receiving care, treatment or sleeping and to provide other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into no fewer than two smoke compartments. Such stories shall be divided into smoke compartments with an area of not more than 22,500 square feet (2092 m2) and the distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). The smoke barrier shall be in accordance with Section 709.

420.4.1 Refuge area.

Refuge areas shall be provided within each smoke compartment. The size of the refuge area shall accommodate the occupants and care recipients from the adjoining smoke compartment. Where a smoke compartment is adjoined by two or more smoke compartments, the minimum area of the refuge area shall accommodate the largest occupant load of the adjoining compartments. The size of the refuge area shall provide the following:

1.	Not less than 15 net square feet (1.4 m2) for each care recipient.

2.	Not less than 6 net square feet (0.56 m2) for other occupants.

Areas or spaces permitted to be included in the calculation of the refuge area are corridors, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas.

[F] 420.5 Automatic sprinkler system.

Group R occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8. Group I-1 occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. Quick-response or residential automatic sprinklers shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

[F] 420.6 Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms.

Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be provided in Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-4 occupancies in accordance with Sections 907.2.6, 907.2.8, 907.2.9 and 907.2.10, respectively. Single-or multiple- station smoke alarms shall be provided in Groups I-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

420.7 Assisted living housing units.

In Group I-1 occupancies, where a fire resistance corridor is provided, in areas where assisted living residents are housed, shared living spaces, group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces open to the corridor shall be in accordance with all of the following criteria:

1.	The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

2.	The spaces are not occupied as resident sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509 or hazardous uses.

3.	The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

4.	In Group I-1, Condition 1, the corridors onto which the spaces open are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the spaces are equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

5.	In Group I-1, Condition 2, the corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

6.	The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

SECTION 421
HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOMS
[F] 421.1 General.

Where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 421.1 through 421.7.

[F] 421.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM.

HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOM.

[F] 421.3 Location.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall not be located below grade.

[F] 421.4 Design and construction.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms not classified as Group H shall be separated from other areas of the building in accordance with Section 509.1.

[F] 421.4.1 Pressure control.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with a ventilation system designed to maintain the room at a negative pressure in relation to surrounding rooms and spaces.

[F] 421.4.2 Windows.

Operable windows in interior walls shall not be permitted. Fixed windows shall be permitted where in accordance with Section 716.

[F] 421.5 Exhaust ventilation.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with mechanical exhaust ventilation in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 502.16.1 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 421.6 Gas detection system.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with a gas detection system that complies with Sections 916 and 421.6.1 through 421.6.2.

[F] 421.6.1 System activation.

Activation of a gas detection alarm shall result in both of the following:

1.	Initiation of distinct audible and visible alarm signals both inside and outside of the hydrogen fuel gas room.

2.	Automatic activation of the mechanical exhaust ventilation system.

[F] 421.6.2 Failure of the gas detection system.

Failure of the gas detection system shall automatically activate the mechanical exhaust ventilation system, stop hydrogen generation and cause a trouble signal to sound at an approved location.

[F] 421.7 Explosion control.

Explosion control shall be provided where required by Section 414.5.1.

[F] 421.8 Standby power.

Mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems shall be provided with a standby power system in accordance with Section 2702.

SECTION 422
AMBULATORY CARE FACIILITIES
422.1 General.

Occupancies classified as ambulatory care facilities shall comply with the provisions of Sections 422.1 through 422.6 and other applicable provisions of this code.

422.2 Separation.

Ambulatory care facilities where the potential for four or more care recipients are to be incapable of self-preservation at any time, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff accepted responsibility for a care recipient already incapable, shall be separated from adjacent spaces, corridors or tenants with a fire partition installed in accordance with Section 708.

422.3 Smoke compartments.

Where the aggregate area of one or more ambulatory care facilities is greater than 10,000 square feet (929 m2) on one story, the story shall be provided with a smoke barrier to subdivide the story into no fewer than two smoke compartments. The area of any one such smoke compartment shall be not greater than 22,500 square feet (2092 m2). The distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall be not greater than 200 feet (60 960 mm). The smoke barrier shall be installed in accordance with Section 709 with the exception that smoke barriers shall be continuous from outside wall to an outside wall, a floor to a floor, or from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier or a combination thereof.

422.3.1 Means of egress.

Where ambulatory care facilities require smoke compartmentation in accordance with Section 422.3, the fire safety evacuation plans provided in accordance with Section 1001.4 shall identify the building components necessary to support a defend-in-place emergency response in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

422.3.2 Refuge area.

Not less than 30 net square feet (2.8 m2) for each nonambulatory care recipient shall be provided within the aggregate area of corridors, care recipient rooms, treatment rooms, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas within each smoke compartment. Each occupant of an ambulatory care facility shall be provided with access to a refuge area without passing through or utilizing adjacent tenant spaces.

422.3.3 Independent egress.

A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originated.

[F] 422.4 Automatic sprinkler systems.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided for ambulatory care facilities in accordance with Section 903.2.2.

[F] 422.5 Fire alarm systems.

A fire alarm system shall be provided for ambulatory care facilities in accordance with Section 907.2.2.

422.6 Electrical systems.

In ambulatory care facilities, the essential electrical system for electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 and NFPA 99.

SECTION 423
STORM SHELTERS
423.1 General.

In addition to other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with ICC 500. Buildings or structures that are also designated as emergency shelters shall also comply with Table 1604.5 as Risk Category IV structures.

423.1.1 Scope.

This section applies to the construction of storm shelters constructed as separate detached buildings or constructed as safe rooms within buildings for the purpose of providing safe refuge from storms that produce high winds, such as tornados and hurricanes. Such structures shall be designated to be hurricane shelters, tornado shelters, or combined hurricane and tornado shelters. Design of facilities for use as emergency shelters after the storm is outside the scope of ICC 500 and shall comply with Table 1604.5 as a Risk Category IV structure.

423.2 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

STORM SHELTER.

Community storm shelter.

Residential storm shelter.

Shelters built for protection during wind storms in accordance with ICC 500 are not emergency shelters that are required to be designed as Risk Category IV structures in accordance with Section 1604.5.

423.3 Critical emergency operations.

In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500 is 250 mph, 911 call stations, emergency operation centers and fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations shall comply with Table 1604.5 as a Risk Category IV structure and shall be provided with a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500.

423.4 Group E occupancies.

In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 mph in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with an aggregate occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500. The shelter shall be capable of housing the total occupant load of the Group E occupancy.

Exceptions:

1.	Group E day care facilities.

2.	Group E occupancies accessory to places of religious worship.

3.	Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.

SECTION 424
PLAY STRUCTURES
424.1 Play structures.

Play structures installed inside all occupancies covered by this code that exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) in height and 150 square feet (14 m2) in area shall comply with Sections 424.2 through 424.5.

424.2 Materials.

Play structures shall be constructed of noncombustible materials or of combustible materials that comply with the following:

1.	Fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

2.	Light-transmitting plastics complying with Section 2606.

3.	Foam plastics (including the pipe foam used in soft-contained play equipment structures) having a maximum heat-release rate not greater than 100 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20 kW ignition source.

4.	Aluminum composite material (ACM) meeting the requirements of Class A interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8 when tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use.

5.	Textiles and films complying with the fire propagation performance criteria contained in Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

6.	Plastic materials used to construct rigid components of soft-contained play equipment structures (such as tubes, windows, panels, junction boxes, pipes, slides and decks) exhibiting a peak rate of heat release not exceeding 400 kW/ m2 when tested in accordance with ASTM E1354 at an incident heat flux of 50 kW/m2 in the horizontal orientation at a thickness of 6 mm.

7.	Ball pool balls, used in soft-contained play equipment structures, having a maximum heat-release rate not greater than 100 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20 kW ignition source. The minimum specimen test size shall be 36 inches by 36 inches (914 mm by 914 mm) by an average of 21 inches (533 mm) deep, and the balls shall be held in a box constructed of galvanized steel poultry netting wire mesh.

8.	Foam plastics shall be covered by a fabric, coating or film meeting the fire propagation performance criteria contained in Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

9.	The floor covering placed under the children’s play structure shall exhibit a Class I interior floor finish classification, as described in Section 804, when tested in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253.

424.3 Fire protection.

Play structures shall be provided with the same level of approved fire suppression and detection devices required for other structures in the same occupancy.

424.4 Separation.

Play structures shall have a horizontal separation from building walls, partitions and from elements of the means of egress of not less than 5 feet (1524 mm). Playground structures shall have a horizontal separation from other play structures of not less than 20 feet (6090 mm).

424.5 Area limits.

Play structures shall be not greater than600 square feet (56 m2) in area, unless a special investigation, acceptable to the building official, has demonstrated adequate fire safety.

SECTION 425
HYPERBARIC FACILITIES
425.1 Hyperbaric facilities.

Hyperbaric facilities shall meet the requirements contained in Chapter 14 of NFPA 99.

SECTION [F] 426
COMBUSTIBLE DUSTS,
GRAIN PROCESSING AND STORAGE
426.1 Combustible dusts, grain processing and storage.

The provisions of Sections 426.1.1 through 426.1.7 shall apply to buildings in which materials that produce combustible dusts are stored or handled. Buildings that store or handle combustible dusts shall comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 61, NFPA 85, NFPA 120, NFPA 484, NFPA 654, NFPA 655 and NFPA 664 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 426.1.1 Type of construction and height exceptions.

Buildings shall be constructed in compliance with the height, number of stories and area limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506; except that where erected of Type I or II construction, the heights and areas of grain elevators and similar structures shall be unlimited, and where of Type IV construction, the maximum building height shall be 65 feet (19 812 mm) and except further that, in isolated areas, the maximum building height of Type IV structures shall be increased to 85 feet (25 908 mm).

[F] 426.1.2 Grinding rooms.

Every room or space occupied for grinding or other operations that produce combustible dusts in such a manner that the room or space is classified as a Group H-2 occupancy shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating of the enclosure shall be not less than 2 hours where the area is not more than 3,000 square feet (279 m2), and not less than 4 hours where the area is greater than 3,000 square feet (279 m2).

[F] 426.1.3 Conveyors.

Conveyors, chutes, piping and similar equipment passing through the enclosures of rooms or spaces shall be constructed dirt tight and vapor tight, and be of approved noncombustible materials complying with Chapter 30.

[F] 426.1.4 Explosion control.

Explosion control shall be provided as specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code, or spaces shall be equipped with the equivalent mechanical ventilation complying with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 426.1.5 Grain elevators.

Grain elevators, malt houses and buildings for similar occupancies shall not be located within 30 feet (9144 mm) of interior lot lines or structures on the same lot, except where erected along a railroad right-of-way.

[F] 426.1.6 Coal pockets.

Coal pockets located less than 30 feet (9144 mm) from interior lot lines or from structures on the same lot shall be constructed of not less than Type IB construction. Where more than 30 feet (9144 mm) from interior lot lines, or where erected along a railroad right-of-way, the minimum type of construction of such structures not more than 65 feet (19 812 mm) in building height shall be Type IV.

[F] 426.1.7 Tire rebuilding.

Buffing operations shall be located in a room separated from the remainder of the building housing the tire rebuilding or tire recapping operation by a 1-hour fire barrier.

Exception: Buffing operations are not required to be separated where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	Buffing operations are equipped with an approved continuous automatic water-spray system directed at the point of cutting action.

2.	Buffing machines are connected to particle-collecting systems providing a minimum air movement of 1,500 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (0.71 m3/s) in volume and 4,500 feet per minute (fpm) (23 m/s) in-line velocity.

3.	The collecting system shall discharge the rubber particles to an approved outdoor noncombustible or fire-resistant container, which is emptied at frequent intervals to prevent overflow.

SECTIONS [F] 427 through 448

RESERVED

SECTION 449
HOSPITALS
449.1 Scope.
449.1.1

All newly licensed hospitals, including conversions of existing buildings or newly constructed hospitals, all hospital outpatient facilities and hospital owned or leased mobile and transportable units unless exempted by Chapter 395.0163, Florida Statutes or modified by Chapter 59A-3 Florida Administrative Code, and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed hospital shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code and the minimum standards of design, construction and specified minimum essential utilities and facilities of this section and shall have plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so by Chapter 553.80(1)(c), Florida Statutes to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this code.

449.1.2

The following are exempt from review under this part:

449.1.2.1

Change of ownership of an existing licensed hospital.

449.1.2.2

Change to an existing hospital’s license type that has no additional physical plant requirements.

449.1.2.3

Change of the functional use of a space, room, or area when no physical plant revisions are made or are required to be made by this code.

449.1.3

The Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Section 101.2, Scope exempts state licensed facilities such as hospitals from compliance with that code. Any repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of an existing state licensed hospital shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and this section.

449.1.4

For project submission and fee requirements, and other administrative, licensure, and programmatic provisions for hospitals, see Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) Chapter 59A-3 Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 395, Florida Statutes.

449.1.5

For state licensure purposes, these codes and standards shall be applicable to the project on the effective date of this code at the time of Stage II preliminary plan approval by the Agency for Health Care Administration (the Agency) as described in Chapter 59A-3 Florida Administrative Code or at the first Stage III construction document review if there has been no previous Stage II preliminary plan approval for that project.

449.2 Additional codes and standards for the design and construction of general, rehabilitative, and psychiatric hospitals, including intensive residential treatment facilities (IRTFs) for children and adolescents, that are located inside of buildings or structures, and unless exempted by Chapter 395.0163, Florida Statutes, all hospital outpatient facilities and hospital owned or leased mobile and transportable units.

In addition to the minimum standards required by Section 449 of this code, Chapter 59A-3 Florida Administrative Code, or by Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, all new hospital facilities and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed hospital, as listed in Section 449.2 of this code shall also be in compliance with the following codes and standards on the effective date of this code, as described in Section 449.1.5 of this code.

449.2.1

The fire codes described in Chapter 69A-53, Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Hospitals and Nursing Homes, Florida Administrative Code. The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101A, Alternate Approaches to Life Safety shall not apply to new construction.

449.2.2

The Guidelines for Design and Construction of Hospitals (The Guidelines), as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

449.3 Additional physical plant requirements for general, rehabilitation, and psychiatric hospitals, including intensive residential treatment facilities (IRTFs) for children and adolescents, and unless exempted by Chapter 395.0163, Florida Statutes, all hospital outpatient facilities and hospital mobile and transportable units.

In addition to the codes and standards referenced in Section 449.2 of this code, the following minimum standards of construction and specified minimum essential facilities, shall apply to all new hospitals and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed hospital, as described in Section 449.1 of this code and listed in Section 449.3 of this code. Where thereare conflicting specific requirements between The Guidelinesand this code, the requirements of this code shall take precedence.

449.3.1 Critical care units.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.1.1

Sliding doors used for access to critical care rooms may be either manual or power operated and shall meet the requirements of Section 449.3.4.10.

449.3.2 Newborn intensive care units.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.2.1

General categories of neonatal services in the State of Florida are Level I, newborn nursery; Level II, intermediate care unit; and Level III, intensive care unit. Facilities which offer obstetrical services shall provide at a minimum a Level I newborn nursery or a holding nursery that shall meet the requirements of The Guidelines, and facilities that offer neonatal care for Level II and Level III neonatal services shall meet the requirements of The Guidelines for a newborn intensive care unit.

449.3.3 Mobile/transportable medical units.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.3.1

In addition to any other state of Florida required permits, mobile and transportable units shall be approved in advance by the Agency for Health Care Administration (Agency) before they may be utilized for patient services. Except as approved by the Agency, use of these units shall be limited to 6 months during a 12-month period. Usage may include temporary facilities during repair/replacement of equipment or intermittent use as needed in underserved communities or due to seasonal fluctuation.

449.3.3.2

The mobile facility shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building, The Guidelines, including Part 1 General and Part 2, Chapter 2.7 Specific Requirements for Mobile/ Transportable Medical Units.

449.3.3.3.

This section shall apply to all mobile/transportable units regardless of the number of hours theyare on-site.

449.3.4 Architectural details, surfaces, and furnishings.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.4.1

Each patient sleeping room, except for special nursing care units or rooms, newborn nurseries and neonatal intensive care units or rooms, shall have a window(s) with a view, visible from the patient’s bed, to the exterior of the building or to an atrium that is visually open to the exterior of the building. The clear opening of the patient room window’s width and height shall have a minimum of 20 feet (6.10 m) unobstructed vista to any permanent structure or equipment, and a minimum of 15 feet (4.57 m) unobstructed vista to any vehicular parking area or to the property line measured horizontally from the plane of the window. The sill height of the window(s) shall be a maximum of 36 inches (0.914 m). Special nursing care units or rooms shall have a window(s) as required by this section and The Guidelines, except the sill height shall be a maximum of 60 inches (1.524 m).

449.3.4.2

Ceilings in patient care areas or rooms with ceiling-mounted surgical light fixtures, tracks, rails or pipes and in the centralized kitchens shall be a minimum height of 9 feet (2.7 m).

Where a pair of double doors opening to a room or closet, are located on the exit access corridor and are not required to be equipped with closers, a door coordinator is not required.

449.3.4.4

Toilet compartment partitions and urinal screens shall be constructed of products that do not rust, corrode or delaminate.

449.3.4.5

All fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barriers, horizontal exits and exit passageway partitions shall be constructed prior to the construction of all intervening walls. Where rated walls, barriers or partitions intersect, the continuity of the higher priority wall, barrier, or partition shall be maintained through the intersection.

449.3.4.6

Smoke barriers shall be constructed so as to provide a continuous smoke-tight membrane from exterior wall to exterior wall and from the floor to the underside of the floor or roof deck above. This includes interstitial space and the area above monolithic fire-rated ceiling membranes. Roof trusses shall be permitted to penetrate portions of the smoke barrier located above the fire-rated ceiling membrane where the annular space between the penetrating truss member and the smoke barrier is sealed to limit the transfer of smoke.

449.3.4.7

Where it is not possible to visually inspect a fire-rated partition, wall or barrier or a smoke barrier that extends through the attic or interstitial space to the roof or floor deck above because of the location of a monolithic ceiling membrane, ceiling access panel(s) shall be installed adjacent to each side of the partition, wall or barrier at intervals not exceeding 30 feet (9.00 m) and in such locations as necessary to view all surfaces of the partition, wall or barrier. Other ceiling access panels shall only be installed as required by other sections of the code. Partitions, walls and barriers requiring protected openings or penetrations shall be identified in accordance with Section 703 of this code.

449.3.4.8

Where electrical conduits, cable trays, ducts and utility pipes pass through the smoke barrier, the utilities shall be located so that access is maintained to adjacent wall surfaces and to all damper access panels. The details shall show the studs and reinforcing half studs so that proper support is provided for the wall surfacing material. There shall be a minimum clearance of 4 inches (102 mm) between all conduits, piping and duct work insulation that are located parallel or adjacent to a fire-rated wall or to a smoke barrier to facilitate the inspection of these walls.

449.3.4.9

The use of pocket sliding or folding doors toany occupiable room shall not be permitted. A slidingdoor equipped with sliding door hardware located outside of the room and not equipped with a bottom doortrack shall be permitted.

449.3.4.10

A sliding door used for access to any room located on the exit access corridor may be manual or power operated and shall be smoke resistive and have latching hardware or other mechanism that prevents the door from rebounding to a partially open position if the door is forcefully closed.

449.3.4.10.1

A sliding door used to access an airborne infection isolation room or a protective environment room shall be equipped with an automatic closer that will close and latch when released.

449.3.4.11

The use of fire shutters to meet the requirements of opening protection required by other sections of this code shall not be permitted.

449.3.4.12

Shutters in openings of smoke partitions to rooms and areas that are permitted to be open to other areas in accordance with Section 407 shall be permitted without automatic closing of the shutter.

449.3.5 Elevators where required.

(Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.)

449.3.5.1

All elevators shall be in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 30 of the Florida Building Code, Building and Chapter 69A-47, Florida Administrative Code, “Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Elevators.”

449.3.6 Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.6.1

Air-handling equipment shall be installed exterior of the building, to include the roof, in a designated equipment room(s), in an open space(s) of an attic(s) or interstitial space(s) located inside the conditioned envelope of the building, or in an enclosed space located in an unconditioned attic(s). If the equipment serves only one room, it may be located above the ceiling and shall be accessible through an access opening in accordance with the requirements of such openings in this code. Access panels are not required for lay-in ceiling installations, provided the service functions are not obstructed by other above-ceiling construction, such as electrical conduits, piping, audio visual cabling and like equipment components or supports.

449.3.6.2

All new hospital, outpatient surgery and cardiac catheterization facility construction, for both inpatients and outpatients, shall have completely ducted airsupply, return, outside air and exhaust systems. In hospital buildings with multiple uses, tenants or occupancies, located on a separate floor or floors within the building, or located in a medical office building, only the licensed health care areas where invasive procedures, as defined by The Guidelines, are performed shall be required to be served by separate ducted mechanical air-supply, return and exhaust systems.

449.3.6.3

In new construction, horizontal offsets of duct system risers penetrating more than one floor shall not be allowed.

449.3.6.4

Flexible ducts shall be listed and labeled to the UL181 Standard for Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air Connectors and shall be Class 0 or Class 1. Flexible ducts shall meet the following additional performance rating criteria:

449.3.6.4.1

The duct shall have a minimum rated air velocity of 4,000 feet per minute, a minimum positive pressure rating of 4 inches water gauge, and a minimum negative pressure rating of 1 inch water gauge.

449.3.6.4.2

The outer vapor barrier shall have a perm rating not greater than 0.05 perms when tested in accordance with ASTM E96, Procedure A.

449.3.6.4.3

Flexible air connectors shall be limited to 14 feet (4267mm) maximum installed length and shall not pass through any wall, partition, or enclosure of a vertical shaft that is required to have a fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or more. Flexible air ducts shall not be limited in length.

449.3.6.4.4

Air ducts and exhaust duct systems shall not be constructed of fiberglass duct board.

449.3.6.5.

Reserved.

449.3.6.6

Filter housing frame blank-off panels shall be permanently attached to the frame, constructed of rigid materials and have sealing surfaces equal to or greater than the filter media installed in the filter frame. All joints between the blank-off panels, filter housing frames and filter support structure shall be caulked airtight.

449.3.7 Fan and damper control during fire alarm.
449.3.7.1

During an automatic fire alarm activation or the activation of a duct smoke detector, fan systems and fan equipment serving more than one room shall be stopped to prevent the movement of smoke by mechanical means from the zone in alarm to adjacent smoke zones. Air movement across smoke barriers shall be permitted when the area is not in automatic fire alarm activation.

449.3.7.2

Fan control shall be designed so as to minimize the interruption of heating, ventilating and air conditioning in compartments remote from the compartment in alarm.

449.3.7.3

Fan control shall not interfere with the continuous operation of exhaust systems conveying ethylene oxide or other hazardous chemicals and fumes or systems required to operate continuously for the health and safety of occupants. Such systems shall include fume hood exhaust deemed by the governing body of the hospital to present a hazard to occupants if exhaust airflow is stopped. Air-handling systems shall be designed to allow for continuous operation of all such systems and to minimize movement of smoke by mechanical means from the zone in alarm.

449.3.8 Carbon monoxide detector.

See Section 915 of this code.

449.3.9 Plumbing.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.9.1

All plumbing systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

449.3.10 Fire pump.

Where a fire pump is required by another section of this code, a new electric motor-driven fire pump shall be connected to the Emergency Power Supply System (EPSS) of the hospital. Where connection to existing EPSS equipment is technically infeasible, replacement fire pumps shall be exempt from this requirement. A fire pump that is not electric motor-driven shall meet the requirements of NFPA 20, Standard for the Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection, alternative power.

449.3.11 Electrical requirements.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.11.1

All material, including equipment, conductors, controls, and signaling devices, shall be installed to provide a complete electrical system with the necessary characteristics and capacity to supply the electrical facility requirements as shown in the specifications and as indicated on the plans.

449.3.11.2

All materials and equipment shall be factory listed as complying with applicable standards of Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., or other similarly established standards of a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) that has been certified by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for that referenced standard.

449.3.11.3

Field labeling of equipment and materials shall be permitted only when provided by a nationally recognized testing laboratory that has been certified by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for that referenced standard.

449.3.11.4

Nonmetallic sheathed cable or similar systems are not permitted for power and lighting wiring in any facility.

449.3.11.5

Panel boards located in spaces subject to storage shall have the clear working space in accordance with Chapter 27, Florida Building Code, Building. “ELECTRICAL ACCESS - NOT FOR STORAGE” shall be permanently marked on the floor and wall about the panel. Panel boards shall not be located in an exit access corridor or in an unenclosed space or area that is open to an exit access corridor. Panel boards may be located inside of a room or closet that opens into an exit access corridor only when the room or closet is separated from the exit access corridor by a partition and door that comply with this code.

449.3.11.6

There shall be documentation for groundingsystem testing of voltage and impedance measurementsin all patient care areas, building service ground electrode systems, lightning protection ground terminalsand special systems such as fire alarm, nurse call, paging, generator, emergency power, fault analysis andbreaker coordination.

449.3.11.7

All spaces occupied by people, machinery and equipment within buildings and approaches to buildings shall have electric lighting.

449.3.11.8

Operating rooms and delivery rooms shall have general lighting for the room in addition to local high intensity, specialized lighting provided by special fixtures at the surgical and obstetrical tables. Each special lighting unit for local lighting at the tables shall be connected to an independent circuit and shall be powered from the critical branch. A minimum of one general purpose lighting fixture shall be powered from a normal circuit in an operating room, delivery or similar room.

449.3.11.9

There shall be a maximum of six duplex receptacles on a circuit in general patient care areas.

449.3.11.10

The circuitry of all receptacles required by The Guidelines and NFPA 99 in critical care areas, in all emergency treatment rooms or areas, and other areas including Class II and Class III imaging rooms, coronary care units, human physiology laboratories, critical care units and phase I postoperative recovery rooms, shall be provided as follows:

449.3.11.10.1

All electrical receptacles at the head of the bed shall be connected to the critical branch of the essential electrical system, except two of the required number shall be connected to a normal power circuit or to a critical branch circuit from a different transfer switch.

449.3.11.10.2

There shall be no more than two duplex or four single receptacles per circuit.

449.3.11.11

All receptacles shall have engraved cover plates to indicate the panel board and circuit numbers powering the device.

449.3.11.12

Branch circuit over-current devices shall be readily accessible to nursing staff and other authorized personnel.

449.3.11.13

The electrical system shall have coordinated short circuit protection.

449.3.11.14

Provide color coding for the junction boxes for the branches of the essential electrical system.

449.3.12 Fire alarm systems.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.12.1 Fire alarm systems.

A fire alarm annunciator panel shall be provided at a 24-hour monitored location. The panel shall indicate visually the zone of actuation of the alarm, and there shall be a system trouble signal indicator. Each smoke compartment shall be annunciated as a separate fire alarm zone. A fire alarm system zone shall not include rooms or spaces in other smoke compartments. A fire alarm zone location map to quickly locate alarm condition shall be provided at the fire alarm control panel.

449.3.12.2

In all inpatient and outpatient care rooms, spaces and areas, including sleeping, treatment, diagnostic, and therapeutic, the private operating mode as permitted and described in NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, shall be required. Only the attendants and other personnel required to evacuate occupants from a zone, area, room, floor, or building shall be required to be notified. Audible and visual notification devices shall only be permitted to be located at the care providers’ stations, the soiled workroom, soiled holding room, clean workroom, staff lounge, medication preparation room, and nurse or supervisor’s office, and other staff rooms or areas as determined by the governing body of the facility.

449.3.13 Nurse call system.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements. The requirements for nurse call systems as described in NFPA 99 shall not apply.

449.3.13.1

In addition to the requirements of radiofrequency systems described in The Guidelines, wireless-type nurse call systems shall be permitted if they have been tested and approved by a national recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of UL 1069, 7th edition, Section 49, Wireless Systems published October 12, 2007 as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

449.3.13.2

In addition to the areas required by The Guidelines, an emergency resuscitation alarm (Code Blue) calling station shall be provided for staff use in each operating and cesarean delivery room.

449.3.13.3

An emergency staff assistance station shall be located within each psychiatric seclusion room and shall be of hands-free operation.

449.3.14 Emergency electric service.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

449.3.14.1

A Type 1 essential electrical system shall be provided in all hospitals as described in NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities. The emergency power for this system shall meet the requirements of a Level 1, Type 10, Class 48 generator as described in NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems.

449.3.14.2

In new facility construction, the normal main service equipment shall be separated from the emergency distribution equipment by locating it in a separate room. Transfer switches shall be considered emergency distribution equipment for this purpose.

449.3.14.3

There shall be a generator remote alarm annunciator in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 110 located at a designated on-site 24-hour staffed location.

449.3.14.4

There shall be illumination of the means of egress in accordance with NFPA 101 and designed for automatic dusk-to-dawn operation. Such illumination shall continue to the public way or to a safe area(s) located at a minimum of 30 feet (9.144 m) from the building and large enough to accommodate the required occupant load of the exit discharge.

449.3.14.5

A minimum of one elevator per bank serving any patient use floor shall be connected to the equipment branch of the essential electric system and arranged for manual or automatic operation during loss of normal power.

449.3.14.6

If a day tank is provided, it shall be equipped with a dedicated low-level fuel alarm and a manual pump. The alarm shall be located at the generator remote alarm annunciator as described in Section 449.3.14.3.

449.3.14.7

Outpatient surgery facilities, cardiac catheterization facilities, or pain management facilities that utilize intravenous (IV) drip sedation located in a separate building or on another campus shall have a Type 1 essential electrical system in compliance with NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities. The emergency power for this system shall meet the requirements of a Level 1, Type 10, Class 8 generator as described in NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems.

449.3.15 Lightning protection.
449.3.15.1

A lightning protection system shall be provided for all new buildings and additions in accordance with NFPA 780, Installation of Lightning Protection Systems.

449.3.15.2

Where additions are constructed to existing buildings, the existing building’s lightning protection system, if connected to the new lightning protection system, shall be inspected and brought into compliance with current standards.

449.3.15.3

A lightning protection system shall be installed on all buildings in which outpatient surgical procedures, cardiac catherization procedures, or pain management procedures that utilize I.V. drip sedation are provided.

449.3.15.4

There shall be surge protection for all normal and emergency electrical services.

449.3.15.5

Additional surge protection shall be provided for all low voltage and power connections to all electronic equipment in critical care areas and life safety systems and equipment such as fire alarm, nurse call and other critical systems. Protection shall be in accordance with appropriate IEEE Standards for the type of equipment protected.

449.3.15.6

All low-voltage system main or branch circuits entering or exiting the structure shall have surge suppressors installed for each pair of conductors and shall have visual indication for protector failure to the maximum extent feasible.

449.3.16 Inpatient room dialysis.
449.3.16.1

If an inpatient requires dialysis due to a chronic condition, it may be accomplished inside the inpatient sleeping room when all of the following are provided:

449.3.16.1.1

A portable dialysis machine with portable reverse osmosis.

449.3.16.1.2

Dedicated closed connections to a water supply and waste water drain. These connections are permitted to be shared with the water supply and waste water drain of the handwashing facility located inside the inpatient room or inside the inpatient toilet room only when the use of the handwashing facility is unimpeded at all times.

449.3.16.1.3

Sufficient electrical circuits and outlets to operate the portable dialysis equipment without overloading the electrical circuit.

449.3.16.1.4

A dedicated equipment room for the cleaning and disinfection of the dialysis equipment.

449.3.16.1.5

A written hospital protocol for the use and maintenance of the inpatient room dialysis equipment signed by the medical director of acute dialysis services.

449.4 Physical plant requirements for disaster preparedness of new hospital construction.
449.4.1 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply specifically to all new facilities as used herein:

449.4.1.1 NEW FACILITY.

A hospital which has not received a Stage II Preliminary Plan approval from the Agency for Health Care Administration pursuant to this section.

449.4.1.2 NET SQUARE FOOTAGE.

The clear floor space of an area excluding cabinetry and other fixed furniture or equipment;

449.4.1.3 DURING AND IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING.

A period of 72 hours following the loss of normal support utilities to the facility.

449.4.1.4 OCCUPIED PATIENT AREA(S).

The location of patients inside of the new facility or in the addition of a wing or floor to an existing facility during and immediately following a disaster. If these patients are to be relocated into an area of the existing facility during and immediately following a disaster, then for purposes of this code, that location will be defined as the “occupied patient area.”

449.4.1.5 PATIENT SUPPORT AREA(S).

The area(s) required to ensure the health, safety and well-being of patients during and immediately following a disaster, such as a nursing station, clean and soiled utility areas, food preparation area, and other areas as determined by the facility to be kept operational during and immediately following a disaster.

449.4.1.6 ON-SITE.

Either in, immediately adjacent to, or on the campus of the facility, or addition of a wing or floor to an existing facility.

449.4.2 Disaster preparedness construction standards.

The following construction standards are in addition to the physical plant requirements described in Sections 449.2 through 449.3. These minimum standards are intended to increase the ability of the facility to be structurally capable of serving as a shelter for patients, staff and the family of patients and staff, equipped to be self-supporting during and immediately following a disaster, and to be protected from damage so the facility can be reoccupied and used for its intended purpose immediately after any required building evacuation.

449.4.2.1 Space standards.
449.4.2.1.1

For planning purposes, each new facility shall provide a minimum of 30 net square feet (2.79 m2) per patient served in the occupied patient area(s). The number of patients to be served is to be determined by the facility administrator.

449.4.2.1.2

As determined by the facility, space for administrative and support activities shall be provided for use by facility staff to allow for care of patients in the occupied patient area(s).

449.4.2.1.3

As determined by the facility, space shall be provided for staff and family members of patients and staff.

449.4.2.2 Site standards.
449.4.2.2.1

Except as permitted by Section 1612 of this code, the lowest floor of all new facilities shall be elevated to the base flood elevation as defined in Section 1612 of this code, plus 2 feet, or to the height of hurricane Category 3 (Saffir-Simpson scale) surge inundation elevation, as described by the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surge (SLOSH) from Hurricanes model developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), and the National Weather Service (NWS), whichever is higher.

449.4.2.2.2

For all existing facilities, the lowest floor elevations of all additions, and all patient support areas including food service, and all patient support utilities, including mechanical, and electrical (except fuel storage as noted in Section 449.4.2.9.3 of this code) for the additions shall be at or above the elevation of the existing building, if the existing building was designed and constructed to comply with either the site standards of Section 449.4 of this code or local flood-resistant requirements, in effect at the time of construction, whichever requires the higher elevation, unless otherwise permitted by Section 1612 of this code. If the existing building was constructed prior to the adoption of either the site standards of Section 449.4 of this code or local flood-resistant requirements, then the addition and all patient support areas and utilities for the addition as described in this section shall either be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of Section 449.4.2.2.1 of this code or be designed and constructed to meet the dry flood proofing requirements of Section 1612 of this code.

449.4.2.2.3

Substantial improvement, as defined by Section 1612 of this code, to all existing facilities located within flood areas as defined in Section 1612 of this code or within a Category 3 surge inundation zone as described in Section 449.4.2.2.1 of this code, shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Section 1612 of this code.

449.4.2.2.4

Where an off-site public access route is available to the new facility at or above the base flood elevation, a minimum of one on-site emergency access route shall be provided that is located at the same elevation as the public access route.

449.4.2.2.5

New landscaping elements shall be located so if damaged they will not block the on-site emergency access route to the facility. Outdoor signs and their foundations shall be designed to meet the wind load criteria of the Florida Building Code, Building.

449.4.2.2.6

New light standards and their foundations used for lighting the on-site emergency access route shall be designed to meet the wind load criteria of ASCE 7 with wind speeds determined from Figure 26.5-1B with appropriate exposure category dependent on site location.

449.4.2.3 Structural standards.

Wind load design of the building structure and exterior envelope including exterior wall systems shall be designed in accordance with the code.

449.4.2.4 Roofing standards.
449.4.2.4.1

Loose-laid ballasted roofs shall not be permitted.

449.4.2.4.2

All new roof appendages such as ducts, tanks, ventilators, receivers, dx condensing units and decorative mansard roofs and their attachment systems shall be structurally engineered to meet the wind load requirements of the applicable building code.

449.4.2.5 Debris impact protection standards.
449.4.2.5.1

All exterior window units, skylights, exterior louvers and exterior door units including vision panels and their anchoring systems shall be impact resistant or protected with an impact-resistant covering meeting the requirements of the Testing Application Standards (TAS) 201, 202, and 203 of this code in accordance with the requirements of Sections 1626.2 through 1626.4 of this code or the debris impact requirements of ASTM E1996 as described in Section 1609.1.2.2. For the purposes of this requirement, facilities located in areas where the ultimate design wind speeds are 130 mph or less as described in Figure 1609.3(2) of this code, shall meet the requirements for Wind Zone 1. The impact-resistant coverings may be either permanently attached or may be removable if stored on site of the facility. Facilities located in the high velocity hurricane zone (HVHZ) shall comply with Sections 1626.2 through 1626.4.

449.4.2.5.2

The location or application of exterior impact protective systems shall not prevent required exit egress from the building.

449.4.2.5.3

When not being utilized to protect the windows, the permanently attached impact-resistant coverings shall not reduce the percentage of the clear window opening below that required by this code for the patient room.

449.4.2.5.4

Systems and utilities identified in Section 449.4.2 shall be protected from debris impact by an equipment housing or a screening enclosure complying with the impact protection standards in accordance with Section 1626 when located at or below 30 feet above the finished grade of the building. Where screening enclosures are used, the height of the enclosure shall be not less than the height of the protected equipment and shall provide clearances required for the maintenance and continuous operation of the equipment. Where the housing and louvers are designed to provide the required equipment protection, sufficient standoff shall be provided to prevent damage to internal components from deflection of the cladding as a result of impact. Roof mounted equipment shall have fastening systems designed to meet the wind load requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building.

449.4.2.6 Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) standards.
449.4.2.6.1

All new and replacement air-moving equipment, dx condensing units, through-wall units and other HVAC equipment located outside of, partially outside of, or on the roof of the facility at or below 30 feet above the finished grade of the building and providing service to the facility shall be permitted only when either of the following are met:

449.4.2.6.1.1

They are located inside a penthouse designed to meet the wind load requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building; or

449.4.2.6.1.2

They are protected in accordance with Section 449.4.2.5.4.

449.4.2.6.2

As determined by the facility, occupied patient areas and patient support areas shall be supplied with temperature and humidity control during and immediately following a disaster.

449.4.2.6.3

Ventilation air change rates in occupied patient areas shall be maintained as specified in this section during and immediately following a disaster by connection to the essential electrical system. The fan systems necessary to provide this service shall receive their power from the emergency power supply system and shall be protected from horizontal impact in accordance with Section 449.4.2.6.1.

449.4.2.7 Plumbing standards.
449.4.2.7.1

There shall be an independent on-site supply (i.e., water well) or on-site storage capability (i.e., empty water storage containers or bladders) of potable water at a minimum quantity of 3 gallons (14 L) per in-patient and one gallon (3.7 L) per facility staff and other personnel in the new facility or wing or floor addition to an existing facility per day during and immediately following a disaster. For planning purposes, the number of in-patients, staff and other personnel shall be determined in writing by the facility and submitted to AHCA. Hot water in boilers or tanks shall not be counted to meet this requirement.

449.4.2.7.2

The facility shall determine what amount of water will be sufficient to provide for patient services, and shall maintain an on-site supply or on-site storage of the determined amount.

449.4.2.7.3

When utilized to meet the minimum requirements of this rule, selected system appurtenances such as water pressure maintenance house pumps, and emergency water supply well pumps shall take power from the emergency power supply system(s).

449.4.2.8 Medical gas systems standards.

The storage, distribution piping system and appurtenances serving the occupied patient area(s) and patient support area(s) shall be contained within a protected area(s) designed and constructed to meet the structural requirements of the code and debris impact requirements as specified by Sections 1626.2 through 1626.4.

449.4.2.9

Emergency electrical generator and essential electrical system standards for hurricane protection.

449.4.2.9.1

In addition to the requirements of NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code and NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, the on-site Level 1 emergency power supply system shall provide electrical power to the occupied patient area(s) and patient support area(s) for the following additional equipment:

449.4.2.9.1.1

Ice-making equipment to produce ice, or freezer storage equipment for the storage of ice.

449.4.2.9.1.2

If required by the emergency food plan, refrigerator unit(s) food service equipment, range hood exhaust fans and selected lighting within the kitchen and dry storage areas.

449.4.2.9.1.3

Selected heating or air conditioning systems as determined by the facility and ventilation systems as required by this code.

449.4.2.9.1.4

Electric lighting required to provide care and service to the patient occupied areas and the necessary patient support areas as defined by this section.

449.4.2.9.2

The emergency power system shall be fueled by a fuel supply stored on-site sized to fuel the generator for 100-percent load for 64 hours or for 72 hours of actual demand load of the occupied patient area(s) and patient support area(s) and patient support utilities during and immediately following a disaster, whichever is greater.

449.4.2.9.3

The fuel supply and all fuel lines of the emergency power system generator shall either be located below ground or protected in accordance with Section 449.4.2.5.4.

449.4.2.9.4

All panel boards, transfer switches, disconnect switches, enclosed circuit breakers or emergency system raceway systems required to support the occupied patient area(s), patient support area(s) or support utilities shall be protected in accordance with Section 449.4.2.5.4, and shall not rely on systems or devices outside of this protected area(s) for their reliability or continuation of service. The equipment system shall be kept entirely independent of all other wiring and equipment and shall not enter the same raceways, boxes, or cabinets with other wiring.

449.4.2.9.5

The emergency generator(s) shall be air or self-contained liquid cooled and it and other essential electrical equipment shall be protected in accordance with Section 449.4.2.5.4.

449.4.2.9.6

A new facility shall be equipped with either a permanent on-site optional standby generator to operate at least the nonessential loads of the electrical system or the entire normal branch of the electrical system, or there shall be a permanently installed predesigned electrical service entry for the electrical system that will allow a quick connection to a temporary electrical generator to operate at least the nonessential loads of the electrical system or the entire normal branch of the electrical system. This quick connection shall be installed inside of a permanent metal enclosure rated for this purpose and may be located on the exterior of the building.

SECTION 450
NURSING HOMES
450.1 Scope.

All newly licensed nursing homes, including conversions of existing buildings or newly constructed nursing homes, and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed nursing home shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code and the minimum standards of design, construction and specified minimum essential utilities and facilities of this section and shall have plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so by Chapter 553.80(1)(c), Florida Statutes to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this code.

450.1.1

The following are exempt from review under this part:

450.1.1.1

Change of ownership of an existing licensed nursing home.

450.1.1.2

Change to an existing nursing home’s license type that has no additional physical plant requirements

450.1.1.3

Change of the functional use of a space, room, or area when no physical plant revisions are made or are required to be made by this code

450.1.2

A facility licensed as a nursing home that only admits children 0 years through 20 years of age shall meet these minimum standards as they are required by the functional program of the facility.

450.1.3

The Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Section 101.2, Scope exempts state licensed facilities such as nursing homes from compliance with that code. Any repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of an existing state licensed nursing home shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and this section.

450.1.4

For project submission and fee requirements, and other administrative, licensure, and programmatic provisions for nursing homes, see Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) Chapter 59A-4 Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 400 Part II, Florida Statutes.

450.1.5

For state licensure purposes, these codes and standards shall be applicable to the project on the effective date of this code at the time of Stage II preliminary plan approval by the Agency for Health Care Administration (the Agency) as described in Chapter 59A-4 Florida Administrative Code or at the first Stage III construction document review if there has been no previous Stage II preliminary plan approval for that project.

450.2 Additional codes and standards for the design and construction of nursing homes.

In addition to the minimum design and construction standards required by Section 450 of this code, Chapter 59A-4, Minimum Standards for Nursing Homes, Florida Administrative Code or by Chapter 400 Part II, Florida Statutes, the following codes and standards shall also be met on the effective date of this code as described in Section 450.1.5 of this code:.

450.2.1

The fire codes described in Chapter 69A-53, Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Hospitals and Nursing Homes, Florida Administrative Code.

450.2.2

The Guidelines for Design and Construction of Residential Health, Care, and Support Facilities (The Guidelines), including Chapter 3.2 Specific Requirements for Nursing Homes as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

450.3 Additional physical plant requirements for nursing homes.

In addition to the codes and standards referenced in Section 450.2 the following minimum standards of construction and specified minimum essential facilities shall apply to all new nursing homes, and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed nursing home, as described in Section 450.1 and listed in this section.

450.3.1 Special considerations:
450.3.1.1

Nursing homes designed to serve only for children 0 through 20 years of age may have a maximum room capacity of four persons.

450.3.1.2

Skilled nursing units that are part of a hospital and licensed as a hospital bed but certified as a skilled nursing bed shall meet the requirements for an in-hospital skilled nursing patient care unit in the FGI Guidelines for Design and Construction of Hospitals as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

450.3.2 Resident rooms.

In addition to the requirements of The Guidelines, Chapter 3.1, each resident room shall meet the following minimum standards:

450.3.2.1

In new construction and additions, the maximum room capacity of each resident room shall be two persons. In double occupancy resident rooms, sleeping areas shall be separated from each other by a full-height wall or full-height rigid sliding or foldable partition to increase acoustic and visual privacy. Each person lying in bed shall have direct visual access to an exterior window at all times. Either doors or cubicle curtains from the entry vestibule to these individual resident sleeping areas shall be provided.

450.3.2.2

The clear floor area excludes either the space for the room entrance door swing into the room or the space for vestibule entry, whichever is greater. For the purpose of determining the minimum clear floor area, the vestibule entry is defined as that floor area located between the room entrance door and the room floor area containing the resident bed(s).

450.3.2.3

Where renovation work is undertaken that alters the room configuration, every effort shall be made to meet these minimum space standards. When this is not possible due to existing physical conditions or constraints, and with the approval of the Agency, a resident room shall have no less than 80 square feet (7.43 m2) of clear floor area per bed in a double occupancy resident room and 100 square feet (9.29 m2) of clear floor area in a single occupancy resident room.

450.3.2.4

The design for privacy shall not restrict resident access at any time to the room entrance, resident armchair, toilet or bathroom, wardrobe, exterior window or closet.

450.3.2.5

Each new resident room, and each individual resident sleeping area, as described in Section 450.3.2.1, shall have an exterior window(s) to the outside that is physically accessible to each resident at all times and visible from the resident’s bed. The window shall be sized with a clear opening of 8 percent of the gross square footage of the resident sleeping room or individual resident sleeping area as described in Section 450.3.2.1. The clear opening of the resident room window width and height shall have a minimum of 20 feet (6.10 m) unobstructed vista to any permanent structure, or equipment, and 15 feet (4.57 m) unobstructed vista to any vehicular parking areas or property line measured horizontally from the plane of the window.

450.3.3 Resident support areas and services.

See The Guidelines for requirements.

450.3.4 Resident living, social, and treatment areas.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.4.1

Dining, lounges, recreation areas, and social areas for residents shall be provided. The total area of these spaces shall be a minimum of 35 square feet (3.25 m2) per bed with a minimum total area of 225 square feet (20.90 m2). At least 20 square feet (1.86 m2) per resident shall be available for dining. Additional space may be required for resident day care programs. Storage for supplies and equipment shall be provided in the recreation area.

450.3.4.2

Storage for supplies, and resident needs, shall be provided. Storage shall be on site but not necessarily in the same building as the resident rooms, provided access is convenient. The minimum required area shall be 5 square feet (0.46 m2) per resident up to 600 square feet (55.74 m2). See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.4.3

Outdoor area(s) shall be provided for the use of all residents and shall include walking paths of durable materials, benches, shaded areas, and visual focusing element(s) such as landscaping, sculpture, or fountain(s). Security fencing if used shall be of a residential design and provide some visual connection to the exterior of the secured area. If an exterior visual connection is not possible or desirable then the interior of the outside area shall be landscaped to be visually interesting. See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.4.4

A barber/beauty room shall be provided with facilities and equipment for resident hair care and grooming. The area of the room shall be a minimum of 120 square feet (11.15 m2) with the least dimension of 10 feet (3.05 m). See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.5 Details and finishes.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.5.1

Doors to all rooms containing bathtubs, showers and water closets for resident use located in double occupancy rooms shall be equipped with privacy hardware that permits emergency access without the use of keys. When such room has only one entrance and is equipped with a swing door, the door shall open outward, or be equipped with emergency release hardware. When emergency release hardware is utilized on a swing door located in a public area, it shall provide visual privacy for the resident and if required by other sections of this code, be smoke resistant. The toilet room door that swings open into the resident room shall not impede the swing of any other door that opens into the resident room.

450.3.5.2

Interior corridor doors, except those to small closets, janitor’s closets, electrical or mechanical rooms, housekeeping closets and other small rooms not subject to occupancy, shall not swing into the corridor. A door located on the exit access corridor, and required to swing outward, shall open into an alcove.

450.3.5.3

The use of pocket sliding or folding doors to any occupiable room shall not be permitted. A sliding door equipped with sliding hardware located outside of the room and without a bottom track shall be permitted. If a sliding door is used on a resident toilet or bathroom, a D-shaped handle at least 4 inches (10.16 cm) long shall be provided to open the door. A sliding door used for access to any room located on the exit access corridor may be manual or power operated and shall be smoke resistive and have latching hardware or other mechanism that prevents the door from rebounding to a partially open position if the door is forcefully closed.

450.3.5.4

Door thresholds, except where required at exterior doors, and expansion joint covers shall be designed to facilitate use of wheelchairs and carts and to prevent tripping and shall provide a smooth and level transition from surface-to-surface.

450.3.5.5

Towel bars shall be provided at each bathing facility.

450.3.5.6

Toilet compartment partitions and urinal screens shall be constructed of a product that does not rust, corrode or delaminate.

450.3.5.7

A minimum of one electric drinking fountain or water and cup dispenser shall be provided per resident floor unless drinking water is available from the resident dietary area.

450.3.5.8

Wall coverings that promote the growth of mold and mildew shall be avoided on exterior walls or on walls that are located in normally wet locations.

450.3.5.9

All fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barriers, horizontal exits and exit passageway partitions shall be constructed prior to the construction of all intervening walls. Where rated walls, barriers or partitions intersect, the continuity of the higher priority wall, barrier, or partition shall be maintained through the intersection.

450.3.5.10

Smoke barriers shall be constructed to provide a continuous smoke-tight membrane from exterior wall to exterior wall and from the floor to the underside of the floor or roof deck above. This includes interstitial space and the area above monolithic fire-rated ceiling membranes. Roof trusses shall be permitted to penetrate portions of the smoke barrier located above the fire-rated ceiling membrane where the annular space between the penetrating truss member and the smoke barrier is sealed to limit the transfer of smoke.

450.3.5.11

Where it is not possible to visually inspect a fire-rated partition, wall or barrier or a smoke barrier that extends through the attic or interstitial space to the roof or floor deck above because of the location of a monolithic ceiling membrane, ceiling access panel(s) shall be installed adjacent to each side of the partition, wall or barrier at intervals not exceeding 30 feet (9.0 m) and in such locations as necessary to view all surfaces of the partition, fire wall or smoke barrier. Other ceiling access panels shall only be installed as required by other sections of the code. Partitions, walls and barriers requiring protected openings or penetrations shall be identified in accordance with Section 703 of this code.

450.3.5.12

Where electrical conduits, cable trays, ducts and utility pipes pass through the smoke partition, the utilities shall be located so that access is maintained to adjacent wall surfaces and to all damper access panels. The details shall show the studs and reinforcing half studs so that proper support is provided for the wall surfacing material. There shall be a minimum clearance of 4 inches (102 mm) between all conduits, piping, and duct work insulation that are located parallel or adjacent to a fire wall or to a smoke barrier to facilitate the inspection of these walls.

450.3.5.13

The use of fire shutters to meet the requirements of opening protection required by other sections of this code shall not be permitted.

450.3.5.14

Shutters in openings of smoke partitions to rooms and areas that are permitted to be open to other areas in accordance with Section 407 shall be permitted without automatic closing of the shutter.

450.3.6 Elevators.

All buildings having resident use areas on more than one floor shall have hospital-type electric or hydraulic elevator(s) that shall be in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 30 of this code and Chapter 69A-47, Florida Administrative Code, Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Elevators. See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.7 Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.7.1

Air-handling equipment shall be installed exterior of the building, to include the roof, in a designated equipment room(s), in an open space(s) of an attic(s) or interstitial space(s) located inside the conditioned envelop of the building, or in an enclosed space located in an unconditioned attic(s). If the equipment serves only one room, it may be located above the ceiling and shall be accessible through an access opening in accordance with the requirements of such openings in this code. Access panels are not required for lay-in ceiling installations, provided the service functions are not obstructed by other above-ceiling construction, such as electrical conduits, piping, audio visual cabling and like equipment components or supports.

450.3.7.2

All outdoor air intakes shall be located a minimum of 3 feet (0.91 m) above surrounding surfaces and a minimum of 10 feet (3.05 m) horizontally from any exhaust air or plumbing vent. This requirement shall take priority over referenced standards.

450.3.7.3

The transfer of air quantities through one space to an adjacent space is not permitted except that the transfer of air to maintain space relative pressure by the under cutting of doors is permitted. The maximum allowable air quantity for door undercuts shall be 75 cfm (35.38 L/s) for single door widths up to 44 inches (1117 mm).

450.3.7.4

All supply, return and exhaust ventilation fans shall operate continuously. Dietary hood, laundry area, administrative areas that are separated from all resident areas and support areas and maintenance area supply and exhaust fans shall be exempted from continuous operation.

450.3.7.5

Cooling coil condensate shall be piped to a roof drain, floor drain or other approved location.

450.3.7.6

Each new resident sleeping room or resident sleeping area that is separated by a permanent partition and door shall be provided with a separate thermostat to provide individual adjustment of room or area temperature.

450.3.8 Exhaust.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.8.1

Exhaust fans and other fans operating in conjunction with a negative duct system pressure shall be located at the discharge end of the system. Fans located immediately within the building located at the end of all exhaust ducts shall be permitted. Existing, nonconforming systems need not be brought into compliance when equipment is replaced due to equipment failure.

450.3.8.2

Exhaust hoods in food preparation areas shall be listed or certified by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL).

450.3.9 Ducts.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.9.1

All new facility construction shall have totally ducted supply, return, exhaust and outside air systems including areas of all occupancy classifications.

450.3.9.2

In new construction, duct system risers penetrating more than one floor shall be installed in vertical fire-rated shafts. Horizontal offsets of the risers shall not be allowed. Fire/smoke dampers shall be installed at duct penetrations of the chase. Existing nonconforming systems shall be brought into compliance when remodel or renovation work is proposed.

450.3.10 Fan and damper control during fire alarm.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.10.1

During an automatic fire alarm or the activation of a duct smoke detector, fan systems and fan equipment serving more than one room shall be stopped to prevent the movement of smoke by mechanical means from the zone in alarm to adjacent smoke zones.

450.3.10.2

Air-handling and fan coil units serving exit access corridors for the zone in alarm shall shut down upon fire alarm.

450.3.10.3

Smoke or fire/smoke dampers shall close upon fire alarm and upon manual shutdown of the associated supply, return or exhaust fan.

450.3.11 Plumbing.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.11.1

Grease interceptors shall be located outside of the building.

450.3.11.2

Provide deep seal traps for floor drains in resident showers.

450.3.11.3

Food preparation sinks, pot washing, dishwashers, janitor sinks, floor drains, and cart and can wash drains shall run through the grease trap. Garbage disposers shall not run through the grease trap.

450.3.11.4

Ice machines, rinse sinks, dishwashers, and beverage dispenser drip receptacles shall be indirectly wasted.

450.3.11.5

A backflow preventer shall be installed on the facility main water source(s).

450.3.11.6

All piping, except control-line tubing, shall be identified. All valves shall be tagged, and a valve schedule shall be provided to the facility owner for permanent record and reference.

450.3.11.7

If eye wash stations are provided, they shall be installed in accordance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard Z358.1 for Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

450.3.12 Medical gas and vacuum systems.

If provided, a medical gas and vacuum system shall be in conformance with the requirements for a Category 2 Building System as described in NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities Code. See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.13 Fire pump.
450.3.13.1

Where required by another section of this code, a new fire pump, except for a replacement fire pump, that is electric motor-driven shall be connected to the Emergency Power Supply System (EPSS) of the nursing home. A fire pump(s) that is not electric motor-driven shall meet the requirements of NFPA 20, Standard for the Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection alternative power.

450.3.14 Electrical requirements.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.14.1

All material, including equipment, conductors, controls, and signaling devices, shall be installed to provide a complete electrical system with the necessary characteristics and capacity to supply the electrical facility requirements as shown in the specifications and as indicated on the plans. All materials and equipment shall be listed as complying with applicable standards of Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., or other nationally recognized testing facilities. Field labeling of equipment and materials will be permitted only when provided by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) that has been certified by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for that referenced standard.

450.3.14.2

Nonmetallic sheathed cable or similar systems are not permitted for power and lighting wiring in any facility.

450.3.14.3

For purposes of electrical requirements, a resident room, a resident therapy area or an examination room that is not equipped with a piped medical gas or vacuum system shall be reviewed as a Category 3 space as defined in NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code. A resident room, a resident therapy area or an examination room that is equipped with a piped medical gas or vacuum system shall be reviewed as a Category 2 space as defined in NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code, and Chapter 27, Electrical Systems, of this code.

450.3.14.4

There shall be at least one duplex receptacle located at the head of the resident bed connected to the critical branch of the essential electrical system.

450.3.14.5

Panels may be located in spaces subject to storage and shall have the clear working space in accordance with Chapter 27, permanently marked “ELECTRICAL—NOT FOR STORAGE” with a line outlining the required clear working space on the floor and wall.

450.3.14.6

Panel boards shall not be located in an exit access corridor or in an unenclosed space or area that is open to an exit access corridor. Panel boards may be located inside of a room or closet that opens into an exit access corridor only when the room or closet is separated from the exit access corridor by a partition and door that comply with this code.

450.3.14.7

There shall be documentation for grounding system testing of voltage and impedance measurements only in areas defined as Risk Category 1 or 2 in resident care areas.

450.3.15 Lighting.

See The Guidelines for additional requirements.

450.3.15.1

All spaces occupied by people, machinery and equipment within buildings, approaches to buildings and parking lots shall have electric lighting.

450.3.15.2

Resident bedrooms shall have general lighting from ceiling mounted fixtures, floor lamp fixtures or table mounted fixtures. Separate fixed night lighting shall be provided. The night-light shall have a switch at the entrance to each resident’s room or separate sleeping area. A reading light shall be provided for each resident. Resident reading lights and other fixed lights not switched at the door shall have switch controls convenient for use at the luminaire. Wall-mounted switches for control of lighting in resident areas shall be of quiet operating type.

450.3.15.3

All indoor lighting in the resident use areas including corridors, shared spaces, treatment areas, sleeping areas, social/recreational areas and living areas shall be designed and constructed to meet Table A-1 of ANSI/IES RP-28, Recommended Practice: Lighting and the Visual Environment for Older Adults and the Visually Impaired, as referenced in The Guidelines.

450.3.15.4

All general resident room lighting and all corridor lighting used by residents shall be designed to minimize glare such as indirect lighting.

450.3.16 Fire alarm systems.
450.3.16.1

A fire alarm annunciator panel shall be provided at a single designated 24-hour monitored location. The panel shall indicate visually, the zone of actuation of the alarm and audibly and visually system trouble. Each smoke compartment shall be annunciated as a separate fire alarm zone. A fire alarm system zone shall not include rooms or spaces in other smoke compartments. A zone location map to quickly locate alarm condition shall be provided at the fire alarm control panel.

450.3.16.2

In all resident care rooms, spaces and areas, including sleeping, treatment, diagnostic and therapeutic, the design and installation of the private operating mode fire alarm as permitted and described in NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, shall be required. Only the attendants and other personnel required to evacuate occupants from a zone, area, room, floor or building shall be required to be notified. Audible and visual notification devices shall only be permitted to be located at the care providers’ stations, the soiled workroom, soiled holding room, clean workroom, staff lounge, medication preparation room, nurse or supervisor’s office, and other staff rooms or areas as determined by the governing body of the facility. (SP7954-R1)

450.3.16.3 Carbon monoxide detector.

See Section 915 of this code for requirements.

450.3.17 Nurse call systems.

Reference The Guidelines only for requirements not specifically described in this section. Nurse call systems as described in NFPA 99 shall not apply.

450.3.17.1

Wired- or wireless-type nurse call systems shall be permitted if they have been tested and approved by a national recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of UL 1069, 7th edition, published October 12, 2007, as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All wireless systems shall have been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of Section 49, Wireless Systems of UL 1069, 7th edition as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All nurse call systems whether wired or wireless shall have electronically supervised visual and audible annunciation in accordance with the supervision criteria of UL 1069, 7th edition for nurse call systems and tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet those requirements.

450.3.17.2

A nurse call system shall be provided that will register a call from a call button from each resident bed to the related staff work area(s) by activating a visual signal at the resident room door or wireless pager and activating a visual and audible signal in the clean utility, soiled utility, nourishment station, medication prep or mobile nurse station receiver and the master station of the resident. If a mobile nurse station receiver is utilized to receive the resident call, it will be worn by all staff who are assigned to the resident unit and shall identify the specific resident and or room from which the call was placed.

450.3.17.3

Audible signals may be temporarily silenced, provided subsequent calls automatically reactivate the audible signal. In rooms containing two or more calling stations, indicating lights shall be provided for each calling station. In multicorridor nursing units, corridor zone lights shall be installed at corridor intersections in the vicinity of staff work areas.

450.3.17.4 Emergency call system.

An emergency call station of the pull cord-type shall be provided for resident use at each exam room (if provided), resident toilet, bath or shower room. The cord shall hang to within 2 to 6 inches (5.08–15.24 cm) of the floor for use by a resident lying on the floor. A portable wireless device shall satisfy this requirement.

1.	One emergency call station shall be installed in each separated room or area. Additional emergency call stations shall be located as determined by the facility in its Functional Program.

2.	If the emergency calling station is located inside of the shower it shall be listed for wet locations.

3.	The call signal shall be the highest priority and shall be cancelled only at the emergency call station.

4.	The emergency call station shall activate distinctive audible and visual signals immediately at the resident room door or wireless pager, and activate a visual and audible signal in the clean utility, soiled utility, nourishment station, medication prep or mobile nurse station receiver and the master station of the resident unit. If a mobile nurse station receiver is utilized to receive the resident call, it will be worn by all staff who are assigned to the resident unit and shall identify the specific resident and or room from which the call was placed.

450.3.17.5

Activation of an emergency call shall not cancel a normal call from the same room.

450.3.18 Essential electrical system.
450.3.18.1

A Type 1 essential electrical system shall be provided in all new nursing homes as described in NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities Code. The emergency power for this system shall meet the requirements of a Level 1, Type 10, Class 54 generator as described in NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems.

450.3.18.2

In new facility construction, the normal main service equipment shall be separated from the emergency distribution equipment by locating it in a separate room. Transfer switches shall be considered emergency distribution equipment for this purpose.

450.3.18.3

There shall be a generator remote alarm annunciator in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 110 located at a designated on-site 24-hour staffed location.

450.3.18.4

A minimum of one elevator per bank serving any resident use floor shall be connected to the equipment branch of the essential electric system and arranged for manual or automatic operation during loss of normal power.

450.3.18.5

If a day tank is provided, it shall be equipped with a dedicated low-level fuel alarm and a manual pump. The alarm shall be located at the generator remote alarm annunciator as described in Section 450.3.18.3.

450.3.19 Lightning protection.
450.3.19.1

A lightning protection system shall be provided for all new buildings and additions in accordance with NFPA 780, Installation of Lightning Protection Systems.

450.3.19.2

Where additions are constructed to existing buildings, the existing building’s lightning protection system, if connected to the new lightning protection system, shall be inspected and brought into compliance with current standards.

450.3.19.3

There shall be surge protection for all normal and emergency electrical services.

450.3.19.4

Additional surge protection shall be provided for all low-voltage and power connections to all electronic equipment in critical care areas and life safety systems and equipment such as fire alarm, nurse call and other critical systems. Protection shall be in accordance with appropriate IEEE Standards for the type of equipment protected.

450.3.19.5

All low-voltage system main or branch circuits entering or exiting the structure shall have surge suppressors installed for each pair of conductors and shall have visual indication for protector failure to the maximum extent feasible.

450.4 Physical plant requirements for disaster preparedness of new nursing home construction.
450.4.1 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply specifically to this section:

450.4.1.1 NEW FACILITY.

A nursing home which has not received a Stage II preliminary plan approval from the Agency for Health Care Administration pursuant to this section.

450.4.1.2 NET SQUARE FOOTAGE.

The clear floor space of an area excluding cabinetry and other fixed furniture or equipment.

450.4.1.3 DURING AND IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING.

A period of 96 hours following the loss of normal support utilities to the facility that are necessary to support the health, safety and welfare of the residents and staff. These support utilities include but are not limited to normal electrical power, potable water supply, sewer and telecommunications.

450.4.1.4 OCCUPIED RESIDENT AREA(S).

The location of residents inside of the new facility or in the addition of a wing or floor to an existing facility during and immediately following a disaster. If these residents are to be relocated into an area of the existing facility during and immediately following a disaster, then for these purposes, that location will be defined as the “occupied resident area.”

450.4.1.5 RESIDENT SUPPORT AREA(S).

The area(s) required to ensure the health, safety and well-being of residents during and immediately following a disaster, such as a staff work area, clean and soiled utility areas, food preparation area and other areas as determined by the facility to be kept operational during and immediately following a disaster.

450.4.1.6 ON SITE.

Either in, immediately adjacent to, or on the campus of the facility, or addition of a wing or floor to an existing facility.

450.4.1.7 RESIDENTS SERVED.

The number of residents as determined by the facility that will be served in the occupied resident area(s) during and immediately following a disaster.

450.4.2 Disaster preparedness construction standards.

The following construction standards are in addition to the physical plant requirements described in Sections 450.2 through 450.3. These minimum standards are intended to increase the ability of the facility to be structurally capable of serving as a shelter for residents, staff and the family of residents and staff and equipped to be self-supporting during and immediately following a disaster:

450.4.2.1 Space standards.
450.4.2.1.1

For planning purposes, each new facility shall provide a minimum of 30 net square feet (2.79 m2) per resident served in the occupied resident area(s). The number of residents to be served is to be determined by the facility administration.

450.4.2.1.2

As determined by the facility, space for administrative and support activities shall be provided for use by facility staff to allow for care of residents in the occupied resident area(s).

450.4.2.1.3

As determined by the facility, space shall be provided for all staff and family members of residents and staff.

450.4.2.2 Site standards.
450.4.2.2.1

Except as permitted by Section 1612 of this code, the lowest floor of all new facilities shall be elevated to the base flood elevation as defined in Section 1612 of this code, plus 2 feet, or to the height of hurricane Category 3 (Saffir-Simpson scale) surge inundation elevation, as described by the Sea, Lake, and Overland Surge (SLOSH) from Hurricanes model developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), and the National Weather Service (NWS), whichever is higher.

450.4.2.2.2

For all existing facilities, the lowest floor elevations of all additions, and all resident support areas including food service, and all resident support utilities, including mechanical, and electrical (except fuel storage as noted in Section 450.4.2.9.3 of this code) for the additions shall be at or above the elevation of the existing building, if the existing building was designed and constructed to comply with either the site standards of Section 450.4 of this code or local flood-resistant requirements in effect at the time of construction, whichever requires the higher elevation, unless otherwise permitted by Section 1612 of this code. If the existing building was constructed prior to the adoption of either the site standards of Section 450.4 of this code or local flood-resistant requirements, then the addition and all resident support areas and utilities for the addition as described in this section shall either be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of Section 450.4.2.2.1 of this code or be designed and constructed to meet the dry flood proofing requirements of Section 1612 of this code.

450.4.2.2.3

Substantial improvement, as defined by Section 1612 of this code, to all existing facilities located within flood areas as defined in Section 1612 of this code or within a Category 3 surge inundation zone as described in Section 450.4.2.2.1 of this code, shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Section 1612 of this code.

450.4.2.2.4

Where an off-site public access route is available to the new facility at or above the base flood elevation, a minimum of one on-site emergency access route shall be provided that is located at the same elevation as the public access route.

450.4.2.2.5

New landscaping elements shall be located so if damaged they will not block the on-site emergency access route to the facility. Outdoor signs and their foundations shall be designed to meet the wind load criteria of this code.

450.4.2.2.6

New light standards and their foundations used for lighting the on-site emergency access route shall be designed to meet the wind load criteria of ASCE 7 with wind speeds determined from Figure 26.5-1B with appropriate exposure category dependent on site location.

450.4.2.3 Structural standards.

Wind load design of the building structure and exterior envelope including exterior wall systems shall be designed in accordance with this code.

450.4.2.4 Roofing standards.
450.4.2.4.1

Loose-laid ballasted roofs shall not be permitted.

450.4.2.4.2

All new roof appendages such as ducts, tanks, ventilators, receivers, dx condensing units and decorative mansard roofs and their attachment systems shall be structurally engineered to meet the wind load requirements of the applicable building code.

450.4.2.5 Debris impact protection standards.
450.4.2.5.1

All exterior window units, skylights, exterior louvers and exterior door units including vision panels and their anchoring systems shall be impact resistant or protected with an impact-resistant covering meeting the requirements of the Testing Application Standards (TAS) 201, 202, and 203 of this code in accordance with the requirements of Sections 1626.2 through 1626.4 of this code or the debris impact requirements of ASTM E1996 as described in Section 1609.1.2.2. For the purposes of this requirement, facilities located where the ultimate design wind speeds are 130 mph or less, as described in Figure 1609.3(2) of this code, shall meet the requirements for Wind Zone 1. The impact-resistant coverings may be either permanently attached or may be removable if stored on site of the facility. Facilities located in the high velocity hurricane zone (HVHZ) shall comply with Sections 1626.2. through 1626.4.

450.4.2.5.2

The location or application of exterior impact protective systems shall not prevent required exit egress from the building.

450.4.2.5.3

When not being utilized to protect the windows, the permanently attached impact-resistant coverings shall not reduce the percentage of the clear window opening below what is required by this code for the patient room.

450.4.2.5.4

Critical systems and utilities identified in this section shall be protected from debris impact by a housing or enclosure complying with the impact protection standards in Sections 1626.2 through 16.26.4 when located at or below 30 feet above the finished grade of the building. Roof mounted equipment shall have fastening systems designed to meet the wind load requirements of the Florida Building Code.

450.4.2.6 Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) standards.
450.4.2.6.1

All new air-moving equipment, dx condensing units, through-wall units and other HVAC equipment located outside of, partially outside of, or on the roof of the facility at or below 30 feet above the finished grade of the building and providing service to the new facility shall be permitted only when either of the following are met:

450.4.2.6.1.1

They are located inside a penthouse designed to meet the wind load requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building; or

They are protected in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4.

450.4.2.6.2

As determined by the governing body of the facility, occupied resident areas and resident support areas shall be supplied with temperature and humidity control during and immediately following loss of normal utilities. At a minimum, these areas shall be maintained at a dry-bulb temperature at or below 81°F (27.2°C). Vulnerable components of new mechanical equipment necessary to maintain safe indoor air temperature shall be protected from horizontal impact in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4 and shall be connected to the facility’s essential electrical system described in Section 450.3.18.1 or connected to the optional standby generator described in 450.4.2.9.6.

450.4.2.6.3

Ventilation air change rates in occupied patient areas shall be maintained as specified in this section during and immediately following a disaster by connection to the essential electrical system. The fan systems necessary to provide this service shall receive their power from the emergency power supply system and shall be protected from horizontal impact in accordance with Section 450.4.2.6.1.

450.4.2.7 Plumbing standards.
450.4.2.7.1

There shall be an independent on-site supply (i.e., water well) or on-site storage capability (i.e., empty water storage containers or bladders) of potable water at a minimum quantity of 3 gallons (11 L) per resident served per day during and immediately following a disaster. For planning purposes the number of in-patients shall be determined in writing by the facility. Hot water in boilers or tanks shall not be counted to meet this requirement.

450.4.2.7.2

There shall be an independent on-site supply or storage capability of potable water at a minimum quantity of 1 gallon (4 L) per facility staff, and other personnel in the facility per day during and immediately following a disaster. For planning purposes, the number of these personnel shall be estimated by the facility. Hot water in boilers or tanks shall not be counted to meet this requirement.

450.4.2.7.3

The facility shall determine what amount of water will be sufficient to provide for resident services, and shall maintain an on-site supply or on-site storage of the determined amount.

450.4.2.7.4

When used to meet the minimum requirements of this rule, selected system appurtenances such as water pressure maintenance house pumps and emergency water supply well pumps shall take power from the emergency power supply system(s).

450.4.2.8 Medical gas systems standards.

The storage, distribution piping system and appurtenances shall be contained within a protected area(s) designed and constructed to meet the structural requirements of this code and debris impact requirements as specified by Sections 1626.2 through 1626.4.

450.4.2.9

Emergency electrical generator and essential electrical system standards for hurricane protection.

450.4.2.9.1

In addition to the requirements of NFPA 99 Health Care Facilities Code and NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, the on-site Level 1 emergency electrical power supply system shall provide electrical power to the occupied patient area(s) and patient support area(s) for the following additional equipment:

450.4.2.9.1.1

Ice-making equipment to produce ice or freezer storage equipment for the storage of ice.

450.4.2.9.1.2

If required by the emergency food plan, refrigerator unit(s) food service equipment, range hood exhaust fans and selected lighting within the kitchen and dry storage areas.

450.4.2.9.1.3

At a minimum, there shall be one clothes washer and one clothes dryer for laundry service.

450.4.2.9.1.4

Selected heating or air conditioning systems as determined by the facility, and ventilation systems as required by this code.

450.4.2.9.1.5

Electric lighting required to provide care and service to the patient occupied areas and the necessary patient support areas as defined by this section.

450.4.2.9.2

The emergency power supply (EPS) shall be fueled by fuel stored on-site. The fuel supply shall be sized to fuel the generator for 100-percent load for 72 hours or for 96 hours of actual demand load of the occupied resident area(s) and resident support area(s) and resident support utilities during and immediately following a disaster, whichever is greater. Where used to meet the requirements of Section 450.4.2.6.2, the fuel calculation must include the cooling demand.

450.4.2.9.3

The fuel supply and all fuel lines of the emergency power supply shall either be located below ground or protected in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4.

450.4.2.9.4

All panel boards, transfer switches, disconnect switches, enclosed circuit breakers or emergency system raceway systems required to support the occupied patient area(s), patient support area(s) or support utilities shall be protected in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4 and shall not rely on systems or devices outside of this protected area(s) for their reliability or continuation of service. The equipment system shall be kept entirely independent of all other wiring and equipment and shall not enter the same raceways, boxes, or cabinets with other wiring.

450.4.2.9.5

The emergency generator(s) shall be air or self-contained liquid cooled and it and other essential electrical equipment shall be protected in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4.

450.4.2.9.6

A new facility shall be equipped with either a permanent on-site optional standby system to operate at least the nonessential loads of the electrical system or the entire normal branch of the electrical system for a period of 96 hours for the demand load of the generator.

Exception: An optional standby system shall not be required where the essential electrical system provided in accordance with Section 450.3.18.1 is designed to operate the facility's entire electrical system and sufficient on-site fuel storage is provided to maintain resident occupied areas for a minimum of 96 hours for the demand load on the system.

450.4.2.9.6.1

The fuel for this generator may be natural gas, diesel or propane. Gasoline shall not be permitted as a fuel source. On-site fuel reserves shall not be required for the optional standby system if the generator is fueled by piped natural gas.

450.4.2.9.6.2

The generator, panel boards, switchgear, fuel lines and other vulnerable system components shall be protected from debris impact in accordance with Section 450.4.2.5.4.

450.4.2.9.6.3

The system shall be protected from flooding in accordance with Section 450.4.2.2.1.

450.4.2.9.6.4

This system shall meet the requirements of NFPA 70 Article 702 and it shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

450.4.2.9.6.5

See 59A-4.1265 Emergency Environmental Control for Nursing Homes, F.A.C. for additional operational requirements.

450.4.2.9.7

Existing facilities that are not required to have an emergency power supply system shall be permitted to renovate existing utility systems without having to add an emergency power supply system.

450.4.2.10 External emergency communications standards.

Reference Chapter 59A-4, Florida Administrative Code for requirements.

SECTION 451
AMBULATORY SURGICAL CENTERS
451.1 Scope.
451.1.1

All newly licensed or newly constructed ambulatory surgical centers, including conversions of existing buildings, all ambulatory surgical center outpatient facilities and ambulatory surgical center mobile and transportable units, unless exempted by Chapter 395.0163, Florida Statutes and all additions, alterations or renovations to an existing licensed ambulatory surgical center shall comply with all applicable requirements of this code and the minimum standards of design, construction and specified minimum essential utilities and facilities of this section and shall have plans reviewed and construction surveyed by the state agency authorized to do so by Chapter 553.80(1)(c), Florida Statutes to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this code.

451.1.2

The following are exempt from review under this part:

451.1.2.1

Change of ownership of an existing licensed ambulatory surgical center.

451.1.2.2

Change to an existing ambulatory surgical center’s license type that has no additional physical plant requirements.

451.1.2.3

Change of the functional use of a space, room, or area when no physical plant revisions are made or are required to be made by this code.

451.1.3

The Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Section 101.2, Scope exempts state licensed facilities such as ambulatory surgical centers from compliance with that code. Any repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of an existing state licensed ambulatory surgical center shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and this section.

451.1.4

For project submission and fee requirements, and other administrative, licensure, and programmatic provisions for ambulatory surgical centers, see Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) Chapter 59A-5 Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.) and Chapter 395, Florida Statutes.

451.1.5

For state licensure purposes, these codes and standards shall be applicable to the project on the effective date of this code at the time of Stage II preliminary plan approval by the Agency for Health Care Administration (the Agency) as described in Chapter 59A-5 Florida Administrative Code or at the first Stage III construction document review if there has been no previous Stage II preliminary plan approval for that project.

451.2

Additional codes and standards for the design and construction of ambulatory surgical centers and, unless exempted by Chapter 395.0163, Florida Statutes, all ambulatory surgical center outpatient facilities and ambulatory surgical center owned or leased mobile and transportable units. In addition to the minimum standards required by Section 451 of this code, Chapter 59A-5, Florida Administrative Code or by Chapter 395, Florida Statutes, all new ambulatory surgical centers and all additions, alterations or renovations to existing ambulatory surgical centers shall also be in compliance with the following codes and standards on the effective date of this code as described in Section 451.1.5 of this code:

451.2.1

The Florida Fire Prevention Code as described in Chapter 633.208 Florida Statutes, Minimum fire safety standards.

451.2.2

The Guidelines for Design and Construction of Outpatient Facilities (The Guidelines), including Part 1 General, and Part 2 Outpatient Facility Types, Chapter 2.7 Specific Requirements for Outpatient Surgery Facilities as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

451.3 Additional physical plant requirements for ambulatory surgical centers.
451.3.1

In addition to the codes and standards referenced in Section 451.2 of this code, the minimum standards of construction and specified minimum essential facilities described in Section 451.3 of this code shall apply to all ambulatory surgical centers as described in Section 451.1 of this code and to all new additions, alterations or renovations to existing ambulatory surgical centers on the effective date of the code.

451.3.2 Outpatient operating room.

All ambulatory surgical centers shall have at least one operating room that has a minimum clear floor area of 270 square feet (25.08 m2) as described in The Guidelines. Every operating room that meets the requirements of an outpatient operating room, as described in The Guidelines, shall be counted as an operating room(s) for purposes of licensure.

451.3.2.1

If provided, all procedure, examination or treatment rooms shall meet the requirements for these rooms as described in The Guidelines. All procedure rooms shall be counted for purposes of licensure.

451.3.2.2

In lieu of audible alarm signals, visible alarm-indicating appliances shall be used in critical care areas, such as the operating room area and the Phase I recovery area.

451.3.3 Pre- and post-procedure patient care.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements not specifically described in this section.

451.3.3.1

All post-procedure patient care stations as described in The Guidelines, including Phase I PostAnesthesia Recovery, whether or not combined with pre-procedure positions, and if provided, Phase II Recovery will be counted as recovery positions for purposes of licensure.

451.3.3.2

A Phase II Recover Room or Area is not required.

451.3.4 Architectural details, surfaces, and furnishings.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.4.1

No doors shall swing into the corridor except those to small closets or small mechanical or electrical rooms that cannot be usefully occupied with the doors in the closed position.

451.3.4.2

All exit access corridor doors must be equipped with automatic positive latching hardware.

451.3.4.3

The use of pocket sliding or folding doors to any occupiable room shall not be permitted. A sliding door equipped with sliding door hardware located outside of the room and not equipped with a bottom door track shall be permitted.

451.3.4.4

All fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barriers, horizontal exits and exit passageway partitions shall be constructed prior to the construction of all intervening walls. Where rated walls, barriers or partitions intersect, the continuity of the higher priority wall, barrier, or partition shall be maintained through the intersection.

451.3.4.5

Smoke barriers shall be constructed so as to provide a continuous smoke-tight membrane from exterior wall to exterior wall and from the floor to the underside of the floor or roof deck above. This includes interstitial space and the area above monolithic fire-rated ceiling membranes. Roof trusses shall be permitted to penetrate portions of the smoke barrier located above the fire-rated ceiling membrane where the annular space between the penetrating truss member and the smoke barrier is sealed to limit the transfer of smoke.

451.3.4.6

Where it is not possible to inspect a fire-rated partition, fire wall or a smoke barrier that extends through the attic or interstitial space to the roof or floor deck above because of the location of a monolithic ceiling membrane, ceiling access panel(s) shall be installed adjacent to each side of the partition, wall or barrier at intervals not exceeding 30 feet (9.00 m) and in such locations as necessary to view all surfaces of the partition, wall or barrier. Other ceiling access panels shall only be installed as required by other sections of the code. Partitions, walls and barriers requiring protected openings or penetrations shall be identified in accordance with Section 703 of this code.

451.3.4.7

Where a fully sprinklered ambulatory surgical center is located in a single-story unsprinklered building, a fire barrier designed and constructed in accordance with Section 707, Fire Barriers, and Section 707.3.10, Fire Areas, of this code, may be used to separate the sprinklered ambulatory surgical center fire area from the fire area of the remainder of the unsprinklered single-story building only when all exits from the ambulatory surgical center lead directly to the exterior of the building or to an exit passageway designed and constructed in accordance with Section 1024, Exit Passageways, of this code.

451.3.5 Elevators where required.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.5.1

All new ambulatory surgical centers located in multistory buildings where patient treatment areas are located on other than the exit floor shall have at least one 2,500 pound (933 kg) capacity elevator that shall be in compliance with the requirements of Section 451.3.13.5 of this code and the requirements of Chapter 30 of the code.

451.3.5.2

This required elevator shall be sized to accommodate an ambulance stretcher 76 inches (1931 mm) long and 24 inches (610 mm) wide in the horizontal position. This elevator shall be identified with a sign indicating it as the ambulance stretcher elevator.

451.3.6 Air-conditioning, heating and ventilating systems.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.6.1

Air-handling equipment shall be located either on the roof of the building it serves or in mechanical equipment rooms unless it serves only one room and is located in that room. In buildings with multiple uses, tenants or occupancies, the licensed health care areas required by this code to maintain filter efficiencies and relative air pressure relationships shall be served by separate ducted mechanical air supply, return and exhaust systems. This equipment may be located in other areas of the building or in the same room as the building air-handling equipment if access during normal business hours is available.

451.3.6.2

Variable volume systems shall not be permitted in surgical procedures rooms and recovery rooms.

451.3.6.3

Friable duct linings exposed to air movement shall not be used in ducts, terminal boxes or other systems supplying operating rooms and recovery rooms, unless terminal filters of at least 90-percent efficiency are installed downstream of linings. Flexible duct work shall have a continuous metal inner liner encased by insulating material with an outer vapor jacket conforming to UL 181 unless the flexible duct meets the following criteria:

451.3.6.3.1

The duct conforms to UL Class 1 Air Duct, Standard 181 with minimum rated air velocity of 4,000 feet per minute, and is pressure rated for a minimum of 4-inches water gage positive pressure and 1-inch water gage negative pressure.

451.3.6.3.2

The inner core of the duct is constructed of Chlorinated Polyethylene (CPE) material encircling a steel helix bonded to the CPE.

451.3.6.3.3

The duct has a fire-retardant metalized vapor barrier that is reinforced with crosshatched fiberglass scrim having a permanence of not greater than 0.05 perms when tested in accordance with ASTM E96 Procedure A.

451.3.6.3.4

The duct has passed an impact test similar to the UL 181 standard, conducted by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) except it shall use a 25-pound weight dropped from a height of 10 feet. As a result of the test, the inner and outer surfaces of the sample shall not have ruptured, broken, torn, ripped, collapsed or separated in order for the duct to pass the test. In addition, the helix shall rebound to a cross-sectional elliptical area not less than 80 percent of the original test sample diameter. The use of flexible duct shall be limited to flexible air connector applications.

451.3.6.4

Filter housing frame blank-off panels shall be permanently attached to the frame, constructed of rigid materials and have sealing surfaces equal to or greater than the filter media installed in the filter frame. All joints between the blank-off panels, filter housing frames and filter support structure shall be caulked air tight.

451.3.6.5

Air ducts and exhaust systems shall not be constructed of fiberglass duct board.

451.3.6.6

Roof top mounted mechanical equipment including air handler units, condensers, vents, exhaust fans, and other such equipment are not required to meet the impact requirements of the code.

451.3.6.7

All new ambulatory surgical centers shall have completely ducted air-supply, return, outside air, and exhaust systems.

451.3.7 Fan and damper control during fire alarm.
451.3.7.1

During an automatic fire alarm activation, fan systems and fan equipment serving more than one room shall be stopped to prevent the movement of smoke by mechanical means from the zone in alarm to adjacent smoke zones or to adjacent areas within the smoke zone if there is only one zone in the facility.

451.3.7.2

Fan control shall be designed so as to minimize the interruption of heating, ventilating and air conditioning in compartments remote from the compartment in alarm.

451.3.7.3

Fan control shall not interfere with the continuous operation of exhaust systems conveying ethylene oxide or other hazardous chemicals and fumes or systems required to operate continuously for the health and safety of occupants. Air-handling systems shall be designed to allow for continuous operation of all such systems and to minimize movement of smoke by mechanical means from the zone in alarm.

451.3.8 Plumbing fixtures.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.8.1

Plumbing shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

451.3.9 Fire pump.
451.3.9.1

Where required by another section of this code, a new fire pump, except for a replacement fire pump, that is electric motor-driven shall be connected to the emergency power supply system (EPSS) of the ambulatory surgical center. A fire pump(s) that is not electric motor-driven shall meet the requirements of NFPA 20, Standard for the Installation of Stationary Pumps for Fire Protection alternative power.

451.3.10 Electrical requirements.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.10.1

All material, including equipment, conductors, controls, and signaling devices, shall be installed to provide a complete electrical system with the necessary characteristics and capacity to supply the electrical facilities shown in the specifications or indicated on the plans.

451.3.10.2

All materials and equipment shall be factory listed as complying with applicable standards of Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., or other similarly established standards of a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) that has been certified by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for that referenced standard.

451.3.10.3

Field labeling of equipment and materials shall be permitted only when provided by a nationally recognized testing laboratory that has been certified by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for that referenced standard.

451.3.10.4

There shall be documentation for equipotential grounding in all patient care areas, building service ground electrode systems, and special systems such as fire alarm, nurse call, paging, generator, emergency power and breaker coordination.

451.3.10.5

All spaces occupied by people, machinery and equipment within buildings, and the approaches thereto, and parking lots, shall have electric lighting.

451.3.10.6

Patients’ recovery rooms shall have general lighting. Fixed lights not switched at the door shall have switch controls convenient for use at the luminaires. All switches for control of lighting in recovery areas shall be of the quiet operating type.

451.3.10.7

Operating rooms shall have general lighting for the room in addition to localized specialized lighting provided by a special lighting unit required at the surgical table. The type of special lighting unit shall be as specified by the functional program of the facility. Each special lighting unit for localized lighting at the surgical table shall be permanently installed and permanently connected to an independent circuit that shall be powered from the critical branch. In addition, a minimum of one general purpose lighting fixture shall be powered from a normal circuit in all operating rooms.

451.3.10.8

The number and circuitry of all duplex receptacles in operating rooms, cardiac catheterization laboratories, and post-operative recovery rooms, shall be provided as follows:

451.3.10.8.1

A minimum of four duplex receptacles shall be connected to the critical branch of the essential electrical system.

451.3.10.8.2

A minimum of two duplex receptacles shall be connected to a normal power circuit or to a critical branch circuit from a different transfer switch.

451.3.10.8.3

There shall be no more than two duplex receptacles per circuit for all receptacles for the areas as listed.

451.3.10.9

All receptacles shall have engraved cover plates to indicate the panel board and circuit numbers powering the device.

451.3.10.10

Branch circuit over-current devices shall be readily accessible to nursing staff and other authorized personnel.

451.3.10.11

Nonmetallic sheathed cable or similar systems are not permitted for power and lighting wiring in any facility.

451.3.10.12

Panel boards located in spaces subject to storage shall have the clear working space in accordance with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. “ELECTRICAL ACCESS—NOT FOR STORAGE” shall be permanently marked on the floor and wall about the panel. Panel boards shall not be located in an exit access corridor or in an unenclosed space or area that is open to an exit access corridor. Panel boards may be located inside of a room or closet that opens into an exit access corridor only when the room or closet is separated from the exit access corridor by a partition and door that comply with this code.

451.3.10.13

The electrical system shall have coordinated short circuit protection.

451.3.10.14

Provide color coding for the junction boxes for the branches of the essential electrical system.

451.3.10.15

Duplex receptacles for general use shall be installed approximately 50 feet (15 240 mm) apart in all general purpose corridors and within 25 feet (7620 mm) of ends of corridors.

451.3.11 Nurses’ calling system.
451.3.11.1

Wired- or wireless-type nurse call systems shall be permitted if they have been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of UL 1069, 7th edition, published October 12, 2007, as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All wireless systems shall be tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of Section 49, “Wireless Systems” of UL 1069, 7th edition as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All nurse call systems whether wired or wireless shall have electronically supervised visual and audible annunciation in accordance with the supervision criteria of UL 1069, 7th edition, for wireless nurse call systems and tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet those requirements.

451.3.11.2

In facilities which contain more than eight recovery beds, or where recovery beds are not in view from the nurses’ station, a nurses’ calling system shall be provided. Each recovery bed shall be provided with a call button. Two call buttons serving adjacent beds may be served by one calling station. Call shall activate a visual and audible signal at the nurses’ station and in the clean workroom and soiled workroom. Call shall also activate a corridor dome light located at each patient recovery position.

451.3.11.3

A nurses’ call emergency system shall be provided at each patient toilet and dressing room. Activation shall be by a pull cord conveniently located for patient use. This system will activate distinct audible and visual signals in the recovery room nurses’ station and in the surgical suite nurses’ station. The emergency call system shall be designed so that signal light activation will remain lighted until turned off at patient’s calling station.

451.3.11.4

A corridor dome light shall be located directly outside of any patient use area that is equipped with a nurse call system.

451.3.12 Fire alarm systems.
451.3.12.1

A fire alarm annunciator panel shall be provided for each facility or building within the Ambulatory Surgical Center (ASC) at a location that is constantly attended during the facility’s hours of operation and shall annunciate any fire alarm in the building from any manual or automatic fire alarm device. The panel shall indicate the zone of actuation of the alarm, and there shall be a trouble signal indicator.

451.3.12.2

A shared building fire alarm system shall be permitted.

451.3.12.3

Each smoke compartment shall be annunciated as a separate fire alarm zone. A fire alarm system zone shall not include rooms or spaces in other smoke compartments and shall be limited to a maximum area of 22,500 square feet (2090 m2).

451.3.13 Emergency electrical service.

Reference The Guidelines for other requirements.

451.3.13.1

A Type 1 essential electrical system shall be provided in ambulatory surgical centers as described in NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities Code. The emergency power for this system shall meet the requirements of a Level 1, Type 10, Class 8 generator as described in NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems.

451.3.13.2

In new facility construction, the normal main service equipment shall be separated from the emergency distribution equipment by locating it in a separate room. Transfer switches shall be considered emergency distribution equipment for this purpose.

451.3.13.3

There shall be a generator remote alarm annunciator in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 110 located at a designated on-site staffed location during the hours of operation of the ambulatory surgical center.

451.3.13.4

Reserved.

451.3.13.5

There shall be illumination of the means of egress in accordance with NFPA 101 and designed for automatic dusk-to-dawn operation. Such illumination shall continue to the public way or to a safe area(s) located a minimum of 30 feet (9.144 m) from the building and large enough to accommodate the required occupant load of the exit discharge.

451.3.13.6

A minimum of one elevator serving any patient treatment floor shall be in compliance with Section 451.3.5 and shall be connected to the equipment branch of the essential electric system and arranged for manual or automatic operation during loss of normal power.

451.3.13.7

If a day tank is provided, it shall be equipped with a dedicated low-level fuel alarm and a manual pump. The alarm shall be located at the generator remote alarm annunciator.

451.3.13.8

Reserved.

451.3.13.9

Electric lighting required to provide care and service to the patient treatment areas shall be connected to the essential electrical system.

451.3.14 Fire protection.

An ambulatory surgical center (ASC) located in a building containing a fire protection sprinkler system, shall be provided with a dedicated supply main serving only the space occupied by the ASC when the ASC is located on the same floor of the building with other building tenants. The supply main shall originate at the fire main piping riser serving the floor the ASC space is occupying. The ASC supply main shall be equipped with an indicating control valve containing a tamper switch installed at the tap to the building fire riser in a readily accessible location. The valve shall have a permanent tag identifying the supply main as that of the ASC.

451.3.15 Medical gas.

A piped oxygen and vacuum system shall be provided in the operating rooms, if required by The Guidelines, that comply with the requirements of NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities Code, for a Category 1 piped gas and vacuum system.

451.3.16 

INSIGHTS

As required by The Guidelines, a waste anesthetic gas disposal (WAGD) system, in accordance with NFPA 99, Health Care Facilities Code, shall be provided in operating rooms where nitrous oxide and/or inhalation anesthsia gas is intended to be administered.

 INSIGHTS (1)
SECTION 452
BIRTHING CENTERS
452.1 Scope.

All birthing centers shall comply with the following design and construction standards as described herein.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Agency of Health Care Administration [AHCA] Rule 59A-11, Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 383, Florida Statutes.

452.2 Physical environment, water supply and fire safety.
452.2.1

At least one birthing room shall be maintained which is adequate and appropriate to provide for the equipment, staff, supplies and emergency procedures required for the physical and emotional care of a maternal client, her support person and the newborn during labor, birth, and the recovery period.

452.2.2

The birth center shall be designed to provide adequate space for the following:

452.2.2.1

Birth rooms shall be located to provide unimpeded, rapid access to an exit of the building which will accommodate emergency transportation vehicles.

452.2.2.2

Adequate fixed or portable work surface areas shall be maintained for use in the birth room.

452.2.2.3

A separate space for a clean area and a contaminated area; if it is not feasible to provide such separate areas, special procedures shall be established for the disposal of infectious waste. Sanitary waste containers, soiled linen containers, storage cabinets and an autoclave, pressure cooker or other effective sterilization equipment shall be available.

452.2.2.4

Prenatal and postpartum examinations which will provide privacy for the patient, hand-washing facilities and the appropriate equipment for staff.

452.2.2.5

Medical record storage, client interviews, instruction and waiting rooms.

452.2.3 Toilet and bathing facilities.
452.2.3.1

A toilet and lavatory shall be maintained in the vicinity of the birth room.

452.2.3.2

Hand-washing facilities shall be in or immediately adjacent to the birth room.

452.2.3.3

A bathtub or shower shall be available for client use.

452.2.3.4

All floor surfaces, wall surfaces, water closets, lavatories, tubs, showers, shall be kept clean, and all appurtenances of the structures shall be of sound construction, properly maintained, in good repair and free from safety hazards.

452.2.4

There shall be provisions and facilities for secure storage of personal belongings and valuables of clients.

452.2.5

There shall be provisions for visual privacy for each maternal client and her support person.

452.2.6

Hallways and doors providing access and entry into the birth center and birth room shall be of adequate width and conformation to accommodate maneuvering of ambulance stretchers and wheelchairs.

452.2.7

All areas of the facility shall be well lighted and shall have light fixtures capable of providing at least 20 footcandles (200 lux) of illumination at 30 inches (762 mm) from the floor to permit observation, cleaning and maintenance. Light fixtures shall be properly maintained and kept clean.

452.2.8

All housing facilities shall have adequate ventilation and be kept free of offensive odors.

452.2.8.1

If natural ventilation is utilized, the opened window area for ventilation purposes shall be equal to one-tenth of the floor space in the residential area.

452.2.8.2

When mechanical ventilation or cooling systems are employed, the system shall be properly maintained and kept clean. Intake air ducts shall be designed and installed so that dust or filters can be readily removed. In residence areas and segregation rooms with solid doors, mechanical ventilation systems shall provide a minimum of 10 cubic feet (0.3 m3) of fresh or filtered recirculated air per minute for each client occupying the area.

452.2.8.3

All toilet rooms shall be provided with direct openings to the outside or provided with mechanical ventilation to the outside.

452.2.9

Adequate heating and cooling facilities shall be provided to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) and maximum temperature of 78°F (26°C) at a point 20 inches (508 mm) above the floor.

452.2.10

All heating devices shall comply with fire prevention provisions found in Rule 69A-3, Fire Prevention, General Provision, Florida Administrative Code.

452.2.11 Laundry.
452.2.11.1

Where laundry facilities are provided, laundry facilities shall be of sound construction and shall be in good repair and clean. Adequate space shall be provided and areas shall be designated for the separation of clean and soiled clothing, linen and towels.

452.2.11.2

Laundry rooms shall be well lighted and properly ventilated. Clothes dryers shall be vented to the exterior.

452.2.12 Insect and rodent control.

Facilities shall be kept free of all insects and rodents. All outside openings shall be effectively sealed or screened with 16 mesh screening or equivalent to prevent entry of insects or rodents.

452.2.13 Outdoor areas.

Outdoor areas shall be well drained. Indoor and outdoor recreational areas shall be provided with safeguards designed for the needs of the residents.

452.2.14 Water supply.
452.2.14.1

Drinking water shall be accessible to all clients. When drinking fountains are available, the jet of the fountain shall issue from a nozzle of nonoxidizing impervious material set at an angle from the vertical. The nozzle and every other opening in the water pipe or conductor leading to the nozzle shall be above the edge of the bowl so that such nozzle or opening will not be flooded in case a drain from the bowl of the fountain becomes clogged. The end of the nozzle shall be protected by nonoxidizing guards to prevent persons using the fountain from coming into contact with the nozzle. Vertical or bubbler drinking fountains shall be replaced with approved-type water fountains or be disconnected. When no approved drinking fountains are available, clients shall be provided with single service cups which shall be stored and dispensed in a manner to prevent contamination. Common drinking cups are prohibited.

452.2.14.2

Hot and cold running water under pressure and at safe temperature, not to exceed 110°F (43°C) to prevent scalding, shall be provided to all restrooms, lavatories and bathing areas.

452.2.15 Sewage disposal.
452.2.15.1

All sanitary facilities shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

452.2.15.2

For facilities with nine or more birth rooms, mop sinks or curbed areas with floor drains shall be available in convenient locations throughout the facility to facilitate cleaning and for the proper disposal of cleaning water.

452.2.16 Fire control.

Each birth center shall provide fire protection through the elimination of fire hazards, the installation of necessary safeguards such as extinguishers and smoke alarms to insure rapid and effective fire control.

452.2.16.1

To safeguard all clients, the birth center shall have:

452.2.16.1.1

“No Smoking” signs prominently displayed in those areas where smoking is not permitted.

452.2.16.1.2

Fire regulations and evacuation route prominently posted.

452.2.16.2

The written fire control plan approved by the appropriate local fire authority shall contain provisions for prompt reporting of all fires, extinguishing fires, protection of personnel and guests, evacuation, and cooperation with fire-fighting authorities.

452.2.16.3

New centers’ carpeting must comply with the maximum flame spread rating of 75 in accordance with ASTM E84 test as required under Chapter 69A- 3.012 Standards of the National Fire Protection Association Adopted, Florida Administrative Code. Those existing centers not having affirmative evidence of complying with such flame spread rating shall establish fire control measures including the prohibition of smoking in carpeted areas. Such procedures shall be approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

SECTION 453
STATE REQUIREMENTS FOR
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
453.1 Scope: Public educational facilities.

Public educational facilities shall comply with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. These are minimum standards; boards may impose more restrictive requirements. Additional requirements for public educational facilities in Florida, including public schools and public Florida colleges, are found in these standards.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Education Rule 6A-2.0010 and Chapter 1013, Florida Statutes.

453.2 Public schools and Florida colleges general requirements.
453.2.1 Owner.

Each school board and Florida college board of trustees is deemed to be the owner of facilities within its respective jurisdiction. Boards shall provide for enforcement of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, including standards for health, sanitation, and others as required by law.

453.2.2 Exemption from local requirements.

All public educational and ancillary plants constructed by a school board or a Florida college board are exempt from all other state, county, district, municipal, or local building codes, interpretations, building permits, and assessments of fees for building permits, ordinances, road closures, and impact fees or service availability fees as provided in Section 1013.371(1)(a), Florida Statutes.

453.3 Code enforcement.
453.3.1 School boards and Florida college boards.

Section 553.80(6), Florida Statutes, provides options for plan review services and inspections by school boards and Florida college boards.

453.3.2 Owner review and inspection.

A school board or Florida college board which undertakes the construction, remodeling, renovation, lease, or lease-purchase of any educational plant or ancillary facility, or day labor project, regardless of cost or fund source, shall review construction documents as required by law in Section 1013.38, Florida Statutes, and Section 553.80(6), Florida Statutes, and shall ensure compliance with requirements of law, rule, and the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. Section 553.80(6), Florida Statutes, states that district school boards and Florida college boards shall provide for plan review and inspections for their projects. They shall use personnel certified under Part XII of Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, to perform the plan reviews and inspections or use one of the options provided in Section 1013.38, Florida Statutes. Under this arrangement, school boards and Florida college boards are not subject to local government permitting, plan review, and inspection fees.

453.3.3 Local government review and inspection.

As an option to the owner providing plan review and inspection services, school boards and Florida college boards may use local government code enforcement officers who will not charge fees more than the actual labor and administrative costs for the plan review and inspections. Local government code enforcement offices shall expedite permitting. Any action by local government not in compliance with Section 553.80(6), Florida Statutes, may be appealed to the Florida Building Commission, which may suspend the authority of that local government to enforce the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal on the facilities of school boards and Florida college boards.

453.3.4 Other regulatory agencies.

Boards shall coordinate the planning of projects with state and regional regulatory and permitting agencies, as applicable. Other state or local agencies may inspect new construction or existing facilities when required by law; however, such inspections shall be in conformance with the code as modified by this section.

453.3.5 Day labor projects.

Any one construction project estimated to cost $300,000 or less where bonafide board employees or contracted labor provide the work. Day labor projects are subject to the same Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal as new construction.

453.3.6 Routine maintenance.

Maintenance projects are subject to the same Florida Building Code and Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal as new construction. Chapter 489, Florida Statutes, exempts boards from the use of a licensed general contractor for projects up to $200,000 where bonafide board employees provide the work. Maintenance projects which include construction, renovation and/or remodeling, shall be reviewed for compliance with the code.

453.3.7 Certificate of occupancy.

New buildings, additions, renovations, and remodeling shall not be occupied until the building has received a certificate of occupancy for compliance with codes that were in effect on the date of permit application.

453.3.8

Reuse and prototype plans shall be code updated with each new project.

453.4 Reference documents.

School Boards and Florida College Boards of Trustees. In addition to complying with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, and other adopted standards and this section, public educational facilities and sites shall comply with applicable federal and state laws and rules.

453.4.1 Rule 6A-2.00.10 [State Requirements for Educational Facilities (SREF)].

A Florida Department of Education document which includes required design standards, standards for rehabilitation of historical resources, capital outlay project process requirements, and various agencies having jurisdiction during project planning and construction.

453.4.2 Flood-resistant construction.

Educational facilities in flood hazard areas shall comply with ASCE 24.

453.4.3 Florida Statutes and state rules.

Including, but not limited to, Chapters 255, 468, 471, 481, 489, 553, 633, 1013, and Section 287.055, Florida Statutes, and various state rules as applicable to specific projects.

453.4.4 Accessibility requirements for children’s environments.

U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.

453.4.5 Handbook for public playground safety.

Playgrounds and equipment shall be designed and installed using the Public Playground Safety Handbook by the U. S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the ASTM/ CPSC Playground Audit Guide as applicable.

453.4.6 ANSI Z535.1.

American National Standard Safety Color Code for marking physical hazards, is used in shops where machinery requires marking and safety zones.

453.4.7 ASCE 7.

American Society of Civil Engineers.

453.4.8

Life Cycle Cost Guidelines for Materials and Building Systems for Florida’s Public Educational Facilities, available from the Department of Education, Office of Educational Facilities, shall be considered.

453.5 Definitions.
453.5.1 ASSEMBLY.

Assembly occupancies are buildings or portions of buildings used for gatherings of 50 or more persons, such as auditoriums, gymnasiums, multipurpose rooms, classrooms and labs, cafeterias, stadiums, media centers and interior courtyards. Assembly occupancies include adjacent and related spaces to the main seating area, such as stages, dressing rooms, workshops, lobbies, rest rooms, locker rooms, and store rooms. School board and Florida college facilities shall follow the requirements of Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal for assembly spaces.

453.5.2 BOARD.

A district school board and a Florida college board of trustees.

453.5.3 BOILER.

A fuel-fired, heat-producing appliance with a minimum input capacity of 60,000 Btu per hour and intended to supply hot water or steam. Boilers and the inspection of boilers shall comply with Section 554, Florida Statutes, the Boiler Safety Act.

453.5.4 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.

Documentation issued by an authority having jurisdiction which indicates inspection and approval of completion of a construction project pursuant to the requirements of Florida law.

453.5.5 COURTYARD.

A court or enclosure adjacent to, or surrounded by, a building(s) and/or walls.

453.5.5.1 “Exterior courtyard”

is a courtyard that is not roofed, has a minimum width of 40 feet (1219 mm) and has an opening a minimum width of 40 feet (1219 mm) with no obstructions or fencing, on at least one end.

An exterior courtyard may be considered exterior space and used for exiting of adjacent spaces. For an exterior courtyard with an opening between 40 feet (1219 mm) and 60 feet wide (18 288 mm), the building walls and wall openings must meet the requirements of Florida Building Code, Building Tables 601 and 602 and the maximum travel distance to the courtyard opening/exit shall not exceed 150 feet (45 720 mm) from any point within the courtyard. If the minimum courtyard width exceeds 60 feet (18 288 mm), the travel distance to a courtyard opening/exit may exceed 150 feet (945 720 mm).

453.5.5.2 “Enclosed courtyard”

is a courtyard not roofed by more than 50 percent of the courtyard area and that is substantially surrounded by a building(s) on two sides or more, has a minimum width of 40 feet (1219 mm) and each opening to the exterior is less than 40 feet (1219 mm) in width. The courtyard area shall be calculated for maximum occupancy as an assembly space and the number and size of remotely located exits shall be calculated for the maximum possible load. The maximum possible load is the greater of the calculated capacity of the courtyard or the load imposed by the surrounding spaces. An enclosed courtyard may be used as a component of exit access provided that the walls and wall openings meet the requirements of Florida Building Code, Building, Tables 601 and 602 and the maximum travel to the exit discharge does not exceed 150 feet (45 720 mm) from any point within the enclosed courtyard. If the minimum courtyard width exceeds 60 feet (18 288 mm), the travel distance to a courtyard opening/exit may exceed 150 feet (45 720 mm). An enclosed courtyard cannot serve as the exterior for exiting or for emergency rescue openings.

453.5.5.3 “Roofed courtyard”

is a courtyard roofed by more than 50 percent of the courtyard area in any manner. Roofed courtyards may be used for assembly spaces and shall not be used as a component of exiting from adjacent spaces.

453.5.6 FACILITY.

Additionally defined as follows:

453.5.6.1 “Ancillary facility”

is a building or other facility necessary to provide district-wide support services, such as an energy plant, bus garage, warehouse, maintenance building, or administrative building.

453.5.6.2 “Ancillary plant”

is buildings, site, and site improvements necessary to provide district-wide vehicle maintenance, storage, building maintenance activities, or administrative functions necessary to provide support services to an educational program.

453.5.6.3 “Auxiliary facility”

consists of the support spaces located at educational facilities and plants which do not contain student stations but are used by students, such as libraries, administrative offices, and cafeterias.

453.5.6.4 “Educational facility”

consists of buildings and equipment, structures, and special educational use areas that are built, installed, or established to serve primarily the educational purposes and secondarily the social and recreational purposes of the community.

453.5.6.5 “Educational plant”

comprises the educational facilities, site, and site improvements necessary to accommodate students, faculty, administrators, staff, and the activities of the educational program.

453.5.6.6 “Existing facility”

is a facility owned, rented or leased.

453.5.6.7 “Leased facility”

is a facility not owned, but contracted for use.

453.5.6.8 “Permanent facility”

is a facility designed for a fixed location.

453.5.6.9 “Relocatable/portable facility”

is a building which is designed with the capability of being moved to a new location.

453.5.6.10 “Modular facility”

is a structure which, when combined with other modules and/or demountable roof and/or wall sections, forms a complete building. This facility may be relocatable.

453.5.7 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.

The upkeep of educational and ancillary plants including, but not limited to, roof or roofing replacement, short of complete replacement of membrane or structure; repainting of interior or exterior surfaces; resurfacing of floors; repair or replacement of glass and hardware; repair or replacement of electrical and plumbing fixtures; repair of furniture and equipment; replacement of system equipment with equivalent items meeting current code requirements providing that the equipment does not place a greater demand on utilities, structural requirements are not increased, and the equipment does not adversely affect the function of life safety systems; traffic control devices and signage; and repair or resurfacing of parking lots, roads, and walkways. Does not include new construction, remodeling, or renovation, except as noted above.

453.5.8 NEW CONSTRUCTION.

Any construction of a building or unit of a building in which the entire work is new. An addition connected to an existing building is considered new construction.

453.5.9 OPEN PLAN BUILDING.

Any building which does not have corridors defined by permanent walls and is entirely open or divided by partitions which may be easily rearranged.

453.5.10 OPEN PLAN INSTRUCTIONAL SPACE.

An arrangement of two or more class areas with no permanent partitions or wall separations.

453.5.11 OWNER.

Each school board and Florida college board of trustees is deemed to be the owner of facilities within its respective jurisdiction.

453.5.12 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION.

Documentation issued by an authority having jurisdiction which indicates approval of construction plans prepared pursuant to the requirements of Florida law.

453.5.13 REMODELING.

The changing of existing facilities by rearrangement of space and/or change of use. Only that portion of the building being remodeled must be brought into compliance with the Florida Building Code and Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal unless the remodeling adversely impacts the existing life safety systems of the building.

453.5.14 RENOVATION.

The rejuvenating or upgrading of existing facilities by installation or replacement of materials and equipment. The use and occupancy of the spaces remain the same. Only that portion of the building being renovated must be brought into compliance with the Florida Building Code and Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal unless the renovation adversely impacts the existing life safety systems of the building.

453.5.15 SEPARATE ATMOSPHERE.

The individual volumes of air in a building which are divided by smoke proof barriers to limit contamination of the air by smoke and fumes during a fire.

453.5.16 SEPARATE BUILDING.

The purpose of separate fire alarm systems or sprinkler systems, a separate building is a structure separated from other buildings by 60 feet (18 288 mm) or more, or as required by other sections of this code.

453.5.17 FLORIDA COLLEGE.

A public community college, public college, state college, or public junior college.

453.5.18 STUDENT-OCCUPIED SPACE.

Any area planned primarily for use by six or more students.

453.6 Administration of public education projects.
453.6.1 Occupancy during construction.

School board and Florida college board facilities, or portions of facilities, shall not be occupied during construction unless exits, fire detection and early warning systems, fire protection, and safety barriers are continuously maintained and clearly marked at all times. Construction on an occupied school board site shall be separated from students and staff by secure barriers. Prior to issuance of the notice to proceed, a safety plan shall be provided by the contractor which clearly delineates areas for construction, safety barriers, exits, construction traffic during the various phases of the project and when conditions change. Where heavy machinery, as is used for earth moving or scraping, is required to work on a school board’s occupied site, the work shall be separated from occupants by secure double barriers with a distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) in between. New construction, remodeling or renovations in existing facilities shall not reduce the means of egress below the requirements for new buildings; safe means of egress from a student-occupied space may be accomplished as authorized by NFPA 101, Florida edition as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. New construction (additions) shall not block or reduce safe means of egress.

453.6.2 Contractor toxic substance safety precautions.

When hazardous chemicals as defined by 29 CFR 1910.1200, OSHA Hazard Communication Standard are to be used during the maintenance, renovation, remodeling, or addition to an existing facility, the contractor shall notify the administrator in writing at least three working days before any hazardous chemical is used. The notice shall indicate the name of each of the hazardous chemicals to be used, where and when they will be used, and a copy of a material safety data sheet (MSDS) for each hazardous chemical. The contractor shall comply with the safety precautions and handling instructions set forth in the MSDS. Copies of hazardous waste manifests documenting disposal shall be provided to the facility’s administrator who will notify occupants of the anticipated presence of toxic substances during the maintenance, renovation, remodeling, or addition to an existing facility.

453.6.3 Flammable or explosive substances.

No flammable or explosive substances or equipment shall be introduced during a remodeling or renovation project in a facility of normally low or ordinary hazard classification while the building is occupied.

453.7 Life safety.
453.7.1 Separate exits.

In assembly occupancies, each required exit from an assembly space must exit into a separate atmosphere or to the exterior, to be considered as a separate exit.

453.7.2 Exit access.

Exit access shall not be through a toilet room, storage room, or similar space, or any space subject to being locked.

453.7.3 Location of fire extinguishers and blankets.

Fire extinguishers may be located inside student-occupied spaces provided they are placed adjacent to the primary exit door, and the room door remains unlocked when the facility is occupied, and a permanently affixed sign, with a red background and white letters, reading “FIRE EXTINGUISHER INSIDE” is placed on the outside adjacent to the door. Fire extinguisher cabinets shall not be locked. Fire blankets shall be located in each laboratory and each shop where a fire hazard may exist. Fire extinguishers and fire blankets shall be readily accessible and suitable for the hazard present and shall not be obstructed or obscured from view. Extinguishers and blankets shall be on hangers or brackets, shelves or cabinets so that the top of the extinguisher or blanket is not more than 48 inches (1220 mm) above finish floor (AFF) and complies with state and federal accessibility requirements. All extinguishers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA. Extinguishers shall remain fully charged and operable at all times and have a current tag to indicate compliance.

453.7.4 Common fire alarm.

Buildings within 60 feet (18,288 mm) of each other shall have a common fire alarm system. On an existing campus, structures that meet the 60 foot (18,288 mm) requirement, any new structure, remodeled facility, or renovated facility, such as classrooms, labs, shops and cafeterias, gymnasiums, auditoriums (separate or combination functions) with assembly occupancy less than 300, shall be connected to the campus existing fire alarm system. An existing system without the voice feature shall not be required to include the voice feature required by Sections 907.2 and 907.2.3 of this code. A new total school fire alarm system upgrade project for an existing campus shall include the voice feature. Emergency shelters shall have the fire alarm panel located in the space identified as the shelter manager’s office.

453.7.5 Fire alarm sending stations.

Sending stations may be located inside student-occupied spaces, adjacent to the primary exit door only if the door to the occupied space is unlocked at all times while the facility is occupied. When located inside a student-occupied space, a permanently affixed sign reading “FIRE ALARM PULL STATION INSIDE” shall be placed outside that space adjacent to the door. This sign shall have a red background with white letters. Sending stations shall be mounted to meet accessibility requirements.

453.7.6 Automatic shut off.

The fire alarm system shall shut off gas and fuel oil supplies which serve student-occupied spaces or pass through such spaces. The shutoff valve shall be located on the exterior at the service entrance to the building. The shutoff valve shall be of the manual reset type.

453.7.6.1 Kitchen gas supplies.

Kitchen gas supplies shall be shutoff by activation of the kitchen hood fire suppression system. The shutoff valve shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations.

453.7.6.2 Emergency power.

The fire alarm system shall not shut off gas supplies which serve emergency power sources.

453.7.7 Unoccupied rooms and concealed spaces.

Rooms or spaces for storage, custodial closets, mechanical rooms, spaces under stages with wood structures and other unoccupied or unsupervised spaces in a building shall have automatic fire alarm system detector devices installed. Any concealed space with exposed materials having a flame-spread rating greater than Class A, including crawl spaces under floors, interstitial spaces between ceiling and floor or roof above and attic spaces, shall be equipped with heat detector devices. Smoke and heat detector devices shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

453.7.7.1 Fully sprinklered buildings.

In fully sprinklered buildings, fire alarm detection devices are not required except where specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

453.7.8 Boiler rooms.

Each boiler room shall be separated from the remainder of the building by one-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or shall be separate from other buildings by 60 feet (18 288 mm), and shall have an out-swinging door opening directly to the exterior. A fire door swinging into the boiler room shall also be provided for any opening into the interior of the building. There shall be no opening into any corridor or area designed for use by students.

453.7.9 Exit passageways and horizontal exits.

Exit passageways as referenced in Section 1024 and horizontal exits referenced in Section 1026 of this code shall be prohibited.

453.8 General requirements for new construction, additions, renovation, and remodeling.
453.8.1 Codes and standards.

Educational facilities owned by school boards and Florida college boards shall meet the construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, state and federal laws and rules, and this section for Florida's public educational facilities for new construction, remodeling and renovation of existing facilities. This is a minimum standard; boards may impose more restrictive safety and level of quality standards for educational, auxiliary, and ancillary facilities under their jurisdiction, provided they meet or exceed these minimum requirements.

453.8.1.1 Educational occupancy.

School board educational facility projects whether owned, lease-purchased or leased shall comply with the educational occupancy and assembly occupancy portions of the above referenced codes as applicable, except where in conflict with this section. The support spaces such as media centers, administrative offices, cafeterias and kitchens located within educational facilities are not separate occupancies.

453.8.1.2 Business occupancy.

Florida college board educational facility projects whether owned, lease-purchased or leased shall comply with the business occupancy and the assembly occupancy of the above referenced codes as applicable, except where in conflict with this section.

453.8.1.3 Ancillary facility.

School board and Florida college board ancillary facilities such as warehouses or maintenance buildings, shall use the applicable occupancy section of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. Ancillary facilities on educational plant sites shall be separated from the educational facility as required by code.

453.8.2 Space standards.

School board and Florida college board facility sizes shall use standards in the “Size of Space and Occupant Design Criteria Table” found in the Department of Education document, “State Requirements for Educational Facilities (SREF).” Exiting from occupied spaces shall comply with Table 1004.5 of this code.

453.8.3 Construction type.

School board and Florida college buildings including auxiliary, ancillary and vocational facilities shall comply with the following:

453.8.3.1 Noncombustible Type I, II or IV.

The minimum construction type for one- and two-story public educational facilities shall be noncombustible Type I, II or IV construction or better.

453.8.3.1.1

Interior nonload-bearing wood studs or partitions shall not be used in permanent educational and auxiliary facilities or relocatable buildings.

Exception: Historic buildings to maintain the fabric of the historic character of the building.

453.8.3.2 Type I.

Facilities three stories or more shall be Type I construction.

453.8.3.3 Type IV.

When Type IV construction is used, wood shall be exposed and not covered by ceilings or other construction.

453.8.3.4 Exceptions to types of construction:

1.	Covered walkways open on all sides may be Type V construction.

2.	Single story dugouts, press boxes, concession stands, related public toilet rooms, detached covered play areas, and nonflammable storage buildings that are detached from the main educational facility by at least 60 feet (1829 mm), may be Type V construction.

453.8.4 Standards for remodeling and/or renovation projects.

Portions of buildings being remodeled and/or renovated shall be brought into compliance with current required Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal as required by the plan review authority in its best judgment.

453.8.4.1

An automatic fire sprinkler system is not required in existing educational buildings unless 50 percent of the aggregate area of the building is being remodeled.

453.8.5 Leased facilities.

Leased facilities shall be brought into compliance with applicable occupancy requirements of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal prior to occupancy.

453.8.6 Asbestos prohibited.

The federal Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act, (AHERA) 40 CFR, Part 763, as revised July 1, 1995, prohibits the use of any asbestos containing materials in any public education construction project and requires certification of same by the architect of record.

453.8.7 Life cycle cost guidelines for materials and building systems.

An analysis shall be included, as required by Section 1013.37(1), Florida Statutes, which evaluates building materials and systems, life cycle costs for maintenance, custodial, operating, and life expectancy against initial costs, as described in Section 1013.37(1)(e)4, Florida Statutes. Standards for evaluation of materials are available from the department in a publication entitled Life Cycle Cost Guidelines for materials and Building Systems for Florida’s Public Educational Facilities.

453.8.8 Safe school design.

School boards shall design educational facilities and sites including pre-K through 12, vocational and Florida colleges to enhance security and reduce vandalism through the use of “safe school design” principles. Safe school design strategies are available from the Florida Department of Education, Office of Educational Facilities, in a publication titled Florida Safe School Design Guidelines and include but are not limited to the following:

453.8.8.1 Natural access and control of schools and campuses.
453.8.8.2

Natural surveillance of schools and campuses both from within the facility and from adjacent streets by removing obstructions or trimming shrubbery.

453.8.8.3

School and campus territorial integrity; securing courtyards, site lighting, building lighting.

453.8.8.4

Audio and motion detection systems covering ground floor doors, stairwells, offices and areas where expensive equipment is stored.

453.8.8.5

Designs which will promote the prevention of school crime and violence. Exterior architectural features which do not allow footholds or handholds on exterior walls, tamperproof doors and locks, nonbreakable glass or shelter window protection system; also landscaping and tree placement should be designed so they do not provide access to roofs by unauthorized persons. Sections of schools commonly used after hours should be separated by doors or other devices from adjacent areas to prevent unauthorized access. Install locks on roof hatches; apply slippery finishes to exterior pipes.

453.8.8.6

Exterior stairs, balconies, ramps, and upper level corridors around the perimeter of buildings should have open-type handrails or other architectural features to allow surveillance.

453.8.8.7

Open areas, such as plazas, the building’s main entrance, parking lots, and bicycle compounds should be designed so they are visible by workers at workstations inside the buildings.

453.9 Structural design.
453.9.1 Loading requirements.

Structural design shall comply with code requirements and wind loads as stipulated by the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. Wind design shall be based on ASCE 7, with wind speeds determined from Figure 26.5-1C and ICC 500, as appropriate.

453.10 Site requirements.
453.10.1 Fencing.

Fencing for school board educational plants shall be of a material which is nonflammable, safe, durable, and low maintenance, provides structural integrity, strength and aesthetics appropriate for the intended location. Fences shall have no jagged or sharp projections. Fence heights shall be in compliance with local zoning regulations. Access shall be provided for maintenance machinery. Prohibited materials for nonagricultural educational plants include razor wire, barbed wire and electrically charged systems.

453.10.1.1 Required locations.

Fencing is required to separate students from potential harm, and shall be provided in the following locations:

453.10.1.1.1 Kindergarten through grade 12.

Exposed mechanical, plumbing, gas, or electrical equipment located on ground level.

453.10.1.1.2 Kindergarten through grade 5.

Special hazards as identified by the authority having jurisdiction including retention ponds whose permanent water depth or whose water depth over a 24-hour period exceeds 1 foot (305 mm), deep drainage ditches, canals, highways, and play fields adjacent to roadways.

453.10.1.1.3 Kindergarten through grade 12.

All child care and kindergarten play areas.

453.10.2 Walks, roads, drives, and parking areas.

Walks, roads, drives, and parking areas on educational and ancillary sites shall be paved. Roads, drives, and parking areas shall be in compliance with Department of Transportation (DOT) road specifications and striped in compliance with DOT paint specifications. All paved areas shall have positive drainage.

453.10.2.1 Covered walks.

All buildings in K-12 educational facilities shall be connected by paved walks and accessible under continuous roof cover. New relocatable classroom buildings shall be connected to permanent buildings by paved covered walks where applicable. Roofs for covered walks shall extend 1 foot (305 mm) beyond each side of the designated walkway width. Gutters or other water funneling devices shall prevent storm water from pouring onto or draining across walks.

453.10.2.2 Accessible walks and bridges.

Accessible walks shall connect building entrance(s) to accessible parking, public transportation stops, public streets, sidewalks, loading and drop-off zones, and other facilities within the site as required by the accessibility standards. School board sites where educational plants are separated by highways shall be connected by overhead pedestrian bridges.

453.10.2.3

Reserved.

453.10.2.4 Vertical drops.

Walls, railings, or other physical barriers which are at least a minimum 12 inches (305 mm) in height, shall define and protect any vertical drop between joining or abutting surfaces of more than 6 inches (152 mm) but less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height. Any vertical drop of 18 inches (457 mm) or more shall be protected by a wall or guardrail a minimum of 42 inches (1067 mm) in height.

Exceptions:

1.	Guards are not required for the locations described in the exception to Section 1015.2.

2.	In assembly seating where guards in accordance with Section 1029.17.3 are permitted and provided.

453.10.2.5 Roads and streets.

Educational and ancillary site access shall consist of a primary road and another means of access to be used in the event the primary road is blocked. Stabilized wide shoulders of the primary road, unobstructed by landscaping, planters, light fixtures, poles, benches, etc., which allow a third lane of traffic, may satisfy the requirement for the other means of access. Driveways shall not completely encircle a school plant, to allow student access to play areas without crossing roads; vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall not cross each other on the site; bus driveways and parent pick-up areas shall be separated.

453.10.2.6 Bus drives.

Bus drives on educational sites shall be designed so that buses do not have to back up. The minimum width shall be 24 feet (7315 mm) for two-lane traffic. The turning radius on educational and ancillary sites and for turning off public access streets shall be as follows: one-way traffic, 60 feet (18 288 mm) minimum measured to the outside curb or edge of the traffic lane; two-way traffic, 60 feet (18 288 mm) minimum measured to the centerline of the road.

453.10.2.7 Vehicle parking areas.

Vehicle parking areas shall comply with minimum parking space requirements in this section. Except for parking space requirements to meet federal and state accessibility laws, where alternate transportation or parking arrangements are available the parking area requirements may be reduced from these standards if sufficient justification documentation is provided and if the review authority approves the reduction based on the justification. Overflow parking areas may utilize alternative parking surfaces which facilitate water absorption rather than runoff when approved for use by the review authority. This requirement usually applies to a percentage of the parking spaces, not all of them.

Exception: Accessible parking spaces shall be hard surface.

453.10.2.8 Minimum parking requirements.
453.10.2.8.1 Faculty and staff.

One space for each member.

453.10.2.8.2 Visitors.

One space for every 100 students.

453.10.2.8.3 Community clinics where provided.

Ten spaces, including one accessible space.

453.10.2.8.4 High schools.

One space for every 10 students in grades 11 and 12.

453.10.2.8.5 Vocational schools.

One space for every two students.

453.10.2.8.6 Florida colleges.

One space for every two students.

453.10.2.8.7 Accessible parking.

Parking spaces designated for persons with disabilities shall comply with the ADA, Florida Building Code, Accessibility, and Section 316.1955, Florida Statutes.

453.10.3 Site lighting required.

Design, construction, and installation of exterior security lighting for educational and ancillary facilities shall be provided for:

453.10.3.1 Auto, bus, and service drives and loading areas.
453.10.3.2 Parking areas.
453.10.3.3 Building perimeter.
453.10.3.4 Covered and connector walks between buildings and between buildings and parking.
453.10.3.5 Lighting for parking areas.

Parking area lighting standards shall be designed to withstand appropriate wind loads. Parking areas shall be illuminated to an average maintained horizontal footcandle, measured at the surface as follows:

453.10.3.5.1

Parking areas—1 footcandle (10 lux).

453.10.3.5.2

Covered and connector walks—1 footcandle (10 lux).

453.10.3.5.3

Entrances/exits—2 footcandles (20 lux).

453.10.3.6 Building exteriors.

Building exteriors, perimeters, and entrances may be illuminated to the minimum number of footcandles, measured at the surface with a suggested uniformity ratio of 2:1 as follows:

453.10.3.6.1

Entrances—5 footcandles (50 lux).

453.10.3.6.2

Building surrounds—1 footcandle (10 lux).

453.10.3.7 Shielding.

Exterior lighting shall be shielded from adjacent properties for all exterior lighting equipment as described in Sections 453.10.3.7.1 and 453.10.3.7.2.

Exception: Lighting used for the following exterior applications is exempt where equipped with a control device independent of the control of the nonexempt lighting:

1.	Specialized signal, directional and marker lighting associated with transportation.

2.	Advertising signage or directional signage.

3.	Lighting integral to equipment or instrumentation and installed by its manufacturer.

4.	Theatrical purposes, including performance, stage, film production and video production.

5.	Temporary lighting.

6.	Roadway lighting required by governmental authorities.

7.	Lighting used to highlight features of public monuments and registered landmark structures.

8.	Lighting classified for and used in hazardous areas.

9.	Lighting for swimming pools, spas and water features.

10.	Lighting for the national flag in light pollution zones B, C and D.

TABLE 453.10.3.7(1) LIGHT POLLUTION ZONES

LIGHT
POLLUTION
ZONE	DESCRIPTION
A	Rural and low-density residential areas such as, but not limited to: agricultural districts, one- and two-family residential communities, business parks, rural town centers, commercial or industrial areas with limited nighttime activity and the developed areas within parks and open space preserves
B	Light commercial business districts and high-density or mixed-use residential districts such as, but not limited to: neighborhood business districts, light industrial areas with moderate nighttime activity, multifamily residential uses, institutional residential uses, hospitals, hotels, motels, churches, schools and neighborhood recreation facilities
C	High-density commercial business districts, and heavy industrial or manufacturing areas such as, but not limited to: business districts in large cities, commercial corridors, high-density suburban commercial areas, town center mixed-use areas, industrial uses and shipping and rail yards with high nighttime activity, high-use recreation facilities, regional shopping malls, car dealerships, gas stations and other exterior retail areas with high nighttime activity
D	Areas such as, but not limited to: high-density entertainment districts and heavy industrial areas, where approved by the code official

TABLE 453.10.3.7(2) MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE BACKLIGHT RATINGSa, b, c

HORIZONTAL DISTANCE TO
LIGHTING BOUNDARY (HLB)
	LIGHT POLLUTION ZONE (LPZ)
A	B	C	D
HLB > 2hm	B3	B4	B5	B5
hm < HLB ≤ 2hm	B2	B3	B4	B4
0.5hm ≤ HLB ≤ hm	B1	B2	B3	B3
HLB < 0.5hm	B0	B0	B1	B2

hm = Mounting Height: The distance above finished grade at which a luminaire is mounted, measured to the midpoint of the luminaire.

a.	Backlight (B) ratings are defined by ANSI/IESNA TM-15-11 Addendum A.

b.	Luminaires located two mounting heights or less from the lighting boundary shall be installed with backlight towards the nearest lighting boundary, unless lighting a roadway, bikeway or walkway that intersects a public roadway.

c.	The rating shall be determined by the actual photometric geometry in the specified mounting orientation.

453.10.3.7.1 Light pollution zones.

The light pollution zone for the building site shall be determined from Table 453.10.3.7(1) unless otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.

453.10.3.7.2 Light trespass.

Exterior luminaires shall not exceed the applicable backlight ratings specified in Table 453.10.3.7(2).

453.10.4 Building setbacks.

Building setbacks from the property line, including relocatables, shall, at a minimum, be 25 feet (7620 mm) or shall comply with local setback requirements if less than 25 feet (7620 mm).

453.10.5 School board playgrounds, equipment, and athletic fields.

Playgrounds, equipment, and athletic fields shall be accessible, compatible with the educational facility served and shall comply with the following:

453.10.5.1

Kindergarten play areas shall be separated from other play areas, fenced, and shall be directly accessed from the kindergarten classrooms.

453.10.5.2

Direct access from the school buildings shall be provided to play areas and athletic fields without crossing public roads, on-site traffic lanes, and parking lots.

453.10.5.3

Related facilities such as toilets, concessions, storage, shower and locker rooms, bleachers, press boxes, observation platforms, scoreboards, and dugouts shall be designed to meet code requirements and the occupant capacity anticipated for the program.

453.10.6 Exterior signage.

All permanent and free-standing exterior signs shall be designed to withstand appropriate wind loads. Illuminated signs shall comply with the electrical and installation requirements of the Florida Building Code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal and ICC 500, as appropriate.

453.10.6.1

Site signage shall not create visual barriers at entrances, sidewalks, roads or road intersections.

453.10.6.2

Accessible routes, including parking, building directories, building identification, and accessible entrances shall be marked by exterior signage in conformance with federal and state accessibility laws.

453.10.7 Landscaping.

Refer to Section 1013.64(5), Florida Statutes, for school board and Florida college requirements. Florida-friendly landscaping is defined in Section 373.185, Florida Statutes.

453.10.8 Water irrigation systems.

Water irrigation systems shall be equipped with soil moisture sensors that will override the irrigation systems cycle when soil contains sufficient moisture.

453.10.9 School site master plan.

New schools shall include, as applicable: facility design capacity; flood plain locations; covered accessible walks; infrastructure locations for, and extensions of, technology, telephone, electricity, fire alarm; and, where applicable, water and sewer utilities, and relocatables.

453.11 Wood: fire-retardant-treated wood (FRTW).

FRTW shall not be used in permanent educational facilities.

Exception: Only FRTW which does not contain ammonium phosphates, sulfates, or halides, may be used in roof structures of noncombustible Type II ancillary facilities as allowed by the Florida Building Code, but only under the following conditions:

453.11.1 FRTW.

All FRTW must meet the requirements of Section 2303.2.

453.11.2

Inspection access panels shall be provided for annual inspection of the condition of the structure and the connectors.

453.11.3

Evidence of compliance shall be provided.

453.12 Roofing.
453.12.1 Class A materials.

All roofing materials shall be labeled Class A per ASTM E108 and shall be certified by a nationally recognized independent testing laboratory. All roofing systems shall be installed within the limitations of the test procedure for surfacing, deck cross slope, and combustibility.

453.12.2 Insulation and moisture protection.

Insulation, moisture protection, roofing, thermal requirements, fireproofing and firestopping shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the Florida Building Code and Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. Cellulose insulation may only be used if it is treated with fire-retardant borate based chemicals; the contractor shall retain bag labels on site for review by building inspector.

453.12.3 Phased installation prohibited.

All new installed materials shall be sealed from moisture penetration at the end of each day. The contractor shall provide the architect/engineer (A/E) of record a “final statement of compliance” for the board.

453.12.4 Manufacturer’s one-year inspection.

The roof shall be inspected by the manufacturer’s representative within one year of acceptance by the board.

453.12.5 Exterior stairways.

Exterior stairways serving as a means of egress shall be roofed.

453.13 Doors and windows.
453.13.1 Doors.

All spaces with an occupant load of six or more students, regardless of use, shall have a door opening directly to the exterior, or as required in the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, in buildings of three stories or less shall have a rescue window opening directly to the exterior, or shall be fully sprinklered. All doors and gates from spaces with an occupant load of six or more students, regardless of use or location, shall swing in the direction of exit travel, shall be of the side-hinged type, and shall always be operable from the inside by a single operation and without a key.

453.13.1.1

Doors for steam rooms, locker rooms, shower rooms and group toilet rooms shall swing in the direction of exit travel, and shall always be operable for exiting from the inside.

453.13.1.2

No mirrors, draperies, curtains, equipment, furnishings, decorations, or other objects which may confuse, obstruct, or conceal the exit or the direction of exit shall be placed to obstruct a means of egress.

453.13.2 Recessed.

Doors when fully opened shall not extend into the required exit width of corridors, except for door thickness and required hardware. Doors may either be recessed and hinged to swing 90 degrees, or if flush with corridor wall shall contain a view panel and be hinged to swing 180 degrees.

453.13.3 Special function doors.

Special function doors, including balanced doors and overhead doors, shall not be used in a means of egress.

453.13.4 Overhead and sliding security grilles.

Security grilles shall have an adjacent side-hinged door swinging in the direction of exit and readily opened from the inside.

453.13.5 Gates.

Gates used to secure buildings or used for egress shall be side-hinged and readily opened from the side from which egress is to be made without the use of a key or special tool, or shall have an adjacent side-hinged door, or doors as required for occupant load, swinging in the direction of exit and readily opened from the inside without a key.

453.13.6 Hardware.

Doors and gates shall be equipped with hardware which will allow egress at all times without assistance. No padlock, chain, hasp, lock, deadbolt, or other device shall be installed at any time on any door used for exiting. Doors which by code require closers and other doors subject to wind exposure shall be equipped with closers to prevent slamming and uncontrolled opening. All doors opening into smoke-tight exit access corridors shall be self-closing or automatic closing. Smoke doors in walls used to divide corridors into separate atmospheres shall be provided with push-pull plates and are not required to have positive latching. As an exception to Section 1010.2.13, delayed egress locks may be used in media centers, alternative education centers, and exceptional student education centers.

453.13.7 Safety glazing: panels and storefronts.

In addition to the requirements of Section 2406.4, the following is considered a hazardous location and requires safety glazing: glazed panels within 48 inches (1219 mm) of a door, excluding transoms or vertical panels above 6 feet 8 inches (2031 mm).

453.13.7.1

All glazing in hazardous locations shall be safety glazing meeting the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building, Section 2406.

453.13.7.2

Large glass panels shall be subdivided by a built-in horizontal member or a permanent chair rail not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in width, located between 24 and 36 inches (610 and 914 mm) above the floor.

453.13.8 Windows.
453.13.8.1 Natural light and ventilation.

Natural light and ventilation requirements for new construction shall be satisfied by windows with operable glazing, providing a net free open area equivalent to 5 percent of the floor area, in all classrooms on the perimeter of buildings, where required by Chapter 1013, Florida Statutes. Auxiliary spaces, music rooms, gyms, locker and shower facilities, laboratories requiring special climate control, and large group instructional spaces having a capacity of more than 100 persons need not have operable windows for the purpose of providing natural light and ventilation. Emergency access, emergency rescue, and secondary means of egress windows maybe included in the calculation to comply with this requirement.

453.13.8.2 Projecting and awning windows.

Projecting and awning windows shall not be located below door head height if in, or adjacent to, a play area, a corridor or walkway.

453.13.8.3 Security/storm screens or grilles.

If a security/storm screen or grille is installed on the outside of an emergency access, rescue or egress window assembly then that security/storm screen or grille together with the emergency rescue window assembly shall be operable from the inside by a single operation without the use of tools to allow for exit under emergency conditions. The emergency rescue window shall be identified by signage, and the release device shall be readily identifiable.

453.14 Special safety requirements.
453.14.1 Master control switch.

In addition to the regular main supply cut-off, each laboratory-type space (such as biology, industrial, chemistry, physics, home economics, and electronics labs) equipped with unprotected gas cocks, compressed air valves, water or electric services which are easily accessible to students, shall have master control valves or switches with permanently attached handles, located and accessible within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the instructor’s station or adjacent to the primary egress door within that space to allow for emergency cut-off of services. The cut-offs shall be in a nonlockable place and the location and operation shall be clearly labeled. Valves shall completely shut off with a one-quarter turn. Computer labs are exempted from this requirement. (Also, see “Emergency shut off switches,” and “Emergency disconnects” requirements under “Electrical.”)

453.14.2 Interior signage.

Signage is required in educational and ancillary facilities. Design, construction, installation, and location of interior signage and graphics shall comply with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal and the following:

453.14.2.1 Emergency rescue windows.

Windows for emergency rescue shall comply with NFPA 101 as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, shall be operable from the inside by a single operation, and shall be labeled “EMERGENCY RESCUE—KEEP AREA CLEAR.” Hinged emergency rescue windows shall swing in the direction of egress.

453.14.2.2

Maximum capacity signs in each space with a capacity of 50 or more occupants. The signs shall be mounted adjacent to the main entrance door.

453.14.2.3

Room name, room number and, if different, FISH inventory numbers shall be provided for each space.

453.14.2.4

A graphic diagram of primary and emergency evacuation routes shall be posted adjacent to the primary exit door from each space occupied by six or more students. The diagram shall clearly indicate, by contrasting color and number, each route of evacuation.

453.14.2.5

Signs necessary to meet accessibility requirements shall be provided.

453.14.2.6

Hazardous work and storage areas shall be identified by appropriate caution signs.

453.14.3 Other potential hazards.

Pipes, ductwork, fans, light fixtures, window projections, protruding sharp corners, or other potential hazards shall not be installed below 6 feet 8 inches (2031 mm) AFF. Audio/visual aids in classrooms may be mounted below 6 feet 8 inches (2031 mm) provided they are marked and padded in accordance with accepted safety standards or have permanent cabinets installed below them.

453.14.4 Storage shelving.

Shelving shall not have sharp corners, splinters, or any construction feature that would be hazardous to the occupants. Shelving shall be constructed to carry the loads imposed. Shelving in science labs, shop storage rooms, and other places which may contain hazardous materials shall have a 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) lip on the front edge of each shelf and shall be constructed of noncorrosive material.

453.14.5 Vertical platform lifts and inclined wheelchair lifts.

The following standards are in addition to the other requirements of the Florida Building Code Florida law, and federal requirements:

453.14.5.1

Lifts shall not reduce the width of required means of egress.

453.14.5.2

Lifts shall have shielding devices to protect users from the machinery or other hazards and obstructions.

453.14.5.3

Lifts shall be key operated for attendant operation in all facilities housing kindergarten to grade 8.

453.14.5.4

Inclined wheelchair lifts may be installed in facilities provided:

453.14.5.4.1

The platform is equipped with bidirectional ramp sensing to stop travel if obstructions are encountered.

453.14.5.4.2

Guide rails are smooth and continuous with no sharp edges or obstructions, all drive system components contain safety features for protection of users, and cables and pulling devices are shielded.

453.14.6 Color code machinery.

Working machinery with component parts shall be color-coded in accordance with ANSI Z535.1, American National Standard Safety Color Code for Marking Physical Hazards. Safety zone lines shall be marked on the floor areas surrounding working machinery.

453.14.7 Anchor equipment.

All equipment designed to be permanently mounted shall be securely anchored to its supporting surface.

453.14.8 Interior finishes.
453.14.8.1 Floors.

Floors in instructional spaces shall be covered with resilient material or carpet.

453.15 Mechanical.
453.15.1 Gas and fluid piping.
453.15.1.1 Flammable liquids/gases.

Piping systems for flammable liquids or gases shall not be installed in interior corridors or stairwells.

Exception: Piping may be located within corridors provided that they are enclosed in a minimum 1-hour fire-rated enclosure.

453.15.1.2 Piping systems.

Piping (fluid system) shall not be run where students can access the pipes, or in areas such as on roofs where they can be damaged by routine or periodic maintenance activities.

453.15.1.3 Main supply valve.

The main supply cutoffs for flammable liquids or gases shall shut down upon activation of the fire alarm system. Refer to the automatic shutoff requirements of Section 453.7.6.

453.15.2 Air plenums.

Corridors shall not be used as a supply, return, exhaust, relief, or ventilation air plenum. The space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above, if used as a plenum, shall be constructed with the ceiling, floor and walls as a minimum 1-hour fire-rated assembly or as a 1-hour fire-rated horizontal wall supported by the corridor walls.

Exception: A smoke-tight corridor with a solid ceiling may be used in a fully sprinklered building.

453.15.3 Residential equipment.

In home economics instructional spaces, faculty lounges, and similar areas where small residential-type ranges are installed for staff use or student education, residential-type hoods mechanically exhausted to the outside shall be used. Hood fire suppression systems are not required to be installed. A fire extinguisher shall be located within 15 feet (457 mm) of the range within the same room, and shall meet the type and size requirements of NFPA 10.

453.15.4

Reserved.

453.15.5 Ventilation air make-up for HVAC systems.

The minimum outdoor airflow rate shall be determined in accordance with Section 403.3.1.1, Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Ventilation supply systems shall be designed to deliver the required rate of outdoor airflow to the breathing zone within each occupiable space. In accordance with Section 401.3, Florida Building Code, Mechanical, this ventilation shall be provided during the periods that the room or space is occupied.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the registered design professional demonstrates that an engineered ventilation system design will prevent the maximum concentration of contaminants from exceeding that obtainable by the rate of outdoor air ventilation determined in accordance with Section 403.3.1.1, Florida Building Code, Mechanical, the minimum required rate of outdoor air shall be reduced in accordance with such engineered system design. In accordance with Section 401.3, Florida Building Code, Mechanical, this ventilation shall be provided during the periods that the room or space is occupied.

2.	Where peak occupancies of less than 3 hours duration occur, the outdoor air flow may be determined on the basis of average occupancy for school buildings for the duration of operation of the air-conditioning system, provided the average occupancy used is not less than one-half the maximum.

453.16 Plumbing.
453.16.1 Standards.

INSIGHTS

Educational and ancillary facilities shall be provided with toilets, hand washing facilities, and drinking fountains for all occupants, in ratios and accessible as required by the Florida Building Code, Florida law, and federal requirements.

Exception: Unisex toilets shall not be provided in addition to group toilets in assembly occupancies.

 INSIGHTS (1)
453.16.1.1 Assembly occupancies.

Toilet facilities for assembly occupancies (i.e. media centers, gymnasiums, cafetoriums, and auditoriums) are not required to be in addition to the overall required plumbing fixture count.

453.16.1.2 Location.

Student toilets shall be distributed throughout the facility and located on each floor for convenient access and continuous supervision. The path of travel to the nearest toilet facility shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet (60 960 mm).

453.16.2 Public shelter.

Refer to the public shelter design criteria of Section 453.25.

453.16.3

Reserved.

453.16.4

Reserved.

453.16.5 Exterior entries.

Exterior entries to toilet rooms shall have outward swinging doors.

453.16.6

Reserved.

453.16.7 Delayed closing valves.

Water supply at toilet room lavatories shall be controlled by delayed-closing valves.

453.16.8 Shower facilities.

Showers shall be provided only where required by the district’s educational program and, where provided, shall utilize energy saving concepts for hot water as required by Section 1013.44(2), Florida Statutes. When provided, shower areas shall comply with the following:

453.16.8.1

Floor finish shall be slip resistant.

453.16.8.2

A master control valve shall be provided to control the shower heads. Showers shall be equipped with flow control devices to limit total flow to a maximum of 3 gpm (0.19 L/s) per shower head.

453.16.9 Kitchens.

Kitchens and food service areas shall be provided with toilet and hand washing facilities for employees as required by code, state rule and statute.

453.16.9.1

A minimum of one water closet and one lavatory with hot and cold water shall be provided in each staff toilet.

453.16.10 Dousing shower and eye wash.

Every science lab, or shop shall be provided with a dousing shower and eye wash for emergency use, including a floor drain.

453.17 Electrical.
453.17.1 Emergency lighting.

Emergency lighting shall be provided at internal and external means of egress, in student-occupied areas, in group toilets, and main electrical rooms.

453.17.2 Electrical rooms and closets.

Main service panels and switches, electrical distribution panels, cabinets, and rooms shall be lockable and not readily accessible to teachers or students.

453.17.3 Spare capacity.

Lighting and power panels shall be provided with a minimum of 20-percent spare breakers and a minimum of 10-percent spare capacity in all main panels and switchboards.

453.17.4 Emergency shutoff switches.

Every laboratory space which has electrical receptacles at student workstations shall have an emergency shutoff switch within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the instructor’s workstation. The emergency shutoff switch shall be operable by a single motion and shall interrupt power to all receptacles in the room.

Exception: Emergency shutoff switches are not required in computer laboratories.

453.17.5 Emergency disconnect.

Each space equipped with electrically powered machinery accessible to students shall have a minimum of two master emergency disconnect switches at convenient locations within the space to shut off all power tool outlets, power to student accessible machines and receptacles in the shop. One emergency shutoff or disconnect switch shall be located near the machinery and one emergency shutoff or disconnect switch shall be located in the instructor’s office if there is a clear view of the entire shop area, others may be required and located as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. The emergency disconnect or shutoff switch shall be operable by a single motion.

Exception: Ordinary office machines, computers, sewing machines, potter’s wheels, residential cooking equipment in home economics labs and other nonhazardous machines do not require emergency disconnect devices.

453.17.6 Sauna and steam rooms.

A “panic” switch to deactivate power to heating equipment shall be provided inside sauna and steam rooms. The panic switch shall also be tied into an alarm or other approved warning device in a supervised space in the area of the sauna and/or steam room. The operation of the switch shall be labeled to indicate the intended function.

453.17.7 Lightning.

All facilities in high lightning risk areas shall be evaluated using the Risk Assessment Guide in NFPA 780 and other standards which address lightning protection, and shall be protected accordingly.

453.17.8 Ground-fault circuit-interrupter (GFCI) protection for personnel.

GFCI protection of receptacles shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 70, National Electrical Code and in the following locations:

1.	All elementary special needs, prekindergarten and kindergarten classroom receptacles.

2.	All building entry vestibule receptacles.

3.	All mechanical, boiler and electrical room receptacles.

453.18 Assembly occupancies in public educational facilities.
453.18.1

Occupant capacity for egress shall be in accordance with Table 1004.5 except as follows:

453.18.1.1 Dressing rooms.

Dressing rooms at 20 net square feet (1.86 m2) per person.

453.18.1.2 Gymnasium.

The number of fixed and telescopic bench-type bleacher seats —plus the main court area at 15 gross square feet (1.4 m2) per person, plus locker rooms at 5 net square feet (0.5 m2) per person.

453.18.1.3 Classrooms and labs.

If spaces are combined through the use of folding partitions, the capacity and exiting shall be based on the capacity of all the spaces joined.

453.18.1.4 Small group areas in media centers.

Small group room or area (view and preview) in media centers at 5 net square feet (0.5 m2) per person.

453.18.1.5 Closed circuit television production, distribution, and control.

The main floor area at 15 net square feet (1.4 m2) per person.

453.18.1.6 Enclosed courtyards.

The enclosed courtyard area at 15 gross square feet (1.4 m2) per person. Raised, dedicated landscape areas may be deducted.

453.19 Shade and green houses.
453.19.1 General.

Shade/green houses shall be of Type I or II construction (metal frame) capable of withstanding the appropriate wind load.

453.19.2 Unrestricted exiting.

The location of the shade/ green house shall not hinder exiting from new and/or existing structures.

453.19.3 Required doors.

A minimum of two doors remotely located shall be provided. Doors shall be side hinged and shall swing in the direction of egress.

453.19.4 Accessibility.

Green houses shall meet accessibility requirements. The accessible walkway shall be connected to doors leading to an accessible route to the permanent structure.

453.19.5 Shade cloth.

Shade cloth shall be tear-away fabric securely fastened to the structural frame.

453.19.6 Fire extinguisher.

A minimum of one Type 2A-10B:C fire extinguisher shall be provided per shade/green house.

453.19.7 Fire alarm.

Fire alarm pull stations shall be located within 200 feet (60 960 mm) of any shade or green house. Fire alarm notification appliances mounted on a permanent building must be audible inside the shade/green house.

453.19.8 Space heaters.

Space heaters, when provided, shall be mounted at least 6 feet 8 inches (2031 mm) AFF.

453.20 Storage.
453.20.1 General storage.

Storage rooms and closets shall not be located over or under exit stairs and ramps whether interior or exterior. General storage space(s) shall be included in every educational facility for the bulk storage of materials, supplies, equipment, and books. Storage rooms shall be separated from mechanical and electrical spaces. Storage spaces shall be mechanically ventilated and conditioned as appropriate for the type of materials to be stored. Sinks located in general storage rooms shall not be used for custodial services.

453.20.2 Custodial work areas and storage.

Provide custodial work areas with well supported shelving for supplies, cleaning, and sanitation materials and an office area including male/female lockers and toilet facilities.

453.20.3 Custodial closets and storage.

Custodial closets shall be provided with storage shelving and a service sink supplied with both hot and cold water. They shall be located to serve each instructional floor and wing regardless of floor area, and other areas such as stage, kitchen, gym, auditorium, clinic, offices and shops. The travel distance to the nearest custodial closet shall not exceed 150 feet (45.72 m).

453.20.4 Chemical and hazardous materials storage.

In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal for separation and protection, chemical and hazardous storage facilities shall also include:

453.20.4.1 Chemical storage.

Doors shall be lockable from the outside and operable at all times from the inside. Rooms shall be well illuminated. Cabinets shall have shelves with a 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) lip on the front and shall be constructed of noncorrosive material.

453.20.4.2 Hazardous materials storage.

Buildings and/or rooms used for the storage, handling and disposal of flammable, poisonous, or hazardous materials or liquids, and equipment powered by internal combustion engines and their fuels shall be separated from adjacent spaces by 1-hour fire-rated assemblies. These requirements also apply to completely detached buildings within 60 feet (18 288 mm) of student-occupied facilities. Doors shall have a C Label and open directly to the exterior. Storage buildings and/or rooms shall be mechanically ventilated. Electrical fixtures, switches, heat detectors and outlets installed in flammable storage rooms shall be explosion proof.

453.20.5 Custodial receiving.

Custodial receiving where chemicals that are dangerous to human tissue are stored, handled, or mixed shall be equipped with a dousing shower and eye wash, including a floor drain.

453.21 Child care/day care/prekindergarten facilities.
453.21.1

Child care/day care/prekindergarten facilities located on board-owned property shall comply with the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal and the specific criteria in this section. Child care/day care/prekindergarten facilities requiring a license from another agency may also be required to comply with additional construction requirements imposed by that agency.

453.21.2

Toilet facilities shall meet accessibility requirements and should open into the instructional space. The toilet may be used by both sexes and shall contain a water closet, lavatory and related accessories.

453.21.3

If child care facilities are provided with a bathing area, it shall be within or adjacent to the child care area and shall contain either a shower with hand-held sprayer or a tub. The water temperature shall be controlled by a mixing valve and shall not exceed 110°F (43°C).

453.21.4

Toilet facilities shall have a nonslip impervious floor and 6-foot (1829 mm) impervious wainscot.

453.21.5

Drinking fountain(s) shall be provided for the children and be within close proximity of the child care facility.

453.21.6

A towel and soap dispenser shall be provided at each sink. Hand wash areas for adults shall be provided with warm water; the water temperature shall be controlled by a mixing valve and shall not exceed 110°F (43°C). All electrical receptacles shall be placed out of reach of the children.

453.21.7

When provided, a residential-type kitchen shall include a nonslip floor, a refrigerator, a residential range, a residential-type range hood mechanically exhausted to the outside, and a fire extinguisher located within 15 feet (457 mm) of the range within the same room.

453.21.8

Areas designated for children’s sleeping mats, cots or cribs shall include a clearly marked exit passageway.

453.21.9

The child care facility shall not contain any storage of cleaning agents, chemicals, or other hazardous materials in student accessible areas.

453.21.10

Outdoor play areas shall be provided and shall be protected from access to streets or other dangers. The play area shall be fenced or walled to a minimum height of 4 feet (1219 mm) and any latches on maintenance gates shall be secured or beyond the reach of the children.

453.21.11

Shade shall be provided in the play area (a covered play area may be provided).

453.21.12

Play equipment shall be firmly anchored, free of sharp corners or pointed surfaces, and shall have cushioning surfaces such as mats or sand beneath.

453.21.13

The grounds shall be free of undergrowth or harmful plant material.

453.22 Clinics.
453.22.1

Clinics in kindergarten through grade 12 (K–12), vocational-technical centers (VTC), and full service schools shall comply with the general criteria found in the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, as well as the specific criteria found herein. Clinics shall be located and equipped to provide emergency aid to students. Closets and storage cabinets used for medications and bandages shall have locks, and shall be designed to be under constant supervision.

453.22.2

School clinics shall include locked storage, toilet room and shower, and bed space.

453.22.3

Sanitary facilities are required as follows:

453.22.3.1

Elementary school clinics, including kinder-garten, shall include at a minimum one accessible toilet room, to serve male and female students, complete with a water closet, lavatory, accessible shower, changing table, and accessories.

453.22.3.2

Secondary and VTC school clinics shall include two accessible toilet rooms complete with water closet, lavatory, accessories and shower.

453.22.3.3

Toilet rooms in clinics shall include both hot and cold water at the showers and all lavatories. The water temperature shall be controlled by a mixing valve and shall not exceed 110°F (43°C).

453.22.3.4

Toilet rooms shall have exhaust fans vented to the exterior.

453.22.3.5

A working counter top with lavatory/sink and hot water shall be provided in each clinic.

453.22.4

The bed area shall be designed to maintain constant visual supervision from the office. Space for student beds shall be provided in each clinic at 50 square feet (4.6 m2) per bed. Space for beds in secondary and VTC schools shall be equally divided for male and female students. Beds shall be provided based on student capacity in the following ratios:

453.22.4.1

Up to 500 students—three beds.

453.22.4.2

501 to 1,000 students—four beds.

453.22.4.3

1,001 to 2,000 students—five beds.

453.22.4.4

Over 2,000—six beds.

453.22.5 Full-service school health clinics.
453.22.5.1 Location.

Clinics shall be located to provide a direct accessible route from the exterior and from the interior or by a connecting covered walk.

453.22.5.2 Parking.

Clinics shall be provided with 10 designated parking spaces immediately adjacent to the clinic, one of which shall be accessible to persons with disabilities.

453.22.5.3 Sanitary facilities.

Sanitary facilities are required as follows:

453.22.5.3.1 

INSIGHTS

Full-service school clinics shall include one accessible toilet room for males and one for females, complete with water closet, lavatory, accessories, and shower. Additional toilets may be required for a full-service school clinic depending on occupant load and program.

 INSIGHTS (1)
453.22.5.3.2

Hot and cold water shall be provided at the showers and lavatories. The water temperature shall be controlled by a mixing valve and shall not exceed 110°F (43°C).

453.22.5.3.3

Toilet rooms shall have exhaust fans vented to the exterior.

453.22.5.3.4

A nurses’ station shall be provided with a working counter with lavatory/sink and be located so as to maintain visual supervision of the bed area.

453.22.5.4

Locked storage rooms shall be provided for a refrigerator, files, equipment, and supplies.

453.22.5.5

Data outlets shall be provided for computer hook-ups and computer networking and additional electric outlets shall be provided for hearing and vision testing machines.

453.23 Kilns.

Kilns shall not be located near or adjacent to paths of egress or exit and shall be placed in separate rooms when serving students through grade 3. Kiln rooms shall be provided with appropriate smoke/heat detectors connected to the fire alarm system.

453.24 Open plan schools.

An open plan building or portion of a building may be subdivided into smaller areas by use of low partitions [maximum 5 feet high (1524 mm)], movable partitions, or movable furnishing, which by location and type do not hinder or obstruct the ability of persons in one area of the plan to be immediately aware of an emergency condition in any other area of the plan. Corridors shall be identified with different color or type of flooring materials, by permanent low partitions or by other means to prevent blockage of the path of egress to exits by partitions or furniture. When open plan schools are partitioned, the work shall conform to the code requirements for new construction. Demountable or movable partitions in open plan classroom areas shall be a maximum of 5 feet (1524 mm) in height and shall terminate a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) from any permanent wall. All circulation openings in open plan areas shall be a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) wide. Movable furnishings shall not exceed 5 feet (1524 mm) in height and shall have a stable base.

453.25 Public shelter design criteria.
453.25.1 New facilities.

New educational facilities for school boards and Florida college boards, unless specifically exempted by the board with the written concurrence of the applicable local emergency management agency or the Florida Division of Emergency Management (DEM), shall have appropriate areas designed as enhanced hurricane protection areas (EHPAs) in compliance with this section.

Exception: Facilities located, or proposed to be located, in a Category A, B or C evacuation zone shall not be subject to these requirements.

453.25.1.1 Enhanced hurricane protection areas (EHPAs).

The EHPAs shall provide emergency shelter and protection for people for a minimum period of 24 hours during a hurricane.

453.25.1.1.1

The EHPA criteria applies only to the specific portions of (K–12) and Florida college educational facilities that are designated as EHPAs.

453.25.1.2

The EHPAs and related spaces shall serve the primary educational or auxiliary use during nonshelter occupancy.

453.25.2 Site.

Factors such as low evacuation demand, size, location, accessibility and storm surge may be considered by the board, with written concurrence of the local emergency management agency or the DEM, in exempting a particular facility.

453.25.2.1 Emergency access.

EHPAs shall have at least one route for emergency vehicle access. The emergency route shall be above the 100-year flood plain. This requirement may be waived by the board, with concurrence of the local emergency management agency or the DEM.

453.25.2.2 Landscaping.

Landscaping around the EHPAs shall be designed to preserve safety and emergency access. Trees shall not conflict with the functioning of overhead or underground utility lines, or cause laydown or impact hazard to the building envelope.

453.25.2.3 Parking.

During an emergency condition, vehicle parking shall be prohibited within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of an EHPA. Designated EHPA parking areas may be unpaved.

453.25.2.4 Signage.

Floor plans of the facility, indicating EHPAs, shall be mounted in the emergency manager’s office/area.

453.25.3 Design.

EHPAs may be above or below ground and may have more than one story, provided the design satisfies the wind load and missile impact criteria. Modular and open-plan buildings may serve as EHPAs provided the design satisfies the wind load and missile impact criteria.

453.25.3.1 Excluded spaces.

Spaces such as mechanical and electrical rooms, storage rooms, open corridors, kitchens, science rooms and labs, vocational shop areas and labs, computer rooms and labs, attic and crawl spaces shall be excluded from EHPA capacity calculations.

453.25.3.2 Capacity.

Fifty percent of the net square feet of a designated educational facility shall be constructed as EHPAs. The net square feet shall be determined by subtracting from the gross square feet those spaces, such as mechanical and electrical rooms, storage rooms, open corridors, kitchens, science rooms and labs, vocational shop areas and labs, computer rooms, attic and crawl spaces, that shall be excluded from EHPA capacity calculations. The board, with concurrence of the applicable local emergency management agency or DEM, may adjust this requirement if it is determined to be in its best interest. The capacity of an EHPA shall be calculated at 20 square feet (1.86 m2) per occupant (adults and children five years or older). The capacity of a special needs EHPA shall be calculated at 60 square feet (5.57 m2) per occupant (adults and children five years or older).

453.25.3.3 Toilets.

Toilet and hand-washing facilities should be located within the EHPAs and provided at one toilet and one sink per 40 occupants. These required toilet and hand-washing facilities are not in addition to those required for normal school occupancy and shall be included in the overall facility fixture count.

453.25.3.3.1

Support systems for the toilets, e.g., bladders, portable toilets, water storage tanks, etc., shall be capable of supplying water and containing waste, for the designed capacity of the EHPAs.

453.25.3.3.2

Plumbing and valve systems of “normal” toilets within the EHPAs may be designed for conversion to emergency operation to meet the required demand.

453.25.3.4 Food service.

Where feasible, include counter tops for food distribution functions in the EHPAs.

453.25.3.5 Manager’s office.

An administration office normally used by a school administrator shall be identified as the EHPA manager’s office and shall be located within the EHPA. The office shall have provisions for standby power, lighting, communications, main fire alarm control panel and storage for the manager’s equipment.

453.25.4 Structural standard for wind loads.

At a minimum, EHPAs shall be designed for hurricane wind loads in accordance with ICC 500.

453.25.4.1 Enclosure classifications.

Enclosure classifications for EHPAs shall be determined in accordance with ASCE 7, Section 26.2.

453.25.4.2 Mechanical ventilation.

EHPAs shall have mechanical ventilation systems. Ventilation shall be provided at a minimum rate of 2 cfm per square foot (0.6 m3/min. per square meter) of EHPA floor area. The mechanical ventilation system shall be connected to the EHPA’s emergency power.

453.25.4.3 Exterior envelope.

The exterior envelope, louvers over air intakes and vents, and gooseneck-type intakes and vents of EHPAs shall be designed and installed to meet the wind load and missile impact criteria in accordance with ICC 500.

453.25.4.3.1

HVAC equipment mounted on roofs and anchoring systems shall be designed and installed to meet the wind load criteria.

453.25.4.3.2

Roof-mounted HVAC equipment shall have a 12-inch-high (305 mm) curb around the roof opening and be designed to prevent the entry of rain water.

Exception: Exposed mechanical equipment or appliances fastened to a roof or installed on the ground in compliance with the code using rated stands, platforms, curbs, slabs, walls, or other means are deemed to comply with the wind-resistance requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, as amended. Further support or enclosure of such mechanical equipment or appliances is not required by a state or local official having authority to enforce the Florida Building Code.

453.25.5 Electrical and standby emergency power system.

The EHPA shall be provided with a standby emergency electrical power system, per Chapter 27, NFPA 70 Articles 700 and 701, which shall have the capability of being connected to a backup generator or other optional power source. Where economically feasible, an equivalent photovoltaic system may be provided. The EHPA’s emergency systems include, but are not limited to: (1) an emergency lighting system, (2) illuminated exit signs, (3) fire protection system(s), alarm (campus wide) and sprinkler, and (4) minimum ventilation for health/safety purposes. The fire alarm panel shall be located in the EHPA manager’s office. A remote annunciator panel shall be located in or adjacent to the school administrator’s office. When generators are installed, the facility housing the generator, permanent or portable, shall be an enclosed area designed to protect the generators from wind and missile impact. Air intakes and exhausts shall be designed and installed to meet the wind load and missile impact criteria. Generators hardened by the manufacturer to withstand the area’s design wind and missile impact criteria shall be exempt from the enclosed area criteria requirement.

453.25.5.1 EHPA lighting.

Emergency lighting shall be provided within the EHPA, EHPA manager’s office, toilet rooms, main electrical room and generator spaces and shall be at least 10 footcandles (100 lux) of general illumination, which can be reduced to 1/2 footcandle (5 lux) in the sleeping areas during the night.

453.25.5.2 Optional standby systems.

Additional non-life safety systems, as defined by Chapter 27 and NFPA 70 Article 702 (Optional Standby Systems), may be supplied power, if available, by the standby emergency power system. These systems shall be connected to the standby emergency power system via an electrical subpanel to the standby electrical power system’s main electrical panel. This will allow selective or total load shedding of power if required. The fire alarm, emergency lighting and illuminated exit signs throughout the entire campus shall receive first priority to power provided by the standby emergency power system per Chapter 27 and NFPA 70 Article 700. The systems listed are not all-encompassing but are in order of priority. Local officials may request additional systems they deem necessary for health, welfare and safety of the public during occupancy:

1.	Remainder of the school’s campus security lighting (building and site).

2.	Additional ventilation systems within the EHPA, including heat.

3.	Intercom system.

4.	Food storage equipment.

5.	Additional electric receptacles, other than those required by Section 453.25.5.3.

453.25.5.3 Receptacle outlets.

A minimum of four electrical outlets, served with power from the standby circuits, shall be provided in the EHPA manager’s office.

453.25.6 Inspections.

EHPAs shall be considered “threshold buildings” in accordance with Section 553.71(12), Florida Statutes, and shall comply with Sections 553.79(5), 553.79(7), and 553.79(9), Florida Statutes.

453.25.6.1

Construction of EHPAs shall be inspected during the construction process by certified building code inspectors or the design architect/engineer(s) certified pursuant to Part XII Chapter 468, Florida Statutes and threshold inspectors for compliance with applicable rules and laws.

453.25.6.2

The emergency electrical systems shall be inspected during the construction process by certified electrical inspector or Florida-registered professional engineers certified pursuant to Part XII Chapter 468, Florida Statutes, skilled in electrical design.

453.25.6.3

All shutter systems, roofs, overflow scuppers, and structural systems of EHPAs shall be inspected and maintained annually prior to hurricane season and after a major event. All emergency generators shall be inspected under load conditions including activation of the fire alarms, emergency lights in accordance with applicable equipment codes and NFPA standards, and including mechanical systems and receptacles connected to the emergency power.

453.26

Reserved.

453.27 New relocatable buildings.
453.27.1 Relocatables.

The terms “relocatable” and “portable” are interchangeable and both terms are used to describe buildings which are constructed to the same building codes as permanent public school buildings, except they are designed to be moved. These buildings may be manufactured in a plant, constructed on site, may be made of demountable components, and may be combined. All new relocatable or portable classrooms shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the Florida Building Code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal and the Department of Business and Professional Regulation rules for factory-built school buildings (see Section 458). The requirements for new relocatables contained herein are in addition to the minimum requirements of the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal. New relocatables which do not comply with the building codes, fire codes and these standards shall not be used as classrooms or for any other student occupancy.

453.27.1.1

Factory-built school shelter means any site-assembled or factory-built school building that is designed to be portable, relocatable, demountable or reconstructable and that complies with the provisions for EHPAs, as required by the applicable code (see Section 453.25).

453.27.2 Design, plan approval, construction.

Regardless of cost or fund source, whether used for classroom, auxiliary or ancillary space, whether leased, purchased, contracted, or constructed by the school board or Florida college board, plans and documents for relocatables, portables and modular schools shall be prepared by Florida registered design professionals and submitted to the authority having jurisdiction for review and approval for compliance with Florida laws, rules, building and life safety codes. The buildings shall be constructed and inspected by personnel licensed, certified or trained as required by Florida construction industry licensing laws.

453.27.2.1 District-wide foundation plans.

District-wide foundation plans for tie down and wind resistance for each type of relocatable and each type of known soil condition in the district, shall be prepared and reviewed at the time of the design and shall be required as a part of the approval of any relocatable. These documents shall be kept on file in the district, with an additional copy in each relocatable filed together with current annual local fire inspection reports, as required by law. The foundation plans shall be reviewed and updated when necessary for compliance with current code for subsequent installations of the relocatable. Relocatables which do not meet the requirements of code for tie down and wind resistance shall not be occupied.

453.27.2.2 DOT requirements.

Relocatable units designed to be moved on state roads shall comply with the maximum unit height, length and width requirements of DOT.

453.27.2.3 Inventory/construction date signage.

A FISH inventory room number and the date of construction shall be noted on an inventory sign permanently affixed outside, beside or above the door, on all relocatables owned or leased by a district.

453.27.3 Construction type.

All new relocatables constructed, purchased or otherwise acquired by a board shall be noncombustible Type I, II or IV construction.

453.27.4 Accessibility.

All relocatables constructed, purchased or otherwise acquired by a board after the effective date of these standards shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act as modified by Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, Florida Building Code, Accessibility. Relocatables intended for use at facilities housing up to grades 5 or 6, shall also conform to the federal criteria ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Building Elements Designed for Children’s Use, which is available from the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.

453.27.5 Site standards/site plan.

Relocatables placed on educational plant sites shall comply with federal and state laws and rules relating to the placement of structures on sites, as well as building code, fire code site requirements.

453.27.5.1 Flood plain.

Compliance with flood plain standards is required for the initial and subsequent installation of public educational relocatable units. The finished floor shall be 12 inches (305 mm) above base flood elevation, the structure shall be designed to meet the Florida Building Code and anchored to resist buoyant forces.

453.27.5.2 Covered walks and technology.

New relocatables and “modular schools” acquired by a board which are intended for long-term use, shall be connected from exit door to the core facilities by accessible covered walkways, and shall contain wiring and computer technologies which connect to the facility’s technology, communications and fire alarms infrastructure.

Exceptions:

1.	Covered walks and public address systems are not required for Florida college facilities.

2.	Temporary relocatables constructed after the date of this standard shall meet all construction requirements of this code, except that covered walks may be installed. The term “temporary relocatable” means relocatables that are used for less than 4 years to provide temporary housing while permanent replacement classrooms and related facilities are under construction, renovation or remodeling. The term “temporary relocatable” does not apply to relocatables that have been located on a school site for more than 3 years and used for classrooms or for student occupancy, where there is no identifiable permanent facility under construction, being remodeled, or renovated to house the students.

453.27.5.3 Separation of units.

Type I, II or IV, (noncombustible) relocatable units shall be separated as required by the Florida Building Code and the school site plan.

453.27.6 Structure.

Relocatable structures shall be positively anchored and designed to comply with Florida Building Code requirements.

453.27.7 Fire-retardant-treated wood (FRTW).

Only FRTW that does not contain ammonium phosphates, sulfates or halides may be used in the roof structure of Type II construction ancillary facilities, as authorized by other sections of the Florida Building Code. FRTW shall comply with the specific requirements found elsewhere in these public educational facilities requirements. Contractors shall provide evidence of compliance to inspectors. Inspection access panels shall be provided to facilitate initial and annual inspections for general condition assessment of FRTW and connectors.

453.27.8 Doors.

Exit doors shall swing in the direction of exit travel.

453.27.8.1 Classroom locksets.

Each door shall be equipped with a lockset, which is readily opened from the side from which egress is to be made at all times, a threshold, heavy duty hinges, and closer to control door closing. Each door shall have a view panel, with minimum dimensions of 8 inches (203 mm) by 42 inches (1067 mm) and a maximum of 1,296 square inches (0.84 m2), of 1/4-inch (6 mm) tempered or safety glass installed with the bottom edge of the panel at 30 inches (762 mm) AFF. Each exterior door shall be protected from the elements by a roof overhang.

453.27.8.2 Roofed platform.

All exterior doors shall open onto a minimum 5 foot by 5 foot (1524 mm by 1524 mm) roofed platform with handrails, which is level with the interior floor.

453.27.9 Operable windows.

Classrooms shall have operable windows equal to at least 5 percent of the floor area of the unit where required by Section 1013.44, Florida Statutes. Exterior doors may be included in computing the required 5 percent. Awning, casement, or projecting windows shall not be placed in walls with adjacent walks, ramps, steps or platforms.

453.27.9.1 Rescue.

Windows for emergency rescue shall comply with NFPA 101, Florida edition as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, shall be operable from the inside by a single operation and shall be labeled “EMERGENCY RESCUE—KEEP AREA CLEAR.”

453.27.10 Finishes.

Finishes in relocatable units shall comply with the following:

453.27.10.1 Interior walls and ceilings.

Interior wall and ceiling finishes in classrooms and other student use spaces shall be Class A or B as defined in NFPA 101 as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Corridor finishes shall be Class A. Formaldehyde levels shall not exceed the minimum HUD standards for manufactured housing.

453.27.10.2 Floors.

Floors shall be covered with resilient material, carpet, or other finished product. Carpet in classrooms shall be tested and certified by the manufacturer as passing the Radiant Panel Test Class II. Carpet in corridors shall be tested and certified by the manufacturer as passing the Radiant Panel Test Class I.

453.27.10.3 Toilet rooms, showers and bathing facilities.

Partitions and walls separating group toilet rooms shall be extended to the bottom of the roof deck.

453.27.10.3.1

Toilet room floors and base shall be finished with impervious nonslip materials. Toilet room walls shall be finished with impervious materials which shall be extended to a minimum height of 6 feet (1828 mm).

453.27.10.3.2

Ceilings shall be of solid-type moisture-resistant materials.

453.27.11 Fire extinguishers.

At least one appropriate fire extinguisher shall be provided in each relocatable classroom unit and in each classroom of a multiclassroom building.

453.27.12 Document storage.

Provision shall be made to secure foundation plans and to post the annual fire inspection report within each relocatable unit.

453.27.13

Reserved.

453.27.14 Child care/day care units.

Standard classroom units intended to house birth to age 3 children, including teenage parent programs (TAP), shall meet the additional criteria under the title of Child Care/Day Care/Prekinder-garten Facilities for permanent buildings contained in these public educational facilities requirements, as well as the following:

453.27.14.1

All TAP spaces where residential kitchens are provided shall have two doors exiting directly to the outside and remotely located from each other. Areas designated for children’s sleeping mats, cots or cribs, shall have a clearly marked exit passageway.

453.27.15 Illumination required.

Illumination in classroom units shall be designed to provide an average maintained 50 footcandles (500 lux) at desk top.

453.27.15.1 Emergency lighting.

Each classroom unit shall be equipped with emergency lighting.

453.27.15.2 Exterior lighting.

Exterior lighting shall be provided as required elsewhere in these public educational facilities code requirements.

453.27.15.3 Exit lighting.

Exit lights shall be provided as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code adopted by the State Fire Marshal.

453.27.16 Air conditioning, heating and ventilation.

Relocatable facilities shall meet Florida Building Code requirements.

453.27.17 Technology.

Relocatables shall contain wiring and computer technology appropriate for the programs to be housed.

453.27.18 Fire safety requirements.

New relocatables shall be provided with fire alarm devices meeting the code requirements for permanent educational facilities and shall be connected to the facility’s main fire alarm system as required by code.

453.27.19 Inspection of units during construction.

Boards shall provide for the inspection of relocatables during construction, as required by the Florida Building Code, as authorized by statute.

453.27.20 Inspection of units prior to occupancy.

Prior to occupancy new relocatables shall be inspected and approved for compliance to the Florida Building Code. New units shall have foundation plans provided and secured, in the relocatable along with the local fire inspector report. Certification of such inspection shall remain on file with the district. Inventory/date of construction signage shall be affixed to the relocatable. Where FRTW is used, inspection access panels shall be provided and within easy reach to facilitate inspection for general condition assessment of FRTW and connectors.

SECTION 454
SWIMMING POOLS AND BATHING PLACES
(PUBLIC AND PRIVATE)

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1 Public swimming pools and bathing places.

Public swimming pools and bathing places shall comply with the design and construction standards of this section.

Exceptions:

1.	A portable pool used exclusively for providing swimming lessons or related instruction in support of an established educational program sponsored or provided by a school district may not be regulated as a public pool. Such pool shall be regulated as a private swimming pool under Section 454.2.

2.	A temporary pool may not be regulated as a public pool. Such pool shall be regulated as a private swimming pool under Section 454.2.

454.1.1 Flood hazard areas.

Public swimming pools installed in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 shall comply with Section 1612.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions apply. See Department of Health (DOH) Rule 64E-9, Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 514, Florida Statutes. The regulation and enforcement of the initial and annual operation permit for public pools are preempted to the DOH. The construction permit holder is responsible for obtaining an operation permit issued by DOH, as a public swimming pool shall not be put into operation without an inspection and operation permit issued from the DOH. DOH may grant variances from the provisions of the Florida Building Code specifically pertaining to public swimming pools and bathing places as authorized by Section 514.0115, Florida Statutes. Building officials shall recognize and enforce variance orders issued by the Department of Health pursuant to Section 514.0115(5), Florida Statutes including any conditions attached to the granting of the variance.

“Bathing load” means the maximum number of persons allowed in the pool or bathing place at one time.

“Collector tank” means a reservoir, with a minimum of 2.25 square feet (0.2 m2) water surface area, that is vented by piping and/or open to the atmosphere, from which the recirculation or feature pump takes suction, and which receives the gravity flow from the main drain line and surface overflow system or feature water source line. The vent shall measure a minimum of 12.56 square inches (8103 mm2)in area. A vent cap assembly shall be installed to minimize rainwater entry into the tank while still allowing for adequate air movement. The vent cap assembly shall be designed to prohibit entry by animals. The vent opening, where connected to the tank, must be set above the static water surface elevation and crown of the overflow piping, if installed. Tanks with vented lids shall not be required to be equipped with a separate vent. Tanks not located in a room or enclosure shall have a lockable lid. Tanks shall be constructed of concrete or other impervious and structurally rigid material, with adequate access for maintenance and cleaning, shall be watertight, shall be free from structural cracks and shall have a nontoxic smooth finish.

“D.E.” is the Diatomaceous Earth that is used as a filter aid in D.E.-type filters. For the purpose of this rule, it also includes alternative filter aids that have been approved under NSF/ANSI Standard 50, and accepted by the filter manufacturer.

“Department” means the permitting/inspection authority.

“Effective barrier” is a barrier which consists of a building, or equivalent structure, plus a 48-inch (1219 mm) minimum height fence on the remaining sides or a continuous 48-inch (1219 mm) minimum height fence. All access through the barrier must have one or more of the following safety features: alarm, key lock or self-locking doors and gates. Safety covers that comply with the American Society for Test Materials standard F1346 may also be considered as an effective barrier.

“Elevated pool” means any pool regulated under this section which is installed over a building (as defined in the Florida Building Code), including any associated troughs, gutters, or tanks.

“Epsom salt float tanks” are special purpose pools leased by the public for a brief period of time to float quietly immersed in water with dissolved Epsom salt. Florida Building Code sections in 454.1 through 454.1.10 apply to these pools, and only the following code sections do not apply to these pools as these code requirements are not necessary for health or safety in these special purpose pools: 454.1.2.1 (a); 454.1.2.2.4, 454.1.3.1.2, 454.1.3.2, 454.1.4.2.2, 454.1.6.1, 454.1.6.5.10.5, 454.1.6.5.11, 454.1.6.5.14, 454.1.6.5.16.6(3), and 454.1.6.5.3.2.5.

“Interactive water features” means a structure designed to allow for recreational activities with recirculated, filtered, and treated water; but having minimal standing water. Water from the interactive fountain type features is collected by gravity below grade in a collector tank or sump. The water is filtered, disinfected and then pumped to the feature spray discharge heads. The collector tank and water filtration features required make this structure a type of public swimming pool.

“Marking” or “Markings” refers to the placement and installation of visual marking cues to help patrons identify step, bench and swimout outlines, slope break location, depth designations and NO ENTRY and NO DIVING warnings. When markings are specified by code to be dark, the term “dark” shall mean a Munsell color value from zero to four.

“Offset” means set back into the deck from the normal pool wall perimeter (three sides must be surrounded by pool deck).

“Perimeter overflow gutter” means a level trough or ledge around the inside perimeter of the pool containing drains to clean the pool water surface.

“Plunge pool” means the receiving body of water located at the terminus of a recreational water slide and is dedicated solely for that purpose. Swimming pools that are not dedicated as plunge pools that include a recreational water slide as part of the design shall meet the requirements of Sections 454.1.1 through 454.1.6.5 and 454.1.9.2 with the exception of Sections 454.1.9.2.1.6.1 and 454.1.9.2.3.

“Pool floor” means the interior pool bottom surface which consists of that area from a horizontal plane up to a maximum of a 45-degree slope.

“Pool wall” means the interior pool side surfaces which consist of that area from a vertical plane to a 45-degree slope.

“Pool turnover” means the circulation of the entire pool volume through the filter system. Pool volume shall be determined from the design water level which is the normal operating water level; for gutter-type pools it is the horizontal plane of the upper lip of the gutter and for skimmer pools it is the centerline of the skimmer opening.

“Portable pool” means a pool or spa, and related equipment systems of any kind, which is designed or intended to be movable from location to location.

“Precoat pot” means a container with a valved connection to the suction side of the recirculation pump of a pressure diatomaceous earth (D.E.) type filter system used for coating the filter with D. E. powder or NSF/ANSI Standard 50-2019 and manufacturer approved substitute filter aid.

A “public swimming pool” or “public pool” means a single watertight structure of concrete, masonry or other approved materials that is located either indoors or outdoors, used for bathing or swimming by humans, and filled with a filtered and disinfected water supply, together with buildings, appurtenances and equipment used in connection therewith. A public swimming pool or public pool shall mean a conventional pool, spa-type pool, wading pool, special purpose pool, interactive water feature or water recreation attraction, to which admission may be gained with or without payment of a fee and includes, but is not limited to, pools operated by or serving camps, churches, cities, counties, day care centers, group home facilities for eight or more clients, health spas, institutions, parks, state agencies, schools, subdivisions, or the cooperative living-type projects of five or more living units, such as apartments, boardinghouses, hotels, mobile home parks, motels, recreational vehicle parks, and townhouses. The term does not include a swimming pool located on the grounds of a private residence.

“Recirculation system” means the system of piping and mechanics designed to remove the water from the pool then filter, disinfect and return it to the pool.

“Recreational water slide” means a flume that carries riders with more than 30 gallons per minute (113.55 L/m) of flow down the flume.

“Resistance exercise pools” are special purpose pools used by bathers with or without supervision to perform low-impact exercises and physical therapy with circulated water resistance.

“Slip resistant” means having a textured surface which is not conducive to slipping under contact of bare feet unlike glazed tile or masonry terrazzo and nontextured plastic materials. Manufactured surface products shall be designated by the manufacturer as suitable for walking surfaces in wet areas.

“Spa pool” means a pool used in conjunction with high-velocity air or water coming from a nozzle inthe back wall of a bench.

“Special purpose pool” means a public pool used exclusively for a specific, supervised purpose, including springboard or platform diving training, SCUBA diving instruction, and aquatic programs for persons with disabilities, preschool or kindergarten children.

“Swimming pool slide” is a slide designed by its manufacturer to discharge over the sidewall of a swimming pool, and which uses not more than 30 gallons per minute (113.55 L/m) of water to carry the riders.

“Swim spa” is a pool used in conjunction with a directional flow of water against which one swims.

“Swim-up bar” means a public swimming pool used for the consumption of food or beverage by people and may include a permanent bar or counter within the pool area from which food and beverage are served to people in the pool.

“Sun shelf” means an area of a pool that adjoins the pool wall with a water depth less than 12 inches (305 mm), and is used for seating and play.

“Temporary pool” means a pool intended to be used in conjunction with a sanctioned national or international swimming or diving competition event that does not exceed 30 consecutive days of use.

“Vanishing edge” means a pool wall structure that is designed in such a way that the top of the pool wall and adjacent deck are not visible from certain vantage points in the pool or from the opposite side of the pool. Water from the pool flows over the edge and is captured and reused through the normal pool circulation system. Includes overflowing edge swimming pools with a lowered deck. Also referred to as an “infinity edge,” “negative edge,” “overflowing edge,” or “zero edge.”

“Wading pool” means a shallow pool designed to be used by children.

“Water recreation attraction” means a facility with design and operational features that provide patron recreational activity and purposefully involves immersion of the body partially or totally in the water. Water recreation attractions include water slides, river rides, water course rides, water activity pools, interactive water features, wave pools and any additional pool within the boundaries of the attraction.

“Water activity pool” means a water recreation attraction which has water-related activities such as rope ladders, rope swings, cargo nets and other similar activities.

“Water slides” means a water recreation attraction ride which is characterized by having trough-like or tubular flumes or chutes.

“Water theme park” means a complex with controlled access, a fenced and gated attraction where guests enter through a limited number of entrances upon purchase of a ticket. These facilities are permanent and consist of multiple water recreation attractions. Lifeguards are present during all operating hours.

“Water therapy facilities,” as that term is used in Section 514.0115, Item 1, Florida Statutes, are pools used exclusively for water therapy to treat a diagnosed injury, illness or medical condition, wherein the therapy is provided under the direct supervision of a Florida licensed physical therapist, occupational therapist or athletic trainer; pursuant to prescription by a physician or a physician’s assistant (PA) licensed pursuant to Chapters 458 or 459, Florida Statutes, a podiatrist licensed pursuant to Chapter 461, Florida Statutes, or an advanced registered nurse practitioner (ARNP) licensed pursuant to Chapter 464, Florida Statutes; and the prescribing physician, PA, podiatrist or ARNP authorizes a plan of treatment justifying use of the pool for health care purposes.

“Wave pool” means a water recreation attraction that is characterized by wave action.

“Wet deck area” means the 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) unobstructed pool deck area around the outside of the pool water perimeter, curb, ladders, handrails, diving boards, diving towers, or pool slides, waterfalls, water features, starting blocks, planters or lifeguard chairs.

“Zero depth entry pool” means a pool where the pool floor continues to slope upward to a point where it meets the surface of the water and the pool deck.

454.1.1.1 Sizing.

The public pools provided at a transient facility shall have a minimum 6 square feet (0.56 m2) of surface area and a minimum of 1 gallon per minute (0.063 L/s) of recirculation flow per living unit. The public pools provided at nontransient facilities shall have a minimum 4.5 square feet (0.42 m2) of surface area and a minimum of 0.75 gallon per minute (0.047 L/s) of recirculation flow per living unit. Recreational vehicle sites, campsites and boat slips designated for liveaboards shall be considered a transient living unit. For properties with multiple pools, this requirement includes the cumulative total surface area and recirculation rate of all swimming pools, spas, wading pools and interactive water features. If the only pools at a facility are spa pools or interactive water features, this requirement does not apply. The bathing load for conventional swimming pools, wading pools, interactive water features, water activity pools and special purpose pools shall be computed on the basis of one person per 5 gpm (0.32 L/s) of recirculation flow. The bathing load for spa type pools shall be based on one person per each 10 square feet (0.9 m2) of surface area.

454.1.2 Swimming pool construction standards.
454.1.2.1 Pool structure.

Pools shall be constructed of concrete or other impervious and structurally rigid material. All pools shall be watertight, shall be free from structural cracks and shall have a nontoxic smooth and slip-resistant finish. All elevated pools constructed of concrete shall have waterproofing integral to the mix, or applied over the surface prior to the final surface application. All materials shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications unless such specifications violate Chapter 64E-9, Florida Administrative Code, rule requirements or the approval criteria of NSF/ANSI Standard 50 or NSF/ANSI Standard 60.

(a)	Tile used in less than 3 feet (914 mm) of water must be slip resistant. A minimum 4-inch (102 mm) tile line, each tile a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides, shall be installed at the water line, but shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) in height if a dark color is used. Gutter-type pools may substitute 2-inch (51 mm) tile, each a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides, along the pool wall edge of the gutter lip.

(b)	One-inch (25 mm) square tile may be used if the manufacturer has specified the adhesive for use underwater to adhere the type of tile used [vitreous (glass) or ceramic]. Tiles shall not have sharp edges exposed that could cause bather injury.

(c)	The grout line is allowed to be included when meeting the 1-inch (25 mm) square tile requirements, if the tile is sold and distributed as nominal or trade size tile.

454.1.2.2 Dimensions.

Any dimensional requirement given in Section 454.1 as a single dimension, with no range or tolerance specified, may have a final constructed tolerance of up to 3 inches (76 mm), or 5 percent of the specified dimension, whichever is less. All approved designs, plans and drawings must comply with all exact dimensional requirements specified in Section 454.1. This construction tolerance may be positive or negative, except negative construction tolerances shall not be applied to any part of a diving bowl. Construction tolerances shall not be applied to dimensional requirements affecting the accessibility of the swimming pool to disabled bathers.

454.1.2.2.1 Dimensional standards.

Dimensional standards for competition-type pools shall be those published by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, 2019-20 and 2020-21; Federation Internationale de Natation Amateur (FINA), 2021 Handbook; USA Swimming, 2022; and National Federation of State High School Associations, 2021-22, which are incorporated by reference in this code.

454.1.2.2.2 Walls and corners.

All pool walls shall have a clearance of 15 feet (4572 mm) perpendicular to the edge (as measured at design water level from gutter lip to gutter lip, or on skimmer pools, from vertical wall to vertical wall). Offset steps, spa pools and wading pools are exempt from this clearance requirement. Where interior steps or a sun shelf protrude into the pool, the remaining width from the junction of the step or shelf riser and the floor to the opposite wall shall be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more. The upper part of pool walls in areas 5 feet (1524 mm) deep or less shall be within 5 degrees vertical for a minimum depth of 21/2 feet (762 mm) from which point the wall may join the floor with a maximum radius equal to the difference between the pool depth and 21/2 feet. The upper part of pool walls in areas over 5 feet (1524 mm) deep shall be within 5 degrees vertical for a minimum depth equal to the pool water depth minus 21/2 feet (762 mm) from which point the wall may join the floor with a maximum radius of 21/2 feet (762 mm). Corners shall be a minimum 90-degree angle. The corner intersections of walls which protrude or angle into the pool water area shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 2 inches (51 mm). This radius shall be continued through the top of the gutter edge; chamfering is allowed, and pool coping shall not overhang into the pool more than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

454.1.2.2.3 Pool floor slope and slope transition.

The radius of curvature between the floor and walls is excluded from these requirements. Multiple floor levels in pools are prohibited, however, an area meeting all of the requirements of a sun shelf shall not be considered a violation of this requirement.

454.1.2.2.3.1 Floor slope shall be uniform.

The floor slope shall be a maximum 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal in areas 5 feet (1524 mm) deep or less. The floor slope shall be a maximum 1 unit vertical in 3 units horizontal in areas more than 5 feet (1524 mm) deep.

454.1.2.2.3.2

Any transition in floor slope shall occur at a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) of water depth. A slope transition must have a 2 to 6 inch (51 to 152 mm) wide dark contrasting tile marking across the bottom and must extend up both sides of the pool at the transition point. The marking shall be continuous except for recessing grouting. A slope transition must have a safety line mounted by use of recessed cup anchors, 2 feet (610 mm) before the contrasting marking, towards the shallow end. The safety line shall have visible floats at maximum 7-foot (2134 mm) intervals.

454.1.2.2.4 Pool depths.

Reserved.

454.1.2.3 Markings.
454.1.2.3.1 Depth and markings.

Depth and markings shall meet the following criteria:

1.	The minimum water depth shall be 3 feet (914 mm) except in sun shelves, wading pools, water-activity pools, and zero entry areas.

2.	Permanent depth markings followed by the appropriate full or abbreviated words “FEET,” “FT,” or “INCHES,” “IN,” shall be installed in minimum 4-inch-high (102 mm) numbers and letters on a contrasting background. Depth markers shall indicate the actual pool depth, within 3 inches (76 mm), at normal operating water level when measured 3 feet (914 mm) from the pool wall.

3.	At a minimum, the markings shall be located on both sides of the pool at the shallow end, slope break, deep-end wall and deep point (if located more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the deep-end wall). Depth markings shall be legible from inside the pool and also from the pool deck. The maximum perimeter distance between depth markings is 25 feet (7620 mm). Pool size and geometry may necessitate additional depth marking placements about all sides of the pool to meet this requirement.

4.	When a curb is provided, the depth markings shall be installed on the inside and outside or top of the pool curb. When a pool curb is not provided, the depth markings shall be located on the inside vertical wall at or above the water level and on the edge of the deck within 2 feet (610 mm) of the pool water. When open type gutter designs are utilized, depth markers shall be located on the back of the gutter wall. When a coping stone with curved or angled underside is provided, the depth markings may be installed on the curved or angled coping underside, and outside or top of the pool curb.

5.	When deck level perimeter overflow systems are utilized, additional depth marking signs shall be posted nearby or placed on adjacent fencing or walls and the size shall be increased so they are recognizable from inside the swimming pool. Alternatively, tile depth markers may be placed at the top of the pool wall just under the water level. Depth markers placed on the pool deck shall be within 3 feet (914 mm) of the water.

6.	Those areas of the pool that are not part of an approved diving bowl shall have dark contrasting tile, 4-inch-high (102 mm) “NO DIVING” markings installed along the perimeter of the pool on the top of the pool curb or deck within 2 feet (610 mm) of the pool water with a maximum perimeter distance of 25 feet (7620 mm) between markings. A 6-inch (152 mm) tile with a 4-inch (102 mm) or larger red, international “NO DIVING” symbol may be substituted for the “NO DIVING” markings. “NO DIVING” markings are not required within the swimming pool.

7.	All markings shall be tile, except that pools constructed of fiberglass, thermoplastic or stainless steel may substitute other type markings when it can be shown that said markings are permanent and will not fade over time. This exemption does not extend to concrete pools that are coated with fiberglass. Tile alternative examples include stone or manufactured plaques with engraved or sandblasted numbers and characters with permanent paint. Permanent appliqués may be used for fiberglass, thermoplastics or stainless steel pools. All markings installed on horizontal surfaces shall have a slip-resistant finish. Markings shall be flush with the surrounding area where placed and recessed if necessary to provide a smooth finish that will avoid creation of an injury hazard to bathers. Pools that are not conducive to tile can employ other equivalent markings as stated above.

454.1.2.3.2 Designs or logos.

Any design or logo on the pool floor or walls shall be such that it will not hinder the detection of a human in distress, algae, sediment, or other objects in the pool.

454.1.2.3.3 Lane markings.

Pools that are not intended to be utilized for officially sanctioned competition may install lap lane markings provided they meet the following criteria: the markings must be 2 to 6 inches (51 to 152 mm) wide, they must terminate 5 feet (1524 mm) from the end wall in a “T” with the “T” bar at least 18 inches (457.2 mm) long, they must be placed at 7-foot (2134 mm) minimum intervals on center and be no closer than 4 feet (1219 mm) from any side wall, steps or other obstructions. Floating rope lines associated with lap lanes must not obstruct the entrance or exit from the pool and are prohibited when the pool is open for general use.

454.1.2.3.4 Targets.

Pools that are not intended for officially sanctioned competition may have 2 to 6 inch (51 to 152 mm) wide 18-inch by 18-inch (457 mm by 457 mm) targets (+) installed on the pool wall.

454.1.2.3.5 Rules and regulations signage.

Rules and regulations for bathers shall be installed in minimum 1-inch (25.4 mm) letters that must be legible from the pool deck, and shall contain the following:

1.	No food or beverages in the pool or on pool wet deck. Commercially bottled water in plastic bottles is allowed on the pool wet deck for pool patron hydration.

Exception: Food and beverages served in accordance with swim-up bar requirements found in Department of Health (DOH) Rule 64E-9.004, Florida Administrative Code.

2.	No glass or animals in the fenced pool area (or 50 feet (15 240 mm) from unfenced pool).

Exception: Service animals as defined in s. 413.08, Florida Statutes All animals are prohibited to enter the pool water or onto the drained area of an interactive water feature.

3.	Bathing load: ___ persons.

4.	Pool hours: __ a.m. to __ p.m.

5.	Shower before entering.

6.	Pools of 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area or greater without an approved diving well configuration shall have “NO DIVING”, in 4 inch (102 mm) letters included with the above listed pool rules.

7.	Do not swallow the pool water. This statement shall be added to signs at pools that conduct alterations as that term is defined.

8.	If the pool includes a sun shelf, “WARNING: DROP OFF AT SUN SHELF EDGE IS ___ FEET DEEP” in 4-inch (102 mm) letters. Not required where sun shelves transition to steps.

9.	If the pool includes a sun shelf or a zero depth entry area, “DO NOT PLACE FURNITURE IN POOL.” Not required when all movable furniture on the deck or in the pool is entirely made from UV-resistant, inert plastic.

10.	By January 1, 2022, all pools shall add: “POOL MAXIMUM DEPTH: ___ FEET,” in 2-inch (51 mm) letters with the previously listed pool rules.

454.1.2.4 Color.

Pool floors and walls shall be white or light pastel in color and shall have the characteristic of reflecting rather than absorbing light. Floors and walls in slide landing areas, and in pools with a maximum depth of 24 inches (610 mm) or less, are exempt from this color requirement. The interior finish coating floors and walls shall be comprised of a nonpigmented white cementitious binder component together with a sand/aggregate component. The finish coating shall have a dry lightness level (CIE L value) of 80.0 or greater and a wet luminous reflectance value (CIE Y value) of 50.0 or greater, as determined by test results provided by the manufacturer, utilizing testing methodology from American Standard ASTM D4086, ASTM E1477, ASTM E1347. Pools constructed of fiberglass, thermoplastic, or stainless steel shall be subject to the same interior finish color requirements. A minimum 4-inch (102 mm) tile line, each tile a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides, shall be installed at the water line, but shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm) in height if a dark color is used. Gutter-type pools may substitute a 2-inch (51 mm) tile line, each tile a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides, along the pool wall edge of the gutter lip.

454.1.2.5 Access.

All pools shall have a means of access every 75 feet (22 860 mm) of pool perimeter with a minimum of two, located so as to serve both ends of the pool, except for swimming pools with eight (8) or more lap lanes, which shall have means of access every 90 feet (27 432 mm) of pool perimeter in the lap lane area. In addition, an access point shall be provided at the deep portion, if the deep portion is not at one end of the pool. When the deep portion of the pool is over 30 feet (9144 mm) wide, both sides of this area shall have a means of access. Access shall consist of ladders, stairs, recessed treads, sun shelves or swimouts and may be used in combination. All treads shall have a slip-resistant surface.

454.1.2.5.1 Ladders.

Ladders shall be of the crossbraced type and shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant materials and be securely anchored into the pool deck. Clearance between the ladder and pool wall shall be between 3 to 6 inches (76 mm to 152 mm). Ladders shall extend at least 28 inches (711 mm) and no more than 40 inches (1016 mm) above the pool deck. Ladder bottom braces shall have intact end caps or bumpers that rest firmly against the pool wall. The top rung of the ladder shall be at or below the water level on open-gutter pools and not more than 12 inches (305 mm) below the deck or curb top on all other type pools.

454.1.2.5.2 Recessed treads.

Recessed treads shall be installed flush with the wall and shall be a minimum 5 inches (127 mm) wide, 10 inches (254 mm) long, with a maximum vertical distance of 12 inches (305 mm) between treads.

454.1.2.5.3 Stairs.

Stairs shall have a minimum tread width of 10 inches (254 mm) and a maximum width of 48 inches (1219 mm) for a minimum tread length of 24 inches (610 mm) and a maximum riser height of 10 inches (254 mm). Treads and risers between the top and bottom treads shall be uniform to within 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in width and height. The riser heights shall be measured at the marked step edges and the differences in elevation shall be considered the riser heights. The front 3/4 to 2 inches (19.1 to 51 mm) of the tread and the top 2 inches (51 mm) of the riser shall be tile, dark in color, contrasting with the interior of the pool. Tile shall be slip resistant. Bullnose tile that is slip resistant may be used when the 3/4-inch (19 mm) segment is placed on the tread or horizontal surface and the 2-inch (51 mm) segment is placed on the riser or vertical surface. Where the gutter is used as the top step, the tile on the gutter for the width of the steps shall be slip resistant. Vinyl liner and fiberglass pools may use other material for the step edge marking, provided the material is permanent, permanently secured, dark in color, nonfading and slip resistant.

Exception: Where a gutter is used as a top step, the gutter’s 2-inch slope from lip to the drain shall be continuous for the full length of the stairs, and the riser from the gutter to the next tread need not be uniform with the remaining risers and treads.

454.1.2.5.4 Swimouts.

Swimouts shall extend 18 (457 mm) to 24 inches (610 mm) back from the pool wall, shall be 4 to 5 feet (1219 mm to 1524 mm) wide, shall be a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) below the deck, unless stairs are provided in the swimout, and shall be located only in areas of the pool greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) deep. Pools that do not utilize a continuous perimeter overflow system must provide a wall return inlet in the swimout for circulation. A permanent dark contrasting colored band of tile shall be installed at the intersection of the pool wall and the swimout and must extend 2 inches (51 mm) on the horizontal and vertical surfaces. Tile must be slip resistant. Bullnose tile may be substituted and installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.5.3 above.

454.1.2.5.5 Handrails and grabrails.

Handrails shall be provided for all stairs, shall be anchored in the bottom step and the deck. Where “figure 4” deck-mounted-type handrails are used, they shall be anchored in the deck and extend laterally to any point vertically above the bottom step. Grabrails must be mounted in the pool deck at each side of recessed steps. Handrails and grabrails shall extend between 28 and 40 inches (711 mm and 1016 mm) above the step edge and deck. Where stairs are used as an access point between a sun shelf and pool area, a handrail shall be provided. The hand rail shall be anchored into the bottom step and the sun shelf floor. Where such stairs are inset into the sun shelf, a handrail shall be placed adjacent to each edge of the sun shelf.

454.1.2.5.6 Disabled access.

Permanent or portable steps, ramps, handrails, lifts or other devices designed to accommodate handicapped individuals in swimming pools may be provided. Excluding all ADA pool access area(s) and their clear deck area(s), the height of the pool wall above wet deck around the remainder of pool perimeter shall comply with Section 454.1.3.1.2 or 454.1.8.5. Lifts mounted into the pool deck shall have a minimum 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) deck behind the lift mount.

454.1.2.6 Obstructions.

INSIGHTS

The pool water area shall be unobstructed by any type structure unless justified by engineering design as a part of the recirculation system. Engineering design and material specifications shall show that such structures will not endanger the pool patron, can be maintained in a sanitary condition and will not create a problem for sanitary maintenance of any part of the pool, pool water, or pool facilities. Structures in accord with the above shall not be located in a diving bowl area or within 15 feet (4572 mm) of any pool wall.

Exceptions:

1.	Stairs, ladders and ramps, necessary for entrance/exit from the pool are not considered obstructions.

2.	Underwater seat benches may be installed in areas less than 5 feet (1524 mm) deep. Bench seats must be 14 to 18 inches (356 to 457 mm) wide and must have a dark contrasting tile marking on the seat edge extending 2 inches (51 mm) on the horizontal and vertical surface. Tile shall be slip resistant. Bullnose tile may be substituted and installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.5.3. Vinyl liner, stainless steel and fiberglass pools may use other material for the bench edge marking as detailed in Section 454.1.2.3.1, Item 7, provided the material is permanently secured, dark in color, nonfading and slip resistant. Benches shall not protrude into the 15-foot (4572 mm) clearance requirement of Section 454.1.2.6. The bench shall not protrude into the diving bowl.

3.	A sun shelf may be installed in pool areas with no more than 4 feet (1219 mm) of water depth, or less, except where the entire sun shelf transitions to steps, where the depth at the bottom of the steps can exceed 4 feet (1219 mm). A sun shelf must have the same markings at the edge as a bench. A sun shelf shall not protrude into the diving bowl. A sun shelf must additionally comply with Section 454.1.2.8.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1.2.7 Diving areas.

Diving facilities shall meet the minimum requirements of the FINA dimensions for diving facilities in accordance with the 2021 FINA Handbook and include the following

1.	Diving boards or platforms with heights of less than the established standard shall meet the dimensional requirements of the next greater height.

2.	Diving boards, platforms and ladders shall have a nonabsorbent, slip-resistant finish and be of sufficient strength to safely carry the anticipated loads. Diving equipment 1 meter and greater shall have guard rails which extend to the edge of the pool wall. All diving boards over 21 inches (533 mm) from the deck shall be provided with a ladder. Diving boards or platforms shall not be installed on curved walls where the wall enters into the defined rectangular diving area specified in this section. Adjacent platform and diving boards shall be parallel.

3.	The location of pool ladders shall be such that the distance from the ladder to any point on a diving board or platform centerline is not less than the plummet to side wall dimension (b) indicated in the FINA standards. Trampoline-type diving facilities are prohibited.

4.	Diving targets may be installed in accordance with FINA standards.

454.1.2.8 Sun shelves.
454.1.2.8.1 Sun shelf dimensional requirements.

Sun shelf areas must be a minimum of 20 inches (508 mm) wide and provide a minimum of 10 square feet (0.93 m2) of horizontal surface adjoining on the edge of the pool over a distance of not less than 3 feet (914 mm). The sun shelf edge that adjoins the pool edge must be continuous. The sun shelf floor shall be horizontal or sloped at a maximum of 1 unit vertical in 60 units horizontal, or shall have a uniform slope from a zero depth entry, and its maximum depth shall be between 6 inches (152 mm) minimum and 12 inches (254 mm) maximum below the water surface.

454.1.2.8.2 Depth markers at sun shelves.

Where a sun shelf is installed, wet deck-located depth and no-diving markers shall be placed every 25 feet (7620 mm) or less, with at least two (2) markers per sunshelf. If the vertical distance between the coping or wet deck and the shelf floor adjacent to the wall is 12 inches (305 mm) or less, these markers shall indicate the water depth of the sun shelf. For open-type gutter pools, the vertical distance shall be measured from the gutter lip to the shelf floor. Where vertical distance between the coping or wet deck and the shelf floor adjacent to the wall is more than 12 inches (305 mm), “No-Entry” markers as described in Section 454.1.9.6.4 shall be provided in the deck. When the sun shelf does not use stairs as a transition, depth markers of the adjacent pool depth at the sun shelf edge and no-dive markers shall be placed on the sun shelf floor, every 10 feet (3048 mm) or less, along a line no more than 1 foot (305 mm) back from the edge of the sun shelf above the deeper pool. All markers shall comply with Items 2, 6 and 7 of Section 454.1.2.3.1, except the distance between them as described in this section shall be followed.

454.1.2.8.3 Access to sun shelf.

For the purposes of Section 454.1.2.5, a sun shelf area shall be considered an entrance to or exit from the pool. If the vertical distance between the coping and the shelf floor adjacent to the wall is more than 10 inches (254 mm), stairs up to the deck or coping shall be provided which shall comply with Sections 454.1.2.5.3 and 454.1.2.5.5; or a zero-depth entry area complying with Section 454.1.9.6 may be provided instead of stairs. For open gutter pools, where the gutter is used as a step, additional steps shall not be required where the distance from the gutter lip to the shelf floor is 10 inches or less. At least one handrail that is compliant with Section 454.1.2.5.5 must be provided at the sun shelf.

454.1.2.8.4 Sun shelf turnover rate.

Additional inlets shall be provided in the sun shelf area. The numbers and location shall be such as to ensure the volume of water in the shelf is filtered and chemically treated once every 60 minutes (1 hour) or less.

454.1.3 Pool appurtenances.
454.1.3.1 Decks and walkways.
454.1.3.1.1

Pool wet decks shall be constructed of concrete or other nonabsorbent material having a smooth slip-resistant finish. Wet deck area finishes shall be designed for such use and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. Wooden decks and walkways are prohibited.

454.1.3.1.2

Pool wet decks shall be uniformly sloped away from the pool or to deck drains to prevent standing water. The minimum slope for the wet deck is 2 percent, but in the portions of the deck intended to be accessible to disabled persons, it may be 1 percent less than the maximum allowable cross slope given by the Florida Building Code, Accessibility. The maximum slope is 4 percent. A minimum of 1 percent deck slope is allowable for paver-type decks. Textured deck finishes that provide pitting and crevices of more than 3/16 inch (4.8 mm) deep that accumulate soil are prohibited. If settling or weathering occurs that would cause standing water, the original slopes shall be restored or corrective drains installed. When a curb is provided, the deck shall not be more than 10 inches (254 mm) below the top of the curb.

Deck-level perimeter overflow systems may be sloped at a maximum of 4 percent toward trench or slot drains for a maximum distance of 18 inches (457 mm) where deck-level perimeter overflow systems are utilized. These must be slip resistant. This distance is not applicable to zero depth entries in Section 454.1.9.6.2. Wet deck area in accordance with Section 454.1.3.1.3 shall be provided beyond the trench grate or slot drain.

Up to 40 percent or 65 feet (19 812 mm), whichever is less, of the wet deck may be lowered. Lowered portions of wet deck shall be at least 10 inches (254 mm) but not more than 36 inches (914 mm) below the pool water level or curb height. Lowered portions of wet deck shall adjoin the rest of the wet deck via a set of stairs or a ramp at each end. If the lowered deck is adjacent to a transfer wall per Section 1009.4 of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, one end of the lowered deck must be connected to the rest of the wet deck via an accessible route as described in Section 402 of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

454.1.3.1.3

Pool wet decks shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 4 feet (1219 mm) around the perimeter of the pool, pool curb, ladders, handrails, diving boards, diving towers and slides.

454.1.3.1.4

Traffic barriers shall be provided as needed so that parked vehicles do not extend over the deck area.

454.1.3.1.5

Walkways shall be provided between the pool and the sanitary facilities, and shall be constructed of concrete or other nonabsorbent material having a smooth slip-resistant finish for the first 15 feet (4572 mm) of the walkway measured from the nearest pool water’s edge. A hose bibb with a vacuum breaker shall be provided to allow the deck to be washed down with potable water.

454.1.3.1.6

Twenty percent of the deck along the pool perimeter may be obstructed as long as any one obstruction does not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) in any one area where water depth is 5 feet (1524 mm) or less. No lowered portion of the wet deck may be obstructed. Obstructions shall have a wet deck area behind or through them, with the near edge of the walk within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the water except approved slide obstructions shall have the near edge of the walk within 35 feet (10 668 mm) of the water. These obstructions must be protected by a barrier or must be designed to discourage patron access. Obstructions shall not include pool exit points. When an obstruction exists in multiple areas around the pool, the minimum distance between obstructions shall be 4 feet (1219 mm).

454.1.3.1.7

Food or drink service facilities shall not be located within 12 feet (3658 mm) of the water’s edge.

Exception: Food and beverages service facilities complying with Section 454.1.9.9.

454.1.3.1.8

The vertical clearance above the pool deck shall be at least 7 feet (2137 mm).

454.1.3.1.9

All public pools shall be surrounded by a minimum 48 inch (1219 mm) high fence or other approved substantial barrier. The fence shall be continuous around the perimeter of the pool area that is not otherwise blocked or obstructed by adjacent buildings or structures and shall adjoin with itself or abut to the adjacent members. Access through the barrier or fence from dwelling units, such as homes, apartments, motel rooms and hotel rooms, shall be through self-closing, self-latching lockable gates of 48 inch (1219 mm) minimal height from the floor or ground with the latch located a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate or at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate on the pool side. If the self-closing, self-latching gate is also self-locking and is operated by a key lock, electronic opener or integral combination lock, then the operable parts of such locks or openers shall be 34 inches minimum (864 mm) and 48 inches maximum (1219 mm) above the finished floor or ground. Doored access points from public rooms such as lobbies or club houses need not be through gates if the door(s) meet the same self-closing, self-latching requirements as a gate. Operable parts used for opening doors at these access points shall be 45 inches (1143 mm) minimum to 48 inches (1220 mm) maximum above the finish floor or ground. Gates shall open outward away from the pool area. A latched, lockable gate shall be placed in the fence within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the closest point between the pool and the equipment area for service access.

Instead of a fence, permanent natural or manmade features such as bulkheads, canals, lakes, navigable waterways, etc., adjacent to a pool may be permitted as a barrier when approved. When evaluating such barrier features, the applicable governing body may perform on-site inspections, and review evidence, such as surveys, aerial photographs, water management agency standards and specifications, and any other similar documentation to verify at minimum, the following: the barrier feature is not subject to natural changes, deviations or alterations and is capable of providing an equivalent level of protection as that provided by a structure, and the barrier feature clearly impedes, prohibits or restricts access to the pool.

Screened pool enclosures must be hardened on the bottom 3 feet (914 mm). Fencing consideration shall be given to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) Publication, No. 362, March 2005, guidelines available from CPSC.gov; or Sections 454.2.17.1.1 through 454.2.17.1.8. Safety covers that comply with ASTM F1346-91 (Reapproved 2003), titled Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, and available from ASTM.org, do not satisfy this requirement.

454.1.3.2 Bridges and overhead obstructions or river rides.

Bridges and overhead obstructions over the pool shall be designed so they will not introduce any contamination to the pool water. The minimum height of the bridge or obstruction shall be at least 4 feet (1219 mm) above the surface of the pool in all cases except when the pool is a river ride where it shall be at least 5 feet (1524 mm) above the surface of the pool. Minimum 42-inch-high (1067 mm) handrails shall be provided along each side of the bridge. The walking surfaces shall be constructed of concrete or other nonabsorbent material having a smooth slip-resistant finish. Pool coping shall not overhang into the pool more than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

454.1.3.3 Safety.
454.1.3.3.1

All swimming pools shall be installed with a shepherd’s hook securely attached to a one piece pole not less than 16 feet (4880 mm) in length, and at least one 16−24-inch (457−610 mm) diameter lifesaving ring, approved or certified under a nationally recognized water safety device standard, with sufficient rope attached to reach all parts of the pool from the pool deck. Safety equipment shall be mounted in a conspicuous place and be readily available for use. Pools greater than 50 feet (15 250 mm) in length shall have multiple units with at least one shepherd’s hook and one lifesaving ring located along each of the longer sides of the pools. Spa pools under 200 square feet (1.86 m2) of surface area, and interactive water features or wading pools with 2 feet (610 mm) or less of water depth are exempt from this requirement.

454.1.3.3.2

All pools with a slope transition shall have safety line anchors as required by Section 454.1.2.2.3.2.

454.1.3.3.3

If a pool cover or solar blanket is installed, it shall be secured around the entire perimeter and designed to support a live load of an adult person; or, the pool area shall be inaccessible to unauthorized individuals during times of cover or blanket use.

454.1.3.3.4

A room or space shall be provided for chemicals to be stored, and the area shall be inaccessible to the public.

454.1.3.3.5

Swimming pool slides shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and sound engineering practice, to include water depth, height above water, distance from pool structure, and isolation of landing area from other pool patrons. If an unenclosed ladder is used, it shall have handrails beginning at the bottom step and be no taller than 6 feet (1829 mm). Pools with slides designed for swimming pools are not required to satisfy those of slide plunge pools in Section 454.1.9.2.1.

454.1.3.3.6

Floating and climb-on devices, objects or toys that are not a part of the approved pool design shall not be tethered in the pool or installed without an engineering alterations application.

454.1.3.3.7

To reduce the possibility of injury, removable padding may be installed over the walls and floors of the pool, in areas where impacts are likely, so long as the surface of the padding is impervious, nontoxic, smooth, and slip resistant. Such padding shall be installed and maintained according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The surface underneath the padding must be structurally rigid, impervious, nontoxic, smooth, and slip resistant. The padding may be white or a contrasting color.

454.1.4 Electrical systems.
454.1.4.1 Electrical equipment and wiring.

Electrical equipment wiring and installation, including the bonding and grounding of pool components shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Outlets supplying pool pump motors connected to single-phase 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying other electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the low voltage contact limit, connected to single-phase, 120 volt through 240 volt branch circuits, rated 15 or 20 amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.

454.1.4.2 Lighting.

Artificial lighting shall be provided at all swimming pools which are to be used at night or which do not have adequate natural lighting so that all portions of the pool, including the bottom, may be readily seen without glare.

454.1.4.2.1 Outdoor pool lighting.

Lighting shall provide a minimum of 3 footcandles (30 lux) of illumination at the pool water surface and the pool wet deck surface. Underwater lighting shall be a minimum of 1/2 watt incandescent equivalent, or 10 lumens, per square foot of pool water surface area.

454.1.4.2.2 Indoor pool lighting.

Lighting shall provide a minimum of 10 footcandles (100 lux) of illumination at the pool water surface and the pool wet deck surface. Underwater lighting shall be a minimum of 8/10 watt incandescent equivalent, or 15 lumens, per square foot of pool surface area.

454.1.4.2.3 Underwater lighting.

Underwater luminaires shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. The location of the underwater luminaires shall be such that the underwater illumination is as uniform as possible. Underwater lighting requirements can be waived when the overhead lighting provides at least 15 footcandles (150 lux) of illumination at the pool water surface and pool wet deck surface. If signage clearly indicates that night swimming is prohibited, underwater lights supplying less than minimum illumination required for night swimming may be installed for safety and decorative purposes. Nothing in this section exempts swimming pools located in coastal areas, as specified in Section 3109 of this code, from compliance with all applicable local and state wildlife and environmental lighting requirements.

454.1.4.2.4 Overhead wiring.

Overhead service wiring shall not pass within an area extending a distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally away from the inside edge of the pool walls, diving structures, observation stands, towers or platforms. Allowances for overhead conductor clearances to pools that meet the safety standards in the National Electrical Code may be used instead. Electrical equipment wiring and installation including the grounding of pool components shall comply with Chapter 27.

454.1.4.2.5 Voltage limitation.

Underwater lighting, or lighting that may be exposed to nozzle-directed pool water, shall not exceed 30 volts DC or 15 volts AC. Such lights shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions and be listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

454.1.5 Equipment area or rooms.
454.1.5.1 Equipment.

Equipment designated by the manufacturer for outdoor use may be located in an equipment area, all other equipment must be located in an equipment room or enclosure. Plastic pipe subject to a period of prolonged sunlight exposure must be coated to protect it from ultraviolet light degradation. An equipment area shall be surrounded with a fence at least 4 feet (1219 mm) high on all sides not confined by a building or equivalent structure. A self-closing and self-latching gate with a permanent locking device shall be provided if necessary for access. An equipment room shall be protected on at least three sides and overhead. Any fence or gate installed shall use members spacing that shall not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere. The fourth side may be a gate, fence, or open if otherwise protected from unauthorized entrance. An equipment enclosure shall be lockable or otherwise protected from unauthorized access.

454.1.5.2 Indoor equipment.

Equipment not designated by the manufacturer for outdoor use shall be located in an equipment room. An equipment room shall be protected on at least three sides and overhead. The fourth side may be a gate, fence or open if otherwise protected from unauthorized entrance.

454.1.5.3 Materials.

The equipment enclosure, area or room floor shall be of concrete or other nonabsorbent material having a smooth slip-resistant finish and shall have positive drainage, including a sump pump if necessary. Ancillary equipment, such as a heater, not contained in an equipment enclosure or room shall necessitate an equipment area as described above.

454.1.5.4 Ventilation.

Equipment rooms shall have either forced draft or cross ventilation. All below-grade equipment rooms shall have a stairway access with forced draft ventilation or a fully louvered door and powered intake within 6 inches (152 mm) of the floor. Where stairway access is not necessary to carry heavy items into the below grade room or vault, a “ship’s ladder” may be used if specified by the design engineer who must consider anticipated workload including equipment removal; and the ladder slope, tread height and width; and construction material of the ladder.

454.1.5.5 Access.

The opening to an equipment room or area shall be a minimum 3 feet by 6 feet (914 mm by 1829 mm) and shall provide easy access to the equipment. Below-grade collector tank(s) must have adequate access for cleaning, maintenance and inspection.

454.1.5.6 Size.

The size of the equipment enclosure, room or area shall provide working space to perform routine operations. Clearance shall be provided for all equipment as prescribed by the manufacturer to allow normal maintenance operation and removal without disturbing other piping or equipment. In rooms with fixed ceilings, the minimum height shall be 7 feet (2137 mm).

454.1.5.7 Lighting.

Equipment rooms or areas shall be lighted to provide 30 footcandles (300 lux) of illumination at floor level.

454.1.5.8 Storage.

Equipment enclosures, rooms or areas shall not be used for storage of chemicals emitting corrosive fumes or for storage of other items to the extent that entrance to the room for inspection or operation of the equipment is impaired.

454.1.5.9 Hose bibbs.

A hose bibb with vacuum breaker shall be located in the equipment room or area.

454.1.6 Plumbing systems.
454.1.6.1 Sanitary facilities.

INSIGHTS

Restrooms shall include a water closet, a diaper change table, a urinal and a lavatory. The entry doors of all restrooms shall be located within a 200-foot (60 960 mm) walking distance of the nearest water’s edge of each pool served by the facilities.

Exception: Where a swimming pool serves only a designated group of residential dwelling units including hotel rooms and not the general public, poolside sanitary facilities are not required if all living units are within a 200-foot (60 960 mm) horizontal radius of the nearest water’s edge, are not over three stories in height unless serviced by an elevator, and are each equipped with private sanitary facilities.

 INSIGHTS (1)

TABLE 454.1.6.1 PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL—REQUIRED FIXTURE COUNT PER SQUARE FOOT OF POOL SURFACE

MEN’S RESTROOM	WOMEN’S RESTROOM
WC	Lavatory	WC	Lavatory
1 per 2,500 for first 10,000, 1 per 5,000 for remainder exceeding 10,000	1 per 5,000 for first 10,000, 1 per 10,000 for remainder exceeding 10,000	1 per 1,250 for first 10,000, 1 per 2,500 for remainder exceeding 10,000	1 per 5,000 for first 10,000, 1 per 10,000 for remainder exceeding 10,000

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

454.1.6.1.1 Required fixtures.

Fixtures shall be provided as indicated on Table 454.1.6.1, rounded up to the next whole number. The fixture count on this chart is deemed to be adequate for the pool and pool deck area that is up to three times the area of the pool surface provided.

454.1.6.1.2 Outside access.

Outside access to facilities shall be provided for bathers at outdoor pools. Where the restrooms are located within an adjacent building and the restroom doors do not open to the outside, the restroom doors shall be within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of the building’s exterior door. If the restrooms are not visible from any portion of the pool deck, signs shall be posted showing directions to the facilities. Directions shall be legible from any portion of the pool deck; letters shall be a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) high.

454.1.6.1.3 Sanitary facility floors.

Floors of sanitary facilities shall be constructed of concrete or other nonabsorbent materials, shall have a smooth, slip-resistant finish, and shall slope to floor drains, which must be installed within the facility. Carpets, duckboards and footbaths are prohibited. The intersection between the floor and walls shall be coved where either floor or wall is not made of waterproof materials such as tile or vinyl.

454.1.6.1.4 Hose bibb.

A hose bibb with vacuum breaker shall be provided in or within 25 feet (7620 mm) of each restroom to allow for ease of cleaning.

454.1.6.2 Rinse shower.

A minimum of one rinse shower shall be provided on the pool deck of all outdoor pools within the perimeter of the fence.

454.1.6.3 Cross-connection prevention.

An atmospheric break or approved backflow prevention device shall be provided in each pool water supply line that is connected to a public water supply. Vacuum breakers shall be installed on all hose bibbs.

454.1.6.4 Plastic pipes.

Plastic pipe subject to a period of prolonged sunlight exposure shall be coated to protect it from ultraviolet light degradation.

454.1.6.5 Recirculation and treatment systems.
454.1.6.5.1 Equipment testing.

Recirculation and treatment equipment such as filters, recessed automatic surface skimmers, ionizers, ozone generators, disinfection feeders and chlorine generators shall be tested and approved using NSF/ANSI 50–2019, Equipment and Chemicals for Swimming Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Other Recreational Water Facilities, which is incorporated by reference.

454.1.6.5.2 Volume.

The recirculation system shall be designed to provide a minimum of four turnovers of the pool volume per day. Pools that are less than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) at health clubs shall be required to provide a minimum of eight turnovers per day.

454.1.6.5.3 System design.

The design pattern of recirculation flow shall be 100 percent of the minimum turnover rate through the main drain piping and 100 percent of the minimum turnover rate through the perimeter overflow system, or at least 60 percent of the minimum turnover rate through the skimmer system. Except when a bottom drain is used in conjunction with a wall main drain carrying 100 percent of the recirculation flow.

454.1.6.5.3.1 Perimeter overflow gutters.

The lip of the gutter shall be uniformly level with a maximum tolerance of 1/4 inch (6 mm) between the high and low areas. The bottom of the gutter shall be level or slope to the drains. The spacing between drains shall not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) for 2-inch (51 mm) drains or 15 feet (4572 mm) for 21/2-inch (64 mm) drains, unless hydraulically justified by the design engineer. Gutters may be eliminated along pool edges for no more than 15 feet (4572 mm) and this shall not exceed 10 percent of the perimeter (at least 90 percent of the perimeter shall be guttered). In areas where gutters are eliminated, handholds shall be provided within 9 inches (229 mm) of the water surface. Handhold design shall be approved by the jurisdictional building department prior to construction.

454.1.6.5.3.1.1

Either recessed-type or opentype gutters shall be used. Special designs can be approved provided they are within limits of sound engineering practice. Recessed-type gutter open areas shall be at least 4 inches (102 mm) deep and 4 inches (102 mm) wide, with a minimum 4 inches (102 mm) clearance for cleaning. The open area of the recessed gutter, excluding the gutter front dam wall, shall not be visible from a position directly above the gutter sighting vertically down the edge of the deck or curb. Open-type gutters shall be at least 6 inches (150 mm) deep and 12 inches (305 mm) wide. The gutter shall slope 2 inches (51 mm), +/-1/4 inch (+/-6 mm), from the lip to the drains. The gutter drains shall be located at the deepest part of the gutter.

454.1.6.5.3.1.2

All gutter systems shall discharge into a collector tank.

454.1.6.5.3.1.3

The gutter lip shall be tiled with a minimum of 2-inch (51 mm) tile on the pool wall, each a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides. The back vertical wall of the gutter shall be tiled with glazed tile. All tile used on the flat, horizontal part, or the leading edge of an open-type gutter, must be slip resistant.

Exception: Stainless steel gutter systems when it can be shown that the surfaces at the waterline and back of the gutter are easily cleanable.

454.1.6.5.3.2 Recessed automatic surface skimmers.

Recessed automatic surface skimmers may be utilized when the pool water surface area is 1,000 square feet (93 m2) or less excluding offset stairs and swimouts and the width of the pool is not over 20 feet (6096 mm).

454.1.6.5.3.2.1 Volume.

The recessed automatic surface skimmer piping system shall be designed to carry 60 percent of the pool total design flow rate with each skimmer carrying a minimum 30 gpm (2 L/s). One skimmer for every 400 square feet (37 m2) or fraction thereof of pool water surface area shall be provided.

454.1.6.5.3.2.2 Location.

Prevailing wind direction and the pool outline shall be considered by the designer in the selection of skimmer locations. The location of skimmers shall be such that the interference of adjacent inlets and skimmers is minimized. Recessed automatic surface skimmers shall be installed so that there is no protrusion into the pool water area. The deck or curb shall provide for a handhold around the entire pool perimeter and shall not be located more than 9 inches (229 mm) above the midpoint of the opening of the skimmer.

454.1.6.5.3.2.3 Equalizers.

If installed, an equalizer valve shall be a spring-loaded vertical check valve that will not allow direct suction on the equalizer line. Float valves are prohibited. If installed, the equalizer line outlet shall be installed at least 1 foot (305 mm) below the normal pool water level and the equalizer line outlet shall be protected by an ASME/ANSI A112.19.8 compliant cover/grate. Any equalizer line shall be 2 inches (51 mm) or larger.

454.1.6.5.3.2.4 Wall-inlet fitting.

A wall-inlet fitting shall be provided directly across from each skimmer within a tolerance of 5 feet (304.8 mm) measured along the perimeter in either direction from center, or shall have a directional flow inlet across from the skimmer that directs flow toward the skimmer.

454.1.6.5.3.2.5 Waterline tile.

A minimum 6-inch (152 mm) water line tile shall be provided on all pools with automatic skimmer systems, each a minimum size of 1 inch (25 mm) on all sides. Glazed tile that is smooth and easily cleanable shall be utilized.

454.1.6.5.4 Pumps.

If the pump or suction piping is located above the water level of the pool, the pump shall be self-priming. Pumps that take suction prior to filtration shall be equipped with a hair and lint strainer. The recirculation pump shall be selected to provide the required recirculation flow against a minimum total dynamic head of 60 feet (18 288 mm) unless hydraulically justified by the design engineer. Vacuum D.E. filter system pumps shall provide at least 50 feet (15 240 mm) of total dynamic head. Should the total dynamic head required not be appropriate for a given project, the design engineer shall provide an alternative.

454.1.6.5.5 Filters.

Filters sized to handle the required recirculation flow shall be provided.

454.1.6.5.5.1 Filter capacities.

The maximum filtration rate in gallons per minute per square foot of filter area shall be: 15 [or 20 if so approved using the procedure stated in Section 454.1.6.5.1] for high rate sand filters, 3 for rapid sand filters, 0.375 for pleated cartridge filters, and 2 [or 3 if so approved using the procedure stated in Section 454.1.6.5.1] for Diatomaceous Earth (D.E.) or regenerative media type filters.

454.1.6.5.5.2 Filter appurtenances.
454.1.6.5.5.2.1 Pressure filter systems.

Pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an air relief valve, influent and effluent pressure gauges with minimum face size of 2 inches (51 mm) reading 0–60 psi (0–414 kPa), and a sight glass when a backwash line is required.

454.1.6.5.5.2.2 Vacuum filter systems.

Vacuum filter systems shall be equipped with a vacuum gauge which has a 2-inch (51 mm) face and reads from 0–30 inches of mercury.

454.1.6.5.5.2.3 D.E. systems.

A precoat pot or collector tank shall be provided for D.E.-type systems.

454.1.6.5.5.3 Filter tanks and elements.

The filter area shall be determined on the basis of effective filtering surfaces with no allowance given for areas of impaired filtration, such as broad supports, folds, or portions which may bridge. D.E.- type filter elements shall have a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) clear spacing between elements up to a 4 square foot (0.4 m2) effective area. The spacing between filter elements shall increase 1/8 inch (3 mm) for each additional square foot of filter area or fraction thereof above an effective filter area of 4 square feet (0.4 m2). All cartridges used in public pool filters shall be permanently marked with the manufacturer’s name, pore size and area in square feet of filter material. All cartridges with end caps shall have the permanent markings on one end cap. Vacuum filter tanks shall have coved intersections between the wall and the floor and the tank floor shall slope to the filter tank drain. The D.E.-type filter tank and elements shall be installed such that the recirculation flow draw down does not expose the elements to the atmosphere whenever only the main drain valve is open or only the surface overflow gutter system valve is open.

454.1.6.5.6 Piping.

All plastic pipe used in the recirculation system shall be imprinted with the manufacturer’s name and the NSF-pw logo for potable water applications. Size, schedule and type of pipe shall be included on the drawings. Plastic pipe subject to a period of prolonged sunlight exposure shall be coated to protect it from ultraviolet light degradation.

454.1.6.5.7 Valves.

Return lines, main drain lines, and surface overflow system lines, shall each have proportioning valves.

454.1.6.5.8 Flow velocity.

Pressure piping shall not exceed 10-feet per second (2038 mm/s), except that precoat lines with higher velocities may be used when necessary for agitation purposes. The flow velocity in suction piping shall not exceed 6-feet per second (1829 mm/s) except that flow velocities up to 10-feet per second (3048 mm/s) in filter assembly headers will be acceptable. Main drain systems and surface overflow systems which discharge to collector tanks shall be sized with a maximum flow velocity of 3-feet per second (914 mm/s). The filter and vacuuming system shall have the necessary valves and piping to allow filtering to pool, vacuuming to waste, vacuuming to filter, complete drainage of the filter tank, backwashing for sand and pressure D.E.- type filters and precoat recirculation for D.E.-type filters.

454.1.6.5.9 Inlets.

All inlets shall be adjustable with wall-type inlets being directionally adjustable and floor-type inlets having a means of flow adjustment. Floor inlets shall be designed and installed such that they do not protrude above the pool floor and all inlets shall be designed and installed so as not to constitute sharp edges or protrusions hazardous to pool bathers. Floor inlets for vinyl liner and fiberglass pools, shall be smooth with no sharp edges, and shall not extend more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) above the pool floor. Wall inlets shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below the normal operating water level unless precluded by the pool depth or intended for a specific acceptable purpose. The spacing of inlets shall comply with one of the following:

1.	The pool is 30 feet (9144 mm) in width or less and has wall inlets such that the inlet spacing does not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) along the entire pool water perimeter.

2.	The pool has floor inlets such that the spacing between adjacent inlets does not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) and the spacing between inlets and adjacent walls does not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm).

3.	The pool has a combination of wall and floor inlets such that the spacing between adjacent inlets of the same type does not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm), the spacing between a floor inlet and an adjacent wall without inlets does not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm), and the spacing between a floor inlet and an adjacent wall with inlets does not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm).

In each case, additional wall or floor inlets may be provided above and beyond these minimum requirements. The flow rate through each inlet shall not exceed 20 gpm (1 L/s) except for inlets designed for higher flows as specified by the manufacturer.

454.1.6.5.10 Main drain outlets.

All pools shall be provided with an outlet at the deepest point.

454.1.6.5.10.1

If the depth at the outlet deviates more than 3 inches (76 mm) from the side wall, that depth shall be identified on depth markers in addition to the markers normally required for the sidewall depth. Markers for the depth at the drains shall be in accordance with Section 454.1.2.3 with the following words added: “AT CENTER” for circular areas and “AT DEEP POINT” for other pool shapes.

454.1.6.5.10.2

Outlets shall be covered by a secured grating which requires the use of a tool to remove and whose open area is such that the maximum velocity of water passing through the openings does not exceed 11/2 feet per second (457 mm/s) at 100 percent of the design recirculation flow. Main drain covers/grates shall comply with the requirements of ANSI/APSP 16 and the water velocity of this section.

454.1.6.5.10.3

Multiple outlets, equally spaced from the pool side walls and from each other, shall be installed in pools where the deep portion of the pool is greater than 30 feet (9144 mm) in width.

454.1.6.5.10.4

If the area is subject to high ground water, the pool shall be designed to withstand hydraulic uplift or shall be provided with hydrostatic relief devices.

454.1.6.5.10.5

The main drain outlet shall be connected to a collector tank. The capacity of the collector tank shall be at least 1 minute of the recirculated flow unless justified by the design engineer. Vacuum filter tanks are considered collector tanks.

454.1.6.5.11 Water makeup control.

An automatic and manual water makeup control shall be provided to maintain the water level at the lip of the overflow gutter or at the mouth of the recessed automatic surface skimmers and shall discharge through an air gap into a fill pipe or collector tank. Over the rim fill spouts are prohibited.

454.1.6.5.12 Cleaning system.

A portable, robotic or plumbed-in vacuum cleaning system shall be provided. All vacuum pumps shall be equipped with hair and lint strainers. When the system is plumbed in, the vacuum fittings shall be located to allow cleaning the pool with a 50-foot (15 240 mm) maximum length of hose. Vacuum fittings shall be located remotely in the pool deck. Remote vacuum assemblies shall be installed with an equalizer line when the vacuum piping system is connected directly to pump suction and the suction line shall be protected with a threaded plug when not in use. The equalizer line outlet shall be installed at least 1 foot (305 mm) below the normal pool water level and the equalizer line outlet shall be protected by an ANSI/APSP-16 compliant cover/grate. The equalizer line shall be sized to handle the expected flow with a 2-inch (51 mm) minimum line size. The provision of a filtered, chemically treated water supply to the equalizer piping shall be provided to assist in preventing algae from forming within the equalizer piping arrangement. Bag-type cleaners, which operate as ejectors on potable water supply pressure, shall be protected by a vacuum breaker. Cleaning devices shall not be used while the pool is open to bathers.

454.1.6.5.13 Rate of flow indicators.

A rate of flow indicator, reading in gpm, shall be installed on the return line following filtration and prior to chemical injection. The rate of flow indicator shall be properly sized for the design flow rate and shall be capable of measuring from three-quarters to at least one-and-one-quarter times the design flow rate. The flow measuring device shall have an operating range appropriate for the anticipated flow rates and be installed where it is readily accessible to read and for routine maintenance. The clearances upstream and downstream from the rate of flow indicator shall comply with manufacturer’s installation specifications.

454.1.6.5.14 Heaters.

Pool heaters shall comply with nationally recognized standards acceptable to the jurisdictional building department and to the design engineer. Pools equipped with heaters shall have a fixed thermometer mounted in the pool recirculation line downstream from the heater outlet. Thermometers mounted on heater outlets do not meet this requirement. A sketch of any proposed heater installation including valves, thermometer, pipe sizes, and material specifications shall be included in the application for permit prior to installation. Piping and influent, effluent and bypass valves which allow isolation or removal of the heater from the system shall be provided. Materials used in solar and other heaters shall be nontoxic and acceptable for use with potable water. Heaters shall not prevent the attainment of the required turnover rate.

454.1.6.5.15 Pool waste water disposal.

Pool waste water shall be discharged through an air gap; disposal shall be to sanitary sewers, storm sewers, drainfields, or by other means, in accordance with local requirements including obtaining all necessary permits. Disposal of water from pools using D.E. powder shall be accomplished through separation tanks which are equipped with air bleed valves, bottom drain lines, and isolation valves, or through a settling tank with final disposal being acceptable to local authorities. D.E. separator tanks shall have a capacity as rated by the manufacturer, equal to the square footage of the filter system. All lines shall be sized to handle the expected flow. There shall not be a direct physical connection between any drain from a pool or recirculation system and a sewer line.

454.1.6.5.16 Addition of chemicals.

Disinfection and ph adjustment shall be added to the pool recirculation flow using automatic feeders meeting the requirement of ANSI/NSF 50. All chemicals shall be fed into the return line after the pump, heater and filters unless the feeder was designed by the manufacturer and approved by the NSF to feed to the collector tank or to the suction side of the pump.

454.1.6.5.16.1 Gas chlorination.

When gas chlorination is utilized, the chlorinator shall be capable of continuously feeding a chlorine dosage of 6 mg/L to the recirculated flow of the filtration system. The application point for chlorine shall be located in the return line downstream of the filter, recirculation pump, heater, and flow meter, and as far as possible from the pool.

454.1.6.5.16.1.1

Gas chlorinators shall be located in above-grade rooms and in areas which are inaccessible to unauthorized persons.

454.1.6.5.16.1.1.1

Chlorine gas rooms shall have: continuous forced draft ventilation capable of a minimum of one air change per minute with an exhaust at floor level to the outside, a minimum of 30 footcandles (300 lux) of illumination with the switch located outside and the door shall open out and shall not be located adjacent to the filter room entrance or the pool deck. A shatterproof gas-tight inspection window shall be provided.

454.1.6.5.16.1.1.2

Chlorine gas areas shall have a roof and shall be enclosed by a chain-link-type fence at least 6 feet (1829 mm) high to allow ventilation and prevent vandalism.

454.1.6.5.16.1.1.3

After December 31, 2023, new pools may not use chlorine gas.

454.1.6.5.16.1.2

When booster pumps are used with the chlorinator, the pump shall use recirculated pool water supplied via the recirculation filtration system. The booster pump shall be electrically interlocked with the recirculation pump to prevent the feeding of chlorine when the recirculation pump is not operating.

454.1.6.5.16.1.3

A means of weighing chlorine containers shall be provided. When 150-pound (68 kg) cylinders are used, platform-type scales shall be provided and shall be capable of weighing a minimum of two full cylinders at one time. The elevation of the scale platform shall be within 2 inches (51 mm) of the adjacent floor level, and the facilities shall be constructed to allow easy placement of full cylinders on the scales.

454.1.6.5.16.2 Hypohalogenation and electrolytic chlorine generators.

The hypohalogenation-type feeder and electrolytic chlorine generators shall be adjustable from 0 to full range. A rate of flow indicator is required on erosion-type feeders. The feeders shall be capable of continuously feeding a dosage of 6 mg/L to the minimum required turnover flow rate of the filtration systems. Solution feeders shall be capable of feeding the above dosage using a 10-percent sodium hypochlorite solution, or 5-percent calcium hypochlorite solution, whichever disinfectant is to be utilized at this facility. To prevent the disinfectant from siphoning or feeding directly into the pool or pool piping under any type failure of the recirculation equipment, an electrical interlock with the recirculation pump shall be incorporated into the system for electrically operated feeders. The minimum size of the solution reservoirs shall be at least 50 percent of the maximum daily capacity of the feeder. The solution reservoirs shall be marked to indicate contents. The solution reservoirs shall be manufactured to accommodate corrosive and oxidizering liquid chemicals.

454.1.6.5.16.3 Feeders for pH adjustment.

Feeders for pH adjustment shall be provided on all pools. pH adjustment feeders shall be positive displacement type, shall be adjustable from 0 to full range, and shall have an electrical interlock with the circulation pump to prevent discharge when the recirculation pump is not operating. When soda ash is used for pH adjustment, the maximum concentration of soda ash solution to be fed shall not exceed 1/2-pound (0.2 kg) soda ash per gallon of water. Feeders for soda ash shall be capable of feeding a minimum of 3 gallons (11 L) of the above soda ash solution per pound of gas chlorination capacity. The minimum size of the solution reservoirs shall not be less than 50 percent of the maximum daily capacity of the feeder. The solution reservoirs shall be marked to indicate the type of contents. The solution reservoirs shall be manufactured to accommodate corrosive and oxidizing liquid chemicals.

454.1.6.5.16.4 Ozone generating equipment.

Ozone generating equipment may be used for supplemental water treatment on public swimming pools subject to the conditions of this section.

454.1.6.5.16.4.1

Ozone generating equipment electrical components and wiring shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building and the manufacturer shall provide a certificate of conformance. The process equipment shall be provided with an effective means to alert the user when a component of this equipment is not operating.

454.1.6.5.16.4.2

Ozone generating equipment shall meet the NSF/ANSI Standard 50.

454.1.6.5.16.4.3

The concentration of ozone in the return line to the pool shall not exceed 0.1 mg/L.

454.1.6.5.16.4.4

The injection point for ozone generating equipment shall be located in the pool return line after the filtration and heating equipment, prior to the halogen injection point, and as far as possible from the nearest pool return inlet with a minimum distance of 4 feet (1219 mm). Injection methods shall include a mixer, contact chamber, or other means of efficiently mixing the ozone with the recirculated water. The injection and mixing equipment shall not prevent the attainment of the required turnover rate of the recirculation system. Ozone generating equipment shall be equipped with a check valve between the generator and the injection point. Ozone generating equipment shall be equipped with an air flow meter and a means to control the flow. The generator shall be electrically interlocked with the recirculation pump to prevent the feeding of ozone when the recirculation pump is not operating. A flow sensor controller can also be used to turn off the feeder when flow is sensed.

454.1.6.5.16.4.5 Ventilation requirements.

Ozone generating equipment shall be installed in equipment rooms with either forced draft or cross draft ventilation. Below-grade equipment rooms with ozone generators shall have forced draft ventilation and all equipment rooms with forced draft ventilation shall have the fan control switch located outside the equipment room door. The exhaust fan intake for forced draft ventilation and at least one vent grille for cross draft ventilation shall be located at floor level.

454.1.6.5.16.4.6

A self-contained breathing apparatus designed and rated by its manufacturer for use in ozone contaminated air shall be provided when ozone generator installations are capable of exceeding the maximum pool water ozone contact concentration of 0.1 mg/L. The self-contained breathing apparatus shall be available at all times and shall be used at times when the maintenance or service personnel have determined that the equipment room ozone concentration exceeds 10 mg/L. Ozone generator installations which require the self-contained breathing apparatus shall also be provided with Draeger-type detector tube equipment which is capable of detecting ozone levels of 10 mg/L and greater.

Exception: In lieu of the self-contained breathing apparatus an ozone detector capable of detecting 1 mg/L may be used. Said detector shall be capable of stopping the production of ozone, venting the room and sounding an alarm once ozone is detected.

454.1.6.5.16.5

Ionization units may be used as supplemental water treatment on public pools subject to the condition of this section.

454.1.6.5.16.5.1

Ionization equipment and electrical components and wiring shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building and the manufacturer shall provide a certification of conformance.

454.1.6.5.16.5.2

Ionization equipment shall meet the NSF/ANSI Standard 50, Circulation System Components and Related Materials for Swimming Pools, Spas/Hot Tubs, or equivalent, shall meet UL standards and shall be electrically interlocked with a recirculation pump.

454.1.6.5.16.6 

INSIGHTS

Ultraviolet (UV) light disinfectant equipment may be used subject to the conditions of this paragraph and manufacturer’s specifications. UV is encouraged to be used to eliminate or reduce chlorine-resistant pathogens, especially the protozoan cryptosporidium.

1.	UV equipment and electrical components and wiring shall comply with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and the manufacturer shall provide a certification of conformance to the jurisdictional building department.

2.	UV equipment shall meet UL standards and shall be electrically interlocked with recirculation pump(s) on all pools and with feature pumps(s) on an IWF such that when the UV equipment fails to produce the required dosage as measured by an automated sensor, the feature pump(s) are disabled so the water features do not operate.

3.	UV equipment shall be certified for secondary or supplemential disinfection per NSF 50–2020.

4.	UV equipment that is not certified for secondary disinfection per NSF 50–2020 shall be installed and configured to constantly produce a validated dosage of at least 40 mJ/cm2 (millijoules per square centimeter) at the end of lamp life, and other third party validation criteria in accordance with the USEPA Ultraviolet Disinfectant Guidance Manual dated November 2006, publication number EPA 815-R-06-007, whenever these devices are used in high-risk pools for secondary disinfection.

5.	The UV equipment shall not be located in a side stream flow and shall be located to treat all water returning to the pool or water features. Any treatment chemicals shall be injected downstream of the UV equipment.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1.6.5.17

Up to 50 percent of the return water that has passed through the filter and received the addition of chemicals may be diverted to water features such as waterfalls or fountains in pools, however, all waters used in the feature shall not be counted toward attaining the minimum turnover rate specified in Section 454.1.1.1 or 454.1.6.5.2, or elsewhere in this code. The return piping system shall be designed and capable of handling the additional feature flow when the feature is turned off, otherwise the pump speed shall be reduced automatically. All water features that utilize water from the pool shall be designed to return the water to the pool. Spray features mounted in the pool deck shall be flush with the pool deck and shall be designed with the safety of the pool patron in mind. Where a pool’s feature flow is greater than 20 percent, that pool shall comply with Section 454.1.7.9 for automated controllers, and with Section 454.1.9.2.7 for 12 mg/L disinfectant capacity by the halogen feeder equipment.

454.1.6.5.18 Chemical quality.

Only NSF-60 approved chemicals shall be provided.

454.1.6.5.19

Automated oxidation reduction potential (ORP) and pH controllers with sensing probes shall be provided on all newly built public swimming pools to assist in maintaining proper disinfection and pH levels.

454.1.7 Wading pools.
454.1.7.1 General.

Wading pools shall meet the requirements of Sections 454.1.1 through 454.1.6.5, unless otherwise indicated. Wading pools and associated piping shall not be physically connected to any other swimming pools and have no minimum width dimensions requirements.

454.1.7.2 Depths.

Wading pools shall have a maximum depth of 2 feet (610 mm). The depth at the perimeter of the pool shall be uniform and shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm). However, where jurisdictional building department-approved zero depth entry designs are used, this uniform depth requirement must be met only on the remainder of the pool outside the zero depth entry portion. The pool floor shall not be more than 12 inches (305 mm) below the deck unless steps and handrails are provided. Depth and “NO DIVING” markers are not required on wading pools.

454.1.7.3 Recirculation.

Wading pools shall have a minimum of one turnover every hour.

454.1.7.3.1

Skimmer equalizer lines, when installed, shall be plumbed into the main drain.

454.1.7.4 Inlets.

Wading pools with 20 feet (6096 mm) or less of perimeter shall have a minimum of two equally spaced adjustable inlets.

454.1.7.5 Emergency drainage.

All wading pools shall have drainage to waste without a cross connection through a quick opening valve to facilitate emptying the wading pool should accidental bowel or other discharge occur.This can also be achieved utilizing a pump taking suction from the collector tank drain with immediate discharge to waste. The pump must be capable of draining all water in the pool and tank.

454.1.7.6

Reserved.

454.1.7.7 Wading pool decks.

When within 50 feet of swimming pools, wading pools shall be separated from the swimming pool by an effective barrier or a fence of a minimum of 48 inches (1219 mm) in height with self-latching and self-closing gates. When adjacent to areas less than 1 foot (305 mm) deep of zero depth entry pools, the fence or effective barrier is required if the water edges are less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) apart. Where the walking distance is at least 50 feet (15 240 mm) between the wading pool and all other pools, fencing requirements should be carefully considered by the applicant to control usage, but are not required by rule. Effective barriers that are designed to define the walking path shall be subject to review and approval by the department. Wading pools shall have a minimum 10-feet (3048 mm) wide deck around at least 50 percent of their perimeter with the remainder of the perimeter deck being at least 4 feet (1219 mm) wide. There shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) between adjacent swimming pools and wading pools.

454.1.7.8 Lighting.

Wading pools are exempt from underwater lighting requirements but shall have lighting installed for night use of 10 footcandles (100 lux) if indoors or 3 footcandles (30 lux) for outdoor night use. Such illumination shall be provided over the pool water surface and the pool deck surface.

454.1.7.9

Automated oxidation reduction potential (ORP) and pH controllers with sensing probes shall be provided to assist in maintaining proper disinfection and pH levels.

454.1.8 Spa pools.
454.1.8.1 General.

Spa pools shall meet the requirements of Sections 454.1.1 through 454.1.6.5, unless specifically indicated otherwise.

454.1.8.2 Color, pattern, finish.

The color, pattern or finish of the pool interior shall not obscure the existence or presence of objects or surfaces within the pool.

454.1.8.3 Water depths.

Spa-type pools shall have a minimum water depth of 21/2 feet (762 mm) and a maximum water depth of 4 feet (1219 mm), except that swim spa pools may have a maximum water depth of 5 feet (1524 mm). Depth markers and “NO DIVING” markers are not required on spa-type pools with 200 square feet (19 m2) or less of water surface area.

454.1.8.4 Steps and handrails.

Steps or ladders shall be provided and shall be located to provide adequate entrance to and exit from the pool. The number of sets of steps or ladders required shall be on the basis of one for each 75 feet (22 860 mm), or major fraction thereof, of pool perimeter. Step sets for spa-type pools with more than 200-square-feet (19 m2) of pool water surface area shall comply with Section 454.1.2.5. Step sets for spa-type pools with 200 square feet (19 m2) or less of pool water surface area shall comply with the following: Step treads shall have a minimum width of 10 inches (254 mm) for a minimum continuous tread length of 12 inches (305 mm). Step riser heights shall not exceed 12 inches (305 mm). Intermediate treads and risers between the top and bottom treads and risers shall be uniform in width and height, respectively. Contrasting markings on the leading edges of the submerged benches and the intersections of the treads and risers are required to be installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.5.

454.1.8.5 Decks.

Spa pools that are 10 feet (3048 mm) wide or less shall have a minimum 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) unobstructed continuous deck around a minimum of 50 percent of the pool perimeter, with all points on the water surface within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally of the deck. Decks shall not be more than 36 inches (914 mm) below the top of the pool. For spa pools greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) in width, deck obstructions shall comply with Section 454.1.3.1.6.

454.1.8.6 Therapy or jet systems.
454.1.8.6.1

The return lines of spa-type therapy or jet systems shall be independent of the recirculation-filtration and heating systems.

454.1.8.6.2

Therapy or jet pumps shall take suction from the collector tank. Collector tank sizing shall take this additional gallonage into consideration.

454.1.8.6.3

Heated systems shall incorporate a 15-minute patron-activated timer on the therapy pump circuit.

454.1.8.7 Filtration system inlets.

Spa-type pools shall have a minimum of two equally spaced adjustable inlets.

454.1.8.8 Filtration recirculation.

Spa-type pools shall have a minimum of one turnover every 30 minutes. The piping, fittings, and hydraulic requirements shall be in accordance with Section 454.1.6.5. All recirculation lines to and from the pool shall be individually valved with proportional flow-type valves in order to control the recirculation flow.

454.1.8.9 Vacuuming.

Spa-type pools of over 200 square feet (19 m2) of pool water surface area shall have provisions for vacuuming.

454.1.8.10 Combination spas/pools.

When spa pools are part of a conventional swimming pool, the spa pool area shall be the same water depth as the main pool area. The spa pool area shall meet Sections 454.1.8.6 and 454.1.8.7, and the deck area shall be protected by connected 30-inch-high (762 mm) stanchions or other approved obstruction to prevent entry, wherever there is a bench with high velocity nozzles producing air bubbles. The deck perimeter at the offset spa area shall not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm). All benches shall have contrasting markings on the leading edges of the intersection of the bench seats. If tile is used, it shall be slip resistant.

454.1.8.11 Portable and wooden spa pools.

Portable and wooden-type spa pools are prohibited.

454.1.8.12 Automated controllers.

Automated oxidation reduction potential (ORP) and pH controllers with sensing probes shall be installed on spa pools to assist in maintaining proper disinfection and pH levels.

454.1.8.13

In addition to the requirements of Section 454.1.2.3.5 spa pool signs installed shall include the following:

1.	Maximum water temperature: 104°F (40°C).

2.	Children under twelve must have adult supervision.

3.	Pregnant women, small children, people with health problems and people using alcohol, narcotics or other drugs that cause drowsiness should not use spa pools without first consulting a doctor.

4.	Maximum use: 15 minutes.

454.1.8.14

A clock shall be visible from the spa pool to assist the patron in meeting Item 4 of Section 454.1.8.13.

454.1.8.15

If a spa is equipped with an emergency cutoff or kill switch, it shall include provisions for a minimum 80 decibel audible alarm near the spa to sound continuously until deactivated when such device is triggered. The following additional rule sign shall be installed to be visible by the spa which reads “ALARM INDICATES SPA PUMPS OFF. DO NOT USE SPA WHEN ALARM SOUNDS UNTIL ADVISED OTHERWISE.”

454.1.9 Water recreation attractions and specialized pools.
454.1.9.1 General.

Water recreation attraction projects shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice. In addition to the requirements of this section, compliance is required with Sections 454.1.1 through 454.1.6.5 of this chapter depending upon the pool design and function. Additionally, all pools listed in this section shall provide a minimum of one turnover every 2 hours unless otherwise noted.

454.1.9.2 Recreational water slides.

Recreational Water slides shall terminate in either a plunge pool or run out lanes.

454.1.9.2.1 Plunge pool.

Plunge pools shall be constructed of concrete or other structurally rigid impervious materials with a nontoxic, smooth and slip-resistant finish. The plunge pool design shall meet the criteria of Sections 454.1.9.2.1.1 through 454.1.9.2.1.6.

454.1.9.2.1.1 Adequate space at terminus.

The slide design engineer must demonstrate to the jurisdictional building department’s satisfaction that the water depth, clear area, distance between adjacent slides, floor slope, rope line placement, exit location, and pool floor surface finish are all adequate to prevent injury or harm to riders or other users of the pool, making reference to ASTM F2376, Standard Practice for Classification, Design, Manufacture, Construction, and Operation of Water Slide Systems, as appropriate. Only one entry or exit location shall be required, regardless of the plunge pool’s perimeter.

454.1.9.2.1.2

Reserved.

454.1.9.2.1.3 Slide flume terminus.
454.1.9.2.1.3.1

The slide flume terminus shall be designed by the design engineer who can demonstrate to the jurisdictional building department’s satisfaction that riders will be adequately slowed prior to discharge so as to prevent injury or harm to the rider upon impact with the plunge pool water. The design engineer must document the designed, safe location of the terminus relative to the plane of the pool wall and to the water level.

454.1.9.2.1.4 Plunge pool main drains.

The plunge pool shall have a minimum of one main drain with separate piping and valve to the filtration system collector tank. The velocity through the openings of the main drain grate shall not exceed 11/2 feet per second (457 mm/s) at the design flow rate of the recirculation pump. The main drain piping shall be sized to handle 100 percent of the design flow rate of the filtration system with a maximum flow velocity of 3 feet (914 mm) per second.

454.1.9.2.1.5 Plunge pool floor slope.

The plunge pool floor shall slope to the main drains and the slope shall not exceed 1 in 10.

454.1.9.2.1.6 Plunge pool decks.
454.1.9.2.1.6.1

Decking shall be provided at the entrance and exit points as necessary to provide safe patron access but shall not be smaller than 10 feet (3048 mm) in width and length.

454.1.9.2.1.6.2 Slopes.

All plunge pool decks shall slope to the plunge pool or pump reservoir or to deck drains which discharge to waste, or other acceptable means. All slopes shall be between 2- and 4-percent grade except for paver-type decks where a minimum of 1 percent grade is allowed.

454.1.9.2.1.7 Plunge pool volume.

The total volume of a plunge pool and its collector tank or tanks shall be equal to or greater than 3 minutes of the combined flow rate in gallons per minute of all filter and slide pumps. The design engineer must account for the water level in the pool both when the slide pumps are on and when they are off. If skimmers are used, skimmers must be placed at both levels if the variance is greater than 3 inches (76 mm). If perimeter overflow is used, half of the gutter outlets must be functional at each water level.

454.1.9.2.2 Run out lanes.
454.1.9.2.2.1

Run out lanes may be utilized in lieu of or within a plunge pool system, provided they are constructed to the slide manufacturers specifications and are approved by the design engineer of record.

454.1.9.2.2.2

Five-foot-wide (1524 mm) walkways shall be provided adjacent to run out lanes, as either dry deck or as part of a pool with up to 12 inches (305 mm) of water depth in this area. The 5-foot (1524 mm) walkway need be only on one side of the run out lane.

454.1.9.2.2.3

Minimum water level indicator markings shall be provided on both sides of the run out trough to ensure adequate water for the safe slowing of pool patrons.

454.1.9.2.2.4

Attendants or lifeguards shall be provided at the top of the slides and at the run out in accordance with a safety/lifeguard plan approved by the Department of Health. If night operation is proposed, 3 footcandles (30 lux) of light shall be provided at the top of the slides and at the run outs.

454.1.9.2.3 Pump reservoirs.

Pump reservoirs are only required for slides with run out lanes. Pump reservoirs shall be made of concrete or other impervious material with a smooth finish. Pump reservoirs shall be for the slide pump intakes, but where properly sized may also be used as a collector tank for the filter system. Pump reservoir designs shall meet the criteria of Sections 454.1.9.2.3.1 through 454.1.9.2.3.5.

454.1.9.2.3.1 Pump reservoir volume.

The minimum reservoir volume shall be equal to 3 minutes of the combined flow rate in gallons per minute of all filter and slide pumps unless justified by the design engineer.

454.1.9.2.3.2 Pump reservoir security.

Pump reservoirs shall be accessible only to authorized individuals.

454.1.9.2.3.3 Pump reservoir maintenance accessibility.

Access decks or walkable grating shall be provided for the reservoir such that all areas are accessible for vacuuming, skimming, and maintenance. The decks shall have a minimum width of 3 feet (914 mm) and shall have a slope of 2−4 percent away from the reservoir.If any part of the pump reservoir has a permanent cover or roof, hatches or other openings for access to and observation of the floor must be provided with one hatch or opening per 150 square feet (13.9 m2) of tank floor area.

454.1.9.2.3.4 Pump reservoir slide pump intakes.

The slide pump intakes shall be located in the pump reservoir and shall be designed to allow cleaning without danger of operator entrapment.

454.1.9.2.3.5 Pump reservoir main drains.

The pump reservoir shall have a minimum of one main drain with separate piping and valve to the filtration system collector tank unless the reservoir is used as the collector tank. Velocity through the openings of the main drain grates shall not exceed 11/2 feet per second (457 mm/s) at the design flow rate of the filtration system pump. The main drain piping shall be sized to handle 100 percent of design flow rate of the filtration system pump with a maximum flow velocity of 3 feet per second (914 mm/s).

454.1.9.2.3.6

Reserved.

454.1.9.2.4 Slide pump check valves.

Slide pumps shall have check valves on all discharge lines.

454.1.9.2.5 Perimeter overflow gutters or skimmers.

Plunge pools shall have perimeter overflow gutter system or skimmer which shall be an integral part of the filtration system.

454.1.9.2.5.1 Perimeter overflow gutter systems.

Perimeter overflow gutter systems shall meet the requirements of Section 454.1.6.5.3.1 except that gutters are not required directly under slide flumes or along the weirs which separate plunge pools and pump reservoirs.

454.1.9.2.5.2 Surface skimmers.

Surface skimmers may be used in lieu of perimeter overflow gutters. The provisions of Section 454.1.6.5.3.2 shall apply, except no maximum width or maximum area shall apply to plunge pools.

454.1.9.2.6 Water slide recirculation–filtration equipment.
454.1.9.2.6.1 Recirculation rate.

The recirculation-filtration system of water slide plunge pools shall turn the water over in a period of 2 hours or less. The turnover rate for slides with run out lanes shall be 1 hour or less. For swimming pools that are not dedicated as plunge pools, but include a recreational water slide as part of the design, the total water volume shall include the water in the plunge pool dimensions stipulated by code, plus the slide water.

454.1.9.2.6.2 Filter performance.

A continuous readout/electronic recording in-line turbidity meter shall be installed per manufacturer’s specifications and used to determine compliance with Rule 64E-9, Florida Administrative Code water quality criteria for clarity. Otherwise if not installed, the recirculation turnover rate of the plunge pool’s water volume as defined in Section 454.1.9.2.6.1, must be enhanced to 1 hour or less.

454.1.9.2.7 Disinfection.

The disinfection equipment shall be capable of feeding 12 mg/L of halogen to the continuous recirculation flow of the filtration system.

454.1.9.2.8

Slide design and construction is the responsibility of a professional engineer licensed in Florida and the applicant.

454.1.9.2.9

A lockable gate shall be provided at the stair or ladder entrance to the slide.

454.1.9.2.10

Upon construction completion, a professional engineer licensed in Florida shall certify that the slide was constructed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications and is structurally sound.

454.1.9.3 Water activity pools.
454.1.9.3.1

Water activity pools shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice.

454.1.9.3.2

Water activity pools shall be constructed of concrete or other structurally rigid impervious materials with a nontoxic, smooth and slip-resistant finish. These pools shall be of such shape and design as to be operated and maintained in a safe and sanitary manner.

454.1.9.3.3

The recirculation-filtration system of water activity pools shall achieve a minimum of one turnover every 2 hours for water activity pools over 2 feet (610 mm) deep, and 1 hour for these pools that are 2 feet (610 mm) deep or less.

454.1.9.3.4

Those portions of the activity pool where the water depth will not allow for the proper installation of underwater lighting shall be provided with 6 footcandles (60 lux) of lighting on the deck and water surface.

454.1.9.3.5

Fence requirements shall be in accordance with Section 454.1.7.7.

454.1.9.3.6

Play features with an overhead clearance of less than 4 feet (1219 mm) shall be blocked or barricaded to preclude children becoming entrapped.

454.1.9.3.7

In addition to the requirements of Section 454.1.2.3.5, all water activity pool signs installed shall have the following added in one inch letters:

“Do not swallow the pool water, it is recirculated.”

“Do not use pool if you are ill with diarrhea.”

454.1.9.4 Wave pools.
454.1.9.4.1

Wave pools shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice.

454.1.9.4.2

Wave pools shall be constructed of concrete or other impervious materials with a smooth slip-resistant finish. These pools shall be of such shape and design as to be operated and maintained in a safe and sanitary manner.

454.1.9.4.3

The recirculation-filtration system of wave pools shall be capable of a minimum of one turnover every 3 hours.

454.1.9.4.4

Floors shall be sloped in accordance with the manufacturer’s or design engineer’s specifications; however, they shall not exceed the slope limits of Section 454.1.2.2.3.

454.1.9.5 River rides.
454.1.9.5.1

River rides shall be constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice.

454.1.9.5.2

River rides shall be constructed on concrete or other impervious materials with a nontoxic, smooth and slip-resistant finish. These rides shall be of such shape and design as to be operated in a safe and sanitary manner.

454.1.9.5.3

The recirculation-filtration system of the river ride shall be capable of a minimum of one turnover every 3 hours.

454.1.9.5.4

The maximum water depth of the river ride shall not exceed 3 feet (914 mm) unless justified to the jurisdictional building department’s satisfaction by the design engineer.

454.1.9.5.5

Decking shall comply with Section 454.1.9.2.1.6.1. Additional decking along the ride course is not required except that decking shall be required at lifeguard locations and emergency exit points.

454.1.9.5.6

Access and exit shall be provided at the start and end of the ride and additional exit locations shall be located along the ride course as necessary to provide for the safety of the patrons.

Propulsion jets shall be installed in the walls of the river ride. In the alternative, propulsion jets may be installed in the floor if they are covered by a grate that will inhibit entrapment or injury of the pool patrons’ feet or limbs.

454.1.9.6 Zero depth entry pools.
454.1.9.6.1

Zero depth entry pools shall have a continuous floor slope from the water edge to 3 feet (914 mm) of water depth at which point the slope can transition to another, less steep continuous slope. Floating safety ropes and slope transition markings are not required at this transition point.

454.1.9.6.2

The deck level perimeter overflow system with grate shall be provided at the water’s edge across the entire zero depth portion of the pool. Zero entry grate must be 8 to 12 inches wide, slip resistant, and constructed for intended purpose of submersion in water and exposure to UV sunlight.

454.1.9.6.3

The pool deck may slope toward the pool for no more than 7 feet (2133 mm), as measured from the overflow system grate outward. Beyond this area the deck shall slope away from the pool in accordance with Section 454.1.2.2.3.

454.1.9.6.4

“No Entry” markers shall be provided along the pool wall edge where the water depth is more than 10 inches (254 mm) but less than 3 feet (914 mm), unless stairs and handrails are provided. “No Entry” markers shall be slip-resistant, shall have 2-inch-high (51 mm) letters, shall be located within 2 feet (610 mm) of the pool edge and shall be spaced no more than 8 feet (2438 mm) apart, or 15 feet (4572 mm) apart if 4-inch-high (102 mm) letters are provided. “NO DIVING” markers are not required around the zero entry area.

454.1.9.6.5

Additional inlets shall be provided in areas of less than 18 inches (457 mm) deep. The numbers and location shall be such as to ensure a 1-hour turnover in this area.

454.1.9.6.6 

INSIGHTS

The recirculation-filtration system shall be of a minimum of one turnover every 2 hours in the area of the pool that is 3 feet (914 mm) deep or less. In the remainder of the pool where the depth is greater than 3 feet (914 mm), the system shall have a maximum 6 hour turnover rate. The design plans submitted by the applicant shall provide the volume of water in the pool area of 3 feet (914 mm) depth and less, the volume of water in the pool area greater than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth and the total volume in the pool for determination of minimum circulation flow. The volume calculations shall provide verification that the correct volume of water is used to determine the minimum flow at the 2-hour and the 6-hour flow requirements.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1.9.6.7

Those portions of the zero depth entry pool, where the water depth will not allow for the proper installation of underwater lighting, shall be provided with 6 footcandles (60 lux) of lighting on the deck and the water.

454.1.9.6.8

Play structures in a zero depth entry area [in depth 0–3 feet (0 to 914 mm)] may be within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the pool walls, but shall comply with sound engineering requirements for the safety of pool patrons.

454.1.9.7 Special purpose pools.
454.1.9.7.1 General.

Special purpose pool projects may deviate from the requirements of other sections of these rules provided the design and construction are within the limits of sound engineering practice. Only those deviations necessary to accommodate the special usage shall be allowed and all other aspects of the pool shall comply with the requirements of this section and with Section 454.1.2.

454.1.9.7.2

A special purpose pool may incorporate ledges which do not overhang into the pool.

454.1.9.7.3

Resistance exercise pools shall comply with the requirements of Sections 454.1 through 454.1.6.5 unless exempted or modified by Section 454.1.9.7.3.

454.1.9.7.3.1

Resistance exercise pools shall be circular or oval in shape with a center island that creates a channel to direct the flow of circulated water. Resistance exercise pools shall have a recirculation rate of 5gpm per bather, shall have a gutter type recirculation system, and shall have a maximum bathing load of 20 persons.

454.1.9.7.3.2 Resistance exercise pool dimensions and depth.

The distance from the outer vertical pool wall to the inner island vertical wall of a resistance exercise pool shall be a minimum of 8.5 feet (2591 mm) and maximum of 10 feet (3048 mm), measured at the designed water level.

The water depth of resistance exercise pools shall be a minimum of 3 feet (914 mm) and a maximum of 3 feet 5 inches (1041 mm).

454.1.9.7.3.3 Grabrails and handrails.

The inner island of resistance exercise pools shall have grab rails mounted on the entire top circumference of the island for use has handholds by bathers while in the pool.

454.1.9.7.3.4 Non-applicable requirements.

INSIGHTS

The following code provisions do apply to resistance exercise pool: Sections 454.1.1.1, 454.1.2.2.3.1, 454.1.2.6 and 454.1.2.2.4.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1.9.7.4

Epsom salt float tanks are special purpose pools leased by the public for a brief period of time to float quietly immersed in water with dissolved Epsom salt. Florida Building Code Sections 454.1 through 454.1.10 apply to these pools, and only the following code sections do not apply to these pools, as these code requirements are not necessary for health or safety in these special purpose pools: Sections 454.1.2.1(a), 454.1.2.2.4, 454.1.3.1.2, 454.1.3.2, 454.1.4.2.2, 454.1.6.1, 454.1.6.5.10.5, 454.1.6.5.11, 454.1.6.5.14, 454.1.6.5.16.6(3) and 454.1.6.5.3.2.5.

454.1.9.8 Interactive water features (IWFs).
454.1.9.8.1

Waters discharged from all fountain or spray features shall not pond on the feature floor but shall flow by gravity through a main drain fitting to a collection system which discharges to a collector tank. The minimum size of the collector tank shall be equal to the volume of 3 minutes of the combined flow of all feature pumps and the filter pump. Smaller tanks may be utilized if hydraulically justified by the design engineer. Adequate access shall be provided to the sump or collector tank. Stairs or a ladder shall be provided as needed to ensure safe entry into the tank.

454.1.9.8.2

Reserved.

454.1.9.8.3

Chemical feeders shall be in accordance with Section 454.1.6.5; except that the disinfection feeder shall be capable of feeding 12 ppm of free chlorine to the pressure side of the recirculation system or the collector tank (based upon a hypothetical 30-minute turnover of the contained volume within the system). Automated oxidation reduction potential (ORP) and pH controllers with sensing probes shall be installed to assist in maintaining proper disinfection and pH levels.

454.1.9.8.4

If night operation is proposed, 6 footcandles (60 lux) of light shall be provided on the pool deck and the water feature area. For IWFs that are operated with attendants or lifeguards, 3 footcandles (30 lux) of light is acceptable.

454.1.9.8.5

All electrical work shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

454.1.9.8.6 Hydraulics.
454.1.9.8.6.1

All water discharged to the spray features must first be treated with UV disinfection as described in Section 454.1.6.5.16.6, with final treatment provided by disinfectant adjustment chemicals, before any of this treated water is piped to the spray features.

The recirculation system shall be sized to treat the contained volume of water in the tank and piping system based on a 30-minute turnover with chlorine feeder/generators capable of producing a dosage of at least 12ppm.

The UV disinfection equipment shall be electrically interconnected such that whenever it fails to produce the required UV dosage, the water spray features pump(s) will be immediately stopped. All pumps must draw suction from the collector tank.

454.1.9.8.6.2

All IWFs must comply with one ofthree options for filtration and disinfection systems as follows:

Option 1: A single pump may be used for water treatment and to supply the water features. Flow must be filtered, treated by a UV unit certified for supplemental disinfection per NSF Standard 50, then treated with disinfectant adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the spray features. Excess flow not required by the features must be directed back to the collector tank following UV treatment and must be treated with disinfectant and pH adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the tank.

Option 2: Separate filter and feature pumps may be utilized. The filter flow must be filtered and treated with disinfectant and pH adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the tank. All feature flow must be filtered, treated by a unit certified for supplemental disinfection per NSF Standard 50, then treated with disinfectant adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the spray features. UV flow capacity must meet the feature pump(s) flow capacity, and a rate of flow indicator complying with Section 454.1.6.5.13 shall be provided for each UV system.

Option 3: Separate filter and feature pumps may be utilized. The filter flow must be filtered and treated with disinfectant and pH adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the tank. All feature flow must be treated by a UV disinfection certified for secondary disinfection per NSF Standard 50, then treated with disinfectant adjustment chemicals prior to discharge to the water features. UV flow capacity must meet the feature pump(s) flow capacity, and a rate of flow indicator complying with Section 454.1.6.5.13 shall be provided for each UV system.

454.1.9.8.6.3

Reserved.

454.1.9.8.6.4

The flow rate through the feature nozzles of the water features shall be such as not to harm the patrons and shall not exceed 20 feet per second (6096 mm/s) unless justified by the design engineer and by the fountain system manufacturer.

454.1.9.8.6.5

An automatic water level controller shall be provided.

454.1.9.8.6.6

An overfill waste line with air gap shall be provided.

454.1.9.8.6.7

A means of vacuuming and completely draining the tank(s) shall be provided.

454.1.9.8.6.8

Reserved.

454.1.9.8.6.9

IWFs shall be fenced in the same fashion as wading pools as noted in Section 454.1.7.7. Where the walking distance is at least 50 feet (15 240 mm) between the IWF and all other pools and the IWF is not designed to have any standing water, fencing requirements should be carefully considered by the applicant to control usage, but are not required by rule. Effective barriers that are designed to define the walking path shall be subject to review and approval by the department.

454.1.9.8.6.10

A minimum 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) wet deck area shall be provided around all IWFs. The wet deck shall meet the requirements of Section 454.1.2.2.3; however, up to 50 percent of the perimeter may be obstructed.

454.1.9.8.6.11

IWFs shall be constructed of concrete or other impervious and structurally rigid material.

454.1.9.8.6.12

Floor slopes of an IWF shall be a maximum 1 foot (305 mm) vertical in 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontal and a minimum of 1 foot (305 mm) vertical in 60 feet (18 288 mm) horizontal.

454.1.9.8.6.13

In addition to the requirements of Section 454.1.2.3.5, all IWF pool rule signs installed shall have the following added in one inch letters:

“Do not swallow the fountain water, it is recirculated.”

“Do not use fountain if you are ill with diarrhea.”

454.1.9.8.7

Water theme parks shall meet all other aspects of these rules for the features provided.

454.1.9.8.7.1

Rules and regulations for water theme parks shall be posted in minimum 1-inch (305 mm) letters at each entrance to the park and shall contain the following:

1.	No food, drink, glass or animals in pool or on the pool decks.

2.	Park operating hours __A.M. to __P.M.

3.	Shower before entering.

4.	Do not swallow the pool water.

454.1.9.8.7.2

Showers shall be provided at or near the entrance (queue line) to a water recreation attraction.

454.1.9.8.7.3

Water theme parks are exempt from the fencing requirements of Section 454.1.3.1.9, except that pools designed for small children shall be fenced when located within 50 feet (15 240 mm) walking distance of a pool with water depths of 3 feet (914 mm) or more. Where the walking distance is at least 50 feet (15 240 mm) between a pool designed for small children and all other pools, fencing requirements should be carefully considered by the applicant to control usage, but are not required by rule. Barriers that are designed to define the walking path shall be subject to review and approval by the department.

454.1.9.8.7.4

Sanitary facilities within a water theme park shall be as near to the water recreation attractions as prudent to ensure patron use, but not over 200 feet (60 960 mm) walking distance from any exit of a water attraction.

454.1.9.9 Swim-up bars.

Swim-up bars shall comply with the requirements of Sections 454.1.9.9.1 through 454.1.9.9.9.

454.1.9.9.1

Swim-up bars are only permitted at transient public lodging establishments licensed under s. 509.013(4)(a)1, Florida Statutes, or at a theme park or entertainment complex as defined in s. 509.013(9), F.S.

454.1.9.9.2

A swim-up bar shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code and within the limits of sound engineering practice. The maximum pool depth shall not exceed 54 inches (1372 mm). The disinfection equipment shall be capable of feeding 12 mg/L of halogen to the continuous recirculation flow of the filtration system. Attendants or lifeguards shall be provided in accordance with a safety/lifeguard plan approved by the Department of Health.

454.1.9.9.3

A swim-up bar shall be equipped with a recirculation system which provides for a maximum time of 2 hours for turnover of the entire pool water volume. Swim-up bar water quality shall be continuously sustained in accordance with Department of Health (DOH) Rule 64E-9.004, Florida Administrative Code, by the installation and use of an automated controller with chemical sensing probes fordisinfection and pH control.

454.1.9.9.4

Signage complying with Section 454.1.2.3.5 must be posted to inform patrons that the public swimming pool has a swim-up bar that provides food and beverages, that spillages should be reported to staff for rapid cleanup, and that consumption of alcoholic beverages may cause drowsiness.

454.1.9.9.5

If the bar or counter is built into the edge of the pool, pool access complying with Section 454.1.2.5 shall be provided at both ends of the bar. A deck complying with Section 454.1.3.1 shall be provided, except, up to 50 percent of the pool perimeter may be obstructed by the bar. Gutter or skimmers are not required at or under the bar counter, however, they are required at the rest of the pool. An automatic water level controller shall be provided, and an overfill waste line with air gap shall be provided.

454.1.9.9.6

A smooth, easily cleanable poolside surface must be provided for patrons to place their food and beverage containers upon.

454.1.9.9.7 

INSIGHTS

A swim-up bar may be physically combined or connected with other pool types, however, food and drink must be permitted over the entire body of water and the requirements of Section 454.1.9.9 shall apply to the entire water volume. A swim-up bar’s water must not mix with any body of water that is not a swim-up bar and does not allow the consumption of food and beverages.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.1.9.10 Vanishing edge pools.
454.1.9.10.1

Vanishing edge pools shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice and shall meet the requirements of Sections 454.1.1 through 454.1.6.5, unless specifically indicated otherwise.

454.1.9.10.2

Vanishing edges and associated discharge troughs or catch basins shall be constructed of concrete or other structurally rigid impervious materials with a nontoxic, smooth and slip-resistant finish.

454.1.9.10.3

The vanishing edge shall discharge into a trough or basin. The trough or basin must be covered with a lid or secure grating that has the capacity to support a responder attending to a bather in distress on the opposite side of the vanishing edge. The trough or basin must be designed to deter access. The maximum height of the trough or basin wall above surrounding grade shall be 10 inches (254 mm). A lowered wet deck in accordance with Section 454.1.3.1 must be provided around the trough or basin and immediately adjacent to it.

454.1.9.10.4

The vanishing edge length shall not exceed 65 feet (19 812 mm) or 40 percent of the pool perimeter, whichever is less. The maximum vertical distance from the top of the vanishing edge wall to the trough or catch basin cover or adjacent grade shall be 36 inches (914 mm). The maximum water depth in the pool at the vanishing edge wall shall be 4 feet (1219 mm). The vanishing edge wall shall not be considered as a perimeter deck obstruction. Water line tile at the top of the edge wall as required by Section 454.1.2.1(a) is not required to be non-skid.

454.1.9.10.5

Depth markings for vanishing edges shall be in accordance with Section 454.1.2.3.1(5).

454.1.9.10.6

The remainder of the pool perimeter must have perimeter overflow gutters per Section 454.1.6.5.3.1 or recessed automatic surface skimmers in accordance with Section 454.1.6.5.3.2. Alternatively, a combination of recessed automatic surface skimmers and perimeter overflow gutters may be used along the remainder of the perimeter, such that parts of the perimeter without perimeter overflow gutters or vanishing edges shall have skimmers spaced every 20 feet (6096 mm) or less, regardless of the width or area of the pool.

454.1.10 Resurfacing.
454.1.10.1 Repairs or alterations of pool structure and equipment.

Replacement of the pool or spa shell is considered to be construction of a new facility and shall be processed as such. Resurfacing the pool interior to original nontoxic, slip-resistant and smooth specifications is considered a repair or alteration. Equivalent replacement of equipment is not considered a repair or alteration. The following items shall be addressed during resurfacing projects:

454.1.10.1.1

The lip of the gutter must be leveled to within 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) between the highest and lowest point and the downward slope from the lip to the drain must be maintained as originally designed or increased, but shall not exceed new construction standards. The gutter surfaces shall be made to comply with Section 454.1.6.5.3.1.3.

454.1.10.1.2

Tile step markings must be installed meeting the requirements of Section 454.1.2.5.3.

454.1.10.1.3

Where applicable, the slope break marking must be installed meeting the requirements of Section 454.1.2.2.3.2 and safety line must be installed 2 feet (610 mm) before the marking.

454.1.10.1.4

Depth markers and NO DIVING markers must be installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.3.

454.1.10.1.5

The pool ladder must have a 3 to 6 inch (76 to 152 mm) clearance from the pool wall. New cross-braced ladder(s) shall be installed in place of noncross-braced ladder(s) in conformance with Section 454.1.2.5.1 during a pool resurfacing.

454.1.10.1.6

Should resurfacing works affect the step riser heights, no riser shall exceed 12 inches (305 mm) for pools and 12 inches (305 mm) for spas, and the intermediate risers shall be made uniform.

454.1.10.1.7

Step treads that protrude from the pool wall shall be removed and replaced with a crossbraced ladder or reconstructed to meet the requirements of Section 454.1.2.5.1 or 454.1.2.5.2.

454.1.10.1.8

Handrails and grabrails that do not meet the requirements of Section 454.1.2.5.5 shall be brought into compliance with Section 454.1.2.5.5 or removed if not needed for compliance with Section 454.1.2.5.

454.1.10.1.9

If gutter grates are replaced, the new gutter grates shall have a total open surface area to meet or exceed the designed flow rate of the pool.

454.1.10.1.10

All elevated above-grade concrete pool walls and floors shall have waterproofing/dampproofing installed prior to the final surface application.

454.1.10.2

The painting of pools shall not be considered a repair or alteration provided the following conditions are met:

1.	Only paints designated by the manufacturer as pool paints are used.

2.	All step stripes, slope break markers and safety line, and depth and NO DIVING markings shall be provided to comply with the applicable provision(s) this section.

454.1.10.3

The installation of copper or copper/silver ionization units and ozone generators capable of producing less than a pool water ozone contact concentration of 0.1 milligrams per liter (mg/L) shall not be considered a pool repair or alteration provided compliance when the following is met:

1.	The ionization or ozone generator unit complies with paragraph 64E-9.008(10)(e), Florida Administrative Code.

2.	The manufacturer provides one set of signed and sealed engineering drawings indicating the following:

a.	The unit does not interfere with the design flow rate.

b.	The unit and the typical installation meet the requirements of the National Electrical Code.

c.	A copper test kit and information regarding the maximum allowed copper and silver level and the minimum required chlorine level shall be available to the pool owner.

d.	The unit shall meet the requirements of NSF/ANSI Standard 50.

3.	At least 7 days before the time of installation, the installer will provide a photocopy of the above drawings and a letter of intent identifying the pool on which the unit is to be installed.

4.	Upon completion of the installation, a professional engineer or electrician licensed in the state of Florida shall provide a letter to the county health department, indicating the unit was properly installed in accordance with the typical drawings, the National Electrical Code and local codes.

454.1.10.4 Electrical.
454.1.10.4.1 Ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.

Outlets supplying repaired, replaced, altered, or relocated pool pump motors connected to single-phase, 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying all other repaired, replaced, altered, or relocated electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the low voltage contact limit, connected to single-phase, 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, rated 15- and 20-amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.

454.1.10.4.2 Equipotential bonding.

Any of the parts specified in Sections 680.26(B)(1) through (B)(7) of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code that are repaired, replaced, altered, or installed new at an existing swimming pool shall be connected to the existing bonding system using solid copper conductors, insulated, covered, or bare, not smaller than 8 AWG or with rigid metal conduit of brass or other identified corrosion-resistant metal. Connections to bonded parts shall be made in accordance with Section 250.8 of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code. An 8 AWG or larger solid copper bonding conductor provided to reduce voltage gradients in the pool area shall not be required to be extended or attached to remote panelboards, service equipment, or electrodes. All metallic float-in light rings shall be connected to the equipotential bonding grid. Float-in light rings with no provision for bonding, and other devices which do not provide an electrical connection between a metallic underwater luminaire and the forming shell of a wet niche fixture, including screws or bolts not supplied by the luminaire’s manufacturer and listed for use with the specific luminaire, shall not be allowed for use with any underwater luminaire that is required to be grounded. Where none of the bonded parts is in direct connection with the pool water, the pool water shall be in direct contact with an approved corrosion-resistant conductive surface that exposes not less than 9 square inches (5800 mm2) of surface area to the pool water at all times. The conductive surface shall be located where it is not exposed to physical damage or dislodgement during usual pool activities, and it shall be bonded in accordance with Section 680.26(B) of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code. A bonded concrete pool shell shall be considered to be a conductive surface. The interior metallic surface or surfaces of any forming shell (wet niche) shall not be covered with any material, including plaster, except potting compound covering internal bonding connections in conformance with 680.23(B)(2)(b) of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, shall be allowed.

454.1.11 Public bathing places—artificial lagoons.
454.1.11.1 General.

An artificial lagoon is a type of water impoundment used as a public bathing place as defined in Section 514.011, Florida Statutes, that is man-made and has either: a total water surface area of at least one-half acre (2023.4 m2) in size, with an impervious containment system such as an artificial liner, and incorporates a method of disinfection that results in a disinfectant residual in the swimming zone(s) that is protective of the public health; or has no impervious containment system or disinfectant system, and the water surface area of the artificial lagoon shall be at least 2 acres (8093.9 m2) in size. Such artificial lagoons shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice and the provisions of Section 454.1.11.

454.1.11.2 Sizing and sanitary facilities for artificial lagoons.

The maximum bathing load for an artificial lagoon with a disinfection system approved by the local authority shall be limited by total square footage of the entire lagoon area that allows for swimming or bathing with 25 square feet (2.32 m2) assigned per bather in water 4 feet (1.219 m) deep or less, and 75 square feet (6.96 m2) in water more than 4 feet deep. The maximum bathing load for all other artificial lagoons shall be limited by total square footage of the entire lagoon area that allows for swimming or bathing with 50 square feet (4.65 m2) assigned per bather in water 4 feet deep or less, and 75 square feet in water more than 4 feet deep. Sanitary facilities serving patrons of an artificial lagoon shall meet the Florida Building Code, Plumbing criteria and are exempt from the fixture count requirements in Section 454.1.6.1.1. All sanitary facilities shall be located as near to the designated swimming area(s) as prudent to ensure patron use, but not more than 200 feet (61 m) walking distance from the designated swimming area(s).

454.1.11.3 Construction standards for artificial lagoons.

If an artificial liner is utilized as a containment system, the artificial liner used to contain the water shall consist of a material certified under NSF/ANSI Standard 61—2019, Drinking Water System Components—Health Effects, hereby incorporated by reference, which has been deemed copyright protected, and is available for review at the Department of State, R.A. Gray Building, 500 South Bronough Street, Tallahassee, FL 32399-0250. The liner or artificial bottom, the floor, and the walls, if any, shall be white or light pastel in color and shall have the characteristic of reflecting rather than absorbing light. The liner material color shall have a dry lightness level (CIE L value) of 80.0 or greater and a wet luminous reflectance value (CIE Y value) of 50.0 or greater, as determined by test results provided by the manufacturer, utilizing testing methodology from ASTM D4086, ASTM E1477 or ASTM E1347. The design of such liner system is the responsibility of a professional engineer licensed in Florida. If any designated swimming area, or portion thereof, is designed with swimming pool features, including concrete vertical walls and floors, such areas of the artificial lagoon shall be designed in compliance with Sections 454.1.2.2.2, 454.1.2.2.3 and 454.1.2.2.4. Additionally, debris skimmers shall be provided in such areas at least every 40 linear feet (12.19 m). Zero depth entry areas of artificial lagoons shall be designed in compliance with Sections 454.1.11.5 and 454.1.11.6.

454.1.11.4 Access to artificial lagoons.

Points of access shall be provided as needed to provide adequate entrance to and exit from the artificial lagoon. Means of access may consist of ladders, stairs, recessed treads, and swimouts, designed in compliance with Section 454.1.2.5, zero depth entry areas, and docks, in any number and combination that is appropriate for the intended use(s) of the artificial lagoon. Permanent or portable steps, ramps, handrails, lifts or other devices designed to accommodate handicapped individuals may be provided. Lifts mounted into the wet deck shall have a minimum 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) deck behind the lift mount.

454.1.11.5 Decks and walkways for artificial lagoons.

Decks and walkways, if utilized to access a designated swimming area, shall be designed in compliance with Sections 454.1.3.1.1 and 454.1.3.1.2. Zero depth entry areas may slope toward the water for no more than 7 feet (2133 mm), as measured from the water’s edge outward. Beyond this area, the deck or other surface shall slope away from the lagoon at a minimum of 2 percent to a maximum of 4 percent. Docks for aquatic activities such as sailing or kayaking, located outside of designated swimming areas, are exempt from this section.

454.1.11.6 Safety for artificial lagoons.

The portion(s) of artificial lagoons designated for swimming shall meet the safety requirements in Section 454.1.3.3. Such designated swimming area(s) shall be visually separated from the rest of the artificial lagoon using a buoyed safety line(s) or similar device(s) approved by the local authority. Additionally, the floor slope at any designated swimming area(s) shall be continuous from the water’s edge to the deepest point and not exceed 1-unit vertical in 10-units horizontal. The depth at the deepest point in any designated swimming area shall be indicated, along with the other rules and regulations signage required in Section 454.1.2.3.5. Where access to a portion of the artificial lagoon with a vertical wall is not blocked or obstructed by an approved substantial barrier, NO DIVING markers and depth markers shall be installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.3.1, except that markers are not required on inside vertical walls of an artificial lagoon. Signage may be substituted for markers if approved by the local authority, and such markers or signs are required only along the accessible perimeter of the lagoon. Markings shall be of such materials that will not fade over time. Artificial lagoons are exempt from the fencing requirements of Section 454.1.3.1.9, except that separate swimming pools designed for small children shall be fenced when located within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of an artificial lagoon. If installed, underwater seat bench construction shall be in compliance with Section 454.1.2.6, Exception 2. If installed, sun shelf construction shall be in compliance with Section 454.1.2.6, Exception 3 and the applicable provisions of Section 454.1.2.8. Where water slides or climbable water activity features are used in or adjacent to the artificial lagoon, a lifeguard safety plan shall be submitted to the health department for approval and implemented by the owner/operator. Slides and water activity features shall be reviewed and approved by the local authority to conform with the same criteria for public swimming pools. If boating is allowed in the lagoon, provisions for bather safety and injury prevention must be specified and provided to the health department.

454.1.11.7 Electrical systems for artificial lagoons.

Electrical equipment wiring and installation, including the bonding and grounding of components, shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Outlets supplying pump motors connected to single-phase 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying other electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the low voltage contact limit, connected to single-phase, 120 volt through 240 volt branch circuits, rated 15 or 20 amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel. Any portions of the artificial lagoon designated for swimming at night shall comply with the lighting requirements in Sections 454.1.4.2.1 and 454.1.4.2.3.

454.1.11.8 Equipment rooms.

Equipment rooms for artificial lagoons shall comply with Section 454.1.5.

454.1.11.9 Treatment systems for artificial lagoons.

If continuous or intermittent chemical disinfection and/or non-chemical disinfection is provided to the artificial lagoon water, the equipment that feeds or generates the chemical shall be NSF/ANSI Standard 50 certified and subject to review and approval by the local authority. The disinfectant chemical shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and must be an NSF/ANSI Standard 60 certified chemical, or a US EPA registered microbial biocide. Any other chemical applied to the water for water quality treatment must be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and must be an NSF/ANSI Standard 60 or Standard 50 certified chemical. If remote chemical monitoring sensors are used, one (1) chemical sensor shall be installed in or directly adjacent to each designated swimming area. Vacuum systems shall not be used in designated swimming area(s) while such area(s) is (are) open for swimming, and all suction outlets shall comply with the requirements of Section 514.0315, Florida Statutes.

454.1.12 Surf pools.
454.1.12.1 General.

A surf pool is a type of water impoundment used as a public bathing place as defined in Section 514.011, Florida Statutes, that is man-made and has either: a total water surface area of at least onequarter acre (1012 m2) in size, with an impervious containment system such as an artificial liner, and incorporates a method of disinfection that results in a disinfectant residual in the swimming zone(s) that is protective of the public health. Such surf pools shall be designed and constructed within the limits of sound engineering practice and the provisions of Section 454.1.12.

454.1.12.2 Sizing and sanitary facilities.

The maximum bathing load for a surf pool with a disinfection system approved by the local authority shall be limited by total square footage of the entire area that allows for surfing with 100 square feet (9.29 m2) per bather in water more than 4 feet (1219 mm) deep. Sanitary facilities serving patrons of an artificial lagoon shall meet the Florida Building Code, Plumbing criteria and are exempt from the fixture count requirements in Section 454.1.6.1.1. All sanitary facilities shall be located as near to the designated surfing area(s) as prudent to ensure patron use, but not more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) walking distance from the designated surfing area(s).

454.1.12.3 Construction standards.

If an artificial liner is utilized as a containment system, the artificial liner used to contain the water shall consist of a material certified under NSF/ANSI Standard 61-2021, Drinking Water System Components—Health Effects, dated April 14, 2021, hereby incorporated by reference, which has been deemed copyright protected, and is available for review at the Department of State, R.A. Gray Building, 500 South Bronough Street, Tallahassee, FL 32399-0250. The liner or artificial bottom, the floor, and the walls, if any, shall be white or light pastel in color and shall have the characteristic of reflecting rather than absorbing light. The liner material color shall have a wet luminous reflectance value (CIE Y value) of 50.0 or greater, as determined by test results provided by the manufacturer, utilizing testing methodology from ASTM D4086, ASTM E1477 or ASTM E1347. The design of such liner system is the responsibility of a professional engineer licensed in Florida. If any designated surfing area, or portion thereof, is designed with swimming pool features, including concrete vertical walls and floors, such areas of the pool shall be designed in compliance with Sections 454.1.2.2.2, 454.1.2.2.3 and 454.1.2.2.4.

454.1.12.4 Access.

Points of access shall be provided as needed to provide adequate entrance to and exit from the surf pool. Means of access may consist of ladders, stairs, recessed treads, and swimouts designed in compliance with Section 454.1.2.5, zero depth entry areas, and docks, in any number and combination that is appropriate for the intended use(s) of the surf pool. Permanent or portable steps, ramps, handrails, lifts or other devices designed to accommodate handicapped individuals may be provided. Lifts mounted into the wet deck shall have a minimum 4-foot-wide (1219 mm) deck behind the lift mount.

454.1.12.5 Decks and walkways.

Decks and walkways, if utilized to access a designated surfing area, shall be designed in compliance with Sections 454.1.3.1.1 and 451.1.3.1.2. Zero depth entry areas may slope toward the water for no more than 15 feet (4572 mm), as measured from the water’s edge outward. Beyond this area, the deck or other surface shall slope away from the surf pool at a minimum of 2 percent to a maximum of 4 percent, and shall be ADA compliant.

454.1.12.6 Safety.

The portion(s) designated for surfing shall meet the safety requirements in Section 454.1.3.3. The depth at the deepest point in any designated swimming/surfing area shall be indicated, along with the other rules and regulations signage required in Section 454.1.2.3.5. Where access to a portion with a vertical wall is not blocked or obstructed by an approved substantial barrier, NO DIVING markers and depth markers shall be installed in accordance with Section 454.1.2.3.1, except that markers are not required on inside vertical walls. Signage may be substituted for markers if approved by the local authority, and such markers or signs are required only along the accessible perimeter. Markings shall be of such materials that will not fade over time. A lifeguard safety plan shall be submitted to the health department for prior approval and implemented by the owner/operator.

454.1.12.7 Electrical systems for artificial lagoons.

Electrical equipment wiring and installation, including the bonding and grounding of components, shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Outlets supplying pump motors connected to single-phase 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying other electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the low voltage contact limit, connected to single-phase, 120- volt through 240-volt branch circuits, rated 15 or 20 amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel. Any portions of the artificial lagoon designated for swimming at night shall comply with the lighting requirements in Sections 454.1.4.2.1 and 454.1.4.2.3.

454.1.12.8 Equipment rooms.

Equipment rooms shall comply with Section 454.1.5.

454.1.12.9 Treatment systems.

The design of the treatment system is the responsibility of a professional engineer licensed in Florida. Chemical disinfection of recirculated water immediately following the filtration process shall achieve a measurable residual in the surf pool water that is continuously protective of public health and shall be in compliance with Section 454.1.6.5.16. The equipment that feeds or generates the chemical shall be NSF/ANSI Standard 50 certified and subject to review and approval by the local authority. The disinfectant chemical shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and must be an NSF/ANSI Standard 60-certified chemical, or a US EPA-registered microbial biocide. Any other chemical applied to the water for water quality treatment must be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and must be an NSF/ANSI Standard 60- or Standard 50-certified chemical. If remote chemical monitoring sensors are used, one (1) chemical sensor shall be installed in or directly adjacent to each designated surf area. Vacuum systems shall not be used in designated swimming area(s) while such area(s) is (are) open for swimming, and all suction outlets shall comply with the requirements of Section 514.0315, Florida Statutes.

454.2 Private swimming pools.
454.2.1 Definitions–general.
454.2.1.1 Tense, gender and number.

For the purpose of this code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in this section. Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words in the feminine and neuter gender include the masculine. The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.

454.2.1.2 Words not defined.

Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; or Florida Fire Prevention Code. Words not defined in the Florida Building Code shall have the meanings stated in the Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.

454.2.2 Definitions.

ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”

ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. The individual official, board, department or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city or other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of the swimming pool code as adopted or amended.

APPROVED. Accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or cited in this code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and power of the administrative authority.

APPROVED SAFETY COVER. A manually or power-applied safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of ASTM International in compliance with ASTM F1346.

APPROVED TESTING AGENCY. An organization primarily established for the purpose of testing to approved standards and approved by the administrative authority.

BACKWASH PIPING. See “Filter waste discharge piping.”

BARRIER. A fence, dwelling wall or nondwelling wall or any combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool, especially access from the residence or from the yard outside the barrier.

BODY FEED. Filter aid fed into a diatomite-type filter throughout the filtering cycle.

CARTRIDGE FILTER. A filter using cartridge-type filter elements.

CHEMICAL PIPING. Piping which conveys concentrated chemical solutions from a feeding apparatus to the circulation piping.

CIRCULATION PIPING SYSTEM. Piping between the pool structure and the mechanical equipment. Usually includes suction piping, face piping and return piping.

COMBINATION VALVE. A multipart valve intended to perform more than one function.

DESIGN HEAD. Total head requirement of the circulation system at the design rate of flow.

DIATOMITE (DIATOMACEOUS EARTH). A type of filter aid.

DIATOMITE-TYPE FILTER. A filter designed to be used with filter aid.

DIRECT ACCESS FROM THE HOME. Any opening which discharges into the “perimeter” of the pool or any opening in an exterior dwelling wall, or interior wall (for indoor pools) which faces the pool.

EXIT ALARM. A device that makes audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window which permits access from the residence to any pool that is without an intervening enclosure is opened or left ajar.

FACE PIPING. Piping, with all valves and fittings, which is used to connect the filter system together as a unit.

FILTER. Any apparatus by which water is clarified.

FILTER AID. A nonpermanent type of filter medium or aid such as diatomite, alum, etc.

FILTER CARTRIDGE. A disposable or renewable filter element which generally employs no filter aid.

FILTER ELEMENT. That part of a filter which retains the filter medium.

FILTER MEDIUM. Fine material which entraps the suspended particles and removes them from the water.

FILTER RATE. Average rate of flow per square foot of filter area.

FILTER ROCK. Specially graded rock and gravel used to support filter sand.

FILTER SAND. A specially graded type of permanent filter medium.

FILTER SEPTUM. That part of the filter element in a diatomite-type filter upon which a cake of diatomite or other nonpermanent filter aid may be deposited.

FILTER WASTE DISCHARGE PIPING. Piping that conducts waste water from a filter to a drainage system. Connection to drainage system is made through an air gap or other approved methods.

FRESH WATER. Those waters having a specific conductivity less than a solution containing 6,000 ppm of sodium chloride.

HIGH RATE SAND FILTER. A sand filter designed for flows in excess of 5 gpm (0.3 L/s) per square foot.

HOT TUB. See “Swimming pool.”

INGROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”

INLET FITTING. Fitting or fixture through which circulated water enters the pool.

MAIN SUCTION OUTLET. Outlet at the deep portion of the pool through which the main flow of water leaves the pool when being drained or circulated.

MEDICALLY FRAIL ELDERLY PERSON. Any person who is at least 65 years of age and has a medical problem that affects balance, vision, or judgment, including but not limited to a heart condition, diabetes, or Alzheimer’s disease or any related disorder.

MESH SAFETY BARRIER. A combination of materials, including fabric, posts, and other hardware to form a barrier around a swimming pool.

POOL. See “Swimming pool.”

POOL DEPTHS. The distance between the floor of pool and the maximum operating water level.

POOL PERIMETER. A pool perimeter is defined by the limits of the pool deck, its surrounding area including yard area on same property, and any dwelling or nondwelling wall or any combination thereof which completely surrounds the pool.

POOL PLUMBING. All chemical, circulation, filter waste discharge piping, deck drainage and water filling systems.

PORTABLE POOL. A prefabricated pool which may be erected at the point of intended use and which may be subsequently disassembled and reerected at a new location. Generally installed on the surface of the ground and without excavation.

PRECOAT. In a diatomite-type filter, the initial coating or filter aid placed on the filter septum at the start of the filter cycle.

RAPID SAND FILTER. A filter designed to be used with sand as the filter medium and for flows not to exceed 5 gpm (0.3 L/s) per square foot.

RECEPTOR. An approved plumbing fixture or device of such material, shape and capacity as to adequately receive the discharge from indirect waste piping, so constructed and located as to be readily cleaned.

RESIDENTIAL. Situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories high.

RETURN PIPING. That portion of the circulation piping which extends from the outlet side of the filters to the pool.

SALINE WATER. Those waters having a specific conductivity in excess of a solution containing 6,000 ppm of sodium chloride.

SEPARATION TANK. A device used to clarify filter rinse or waste water; sometimes called a “reclamation tank.”

SKIM FILTER. A surface skimmer combined with a vacuum diatomite filter.

SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “Swimming pool.”

SPA, PORTABLE. Nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls and water heating and water circulating equipment are an integral part of the product and which is cord-connected and not permanently electrically wired.

SUCTION PIPING. That portion of the circulation piping located between the pool structure and the inlet side of the pump and usually includes main outlet piping, skimmer piping, vacuum piping and surge tank piping.

SURFACE SKIMMER. A device generally located in the pool wall which skims the pool surface by drawing pool water over a self-adjusting weir.

SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.

SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.

SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. Any structure, located in a residential area, that is intended for swimming or recreational bathing and contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep including but not limited to inground, above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and nonportable spas.

SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. A watertight structure of concrete, masonry, fiberglass, stainless steel or plastic which is located either indoors or outdoors, used for bathing or swimming by humans, and filled with a filtered and disinfected water supply, together with buildings, appurtenances and equipment used in connection therewith. A public swimming pool or public pool shall mean a conventional pool, spa-type pool, wading pool, special purpose pool or water recreation attraction, to which admission may be gained with or without payment of a fee and includes, pools operated by or serving camps, churches, cities, counties, day care centers, group home facilities for eight or more clients, health spas, institutions, parks, state agencies, schools, subdivisions; or the cooperative living-type projects of five or more living units, such as apartments, boarding houses, hotels, mobile home parks, motels, recreational vehicle parks and townhouses.

SWIMMING POOL, RESIDENTIAL. See “Swimming pool, private.”

TURNOVER TIME. The time in hours required for the circulation system to filter and recirculate a volume of water equal to the pool volume.

VACUUM FITTING. A fitting in the pool which is used as a convenient outlet for connecting the underwater suction cleaning equipment.

VACUUM PIPING. The piping from the suction side of a pump connected to a vacuum fitting located at the pool and below the water level.

WASTE PIPING. See “Filter waste discharge piping.”

WIDTH AND/OR LENGTH. Actual water dimension taken from wall to wall at the maximum operating water level.

YOUNG CHILD. Any person under the age of 6 years.

454.2.3 Mechanical requirements.

Unless otherwise specified in this code, all piping, equipment and materials used in the process piping system of swimming pools that are built in place shall conform to the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

454.2.4 Approvals.
454.2.4.1 Compliance.

All materials, piping, valves, equipment or appliances entering into the construction of swimming pools or portions thereof shall be of a type complying with this code or of a type recommended and approved by a nationally recognized testing agency or conforming to other recognized standards acceptable to the administrative authority.

454.2.4.2 Items not covered.

For any items not specifically covered in these requirements, the administrative authority is hereby authorized to require that all equipment, materials, methods of construction and design features shall be proven to function adequately, effectively and without excessive maintenance and operational difficulties.

454.2.4.2.1 Flood hazard areas.

Private swimming pools installed in flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 shall comply with Section 1612.

454.2.4.3 Applicant responsibility.

It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide such data, tests or other adequate proof that the device, material or product will satisfactorily perform the function for which it is intended, before such item shall be approved or accepted for tests.

454.2.5 Alternate materials and methods of construction.
454.2.5.1 Approval and authorization.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, method of construction, appliance or equipment, provided any such alternate has been first approved and its use authorized by the administrative authority.

454.2.5.2 Required tests.

When there is insufficient evidence to substantiate claims for alternates, the administrative authority may require tests, as proof of compliance, to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the applicant.

454.2.6 Private swimming pools.
454.2.6.1 Conformance standard.

INSIGHTS

Design, construction and workmanship shall be in conformity with the requirements of ANSI/APSP/ICC 3, ANSI/APSP/ICC 4, ANSI/APSP/ICC 5, ANSI/APSP/ICC 6, and ANSI/APSP/ICC 7.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.2.6.2 Required equipment.

Every swimming pool shall be equipped complete with approved mechanical equipment consisting of filter, pump, piping valves and component parts.

Exception: Pools with a supply of fresh water equivalent to the volume of the pool in the specified turnover time will be allowed.

454.2.6.3 Water velocity.

INSIGHTS

Pool piping shall be designed so the water velocity will not exceed 10 feet per second (mm/s) for pressure piping and 8 feet per second (mm/s) for suction piping, except that the water velocity shall not exceed 8 feet per second (3048 mm/s) in copper tubing. Main suction outlet velocity must comply with ANSI/APSP/ICC 7.

Exception: Jet inlet fittings shall not be deemed subject to this requirement.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.2.6.4 Piping to heater.

Water flow through the heater, any bypass plumbing installed, any back-siphoning protection, and the use of heat sinks shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

454.2.6.5 Piping installation.

All piping materials shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s installation standards.

Exception: Primer and glue on exposed aboveground piping not required to be colored.

454.2.6.6 

INSIGHTS

Entrapment protection for suction outlets shall be installed in accordance with requirements of ANSI/APSP 7/ICC 7.

 INSIGHTS (1)
454.2.7 Pumps.
454.2.7.1 Strainer.

Pool circulating pumps shall be equipped on the inlet side with an approved-type hair and lint strainer when used with a pressure filter.

454.2.7.2 Installation.

Pumps shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer recommendations.

454.2.7.3 Capacity.

Pumps shall have design capacity at the following heads.

1.	Pressure diatomaceous earth–At least 60 feet (18 288 mm).

2.	Vacuum D.E.–20-inch (508 mm) vacuum on the suction side and 40 feet (1219 mm) total head.

3.	Rapid sand–At least 45 feet (13 716 mm).

4.	High rate sand–At least 60 feet (18 288 mm).

454.2.7.4 Materials.

Pump impellers, shafts, wear rings and other working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials.

454.2.8 Valves.
454.2.8.1 General.

Valves shall be made of materials that are approved in the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Valves located under concrete slabs shall be set in a pit having a least dimension of five pipe diameters with a minimum of at least 10 inches (254 mm) and fitted with a suitable cover. All valves shall be located where they will be readily accessible for maintenance and removal.

454.2.8.2 Full-way (gate) valves.

Full-way valves shall be installed to insure proper functioning of the filtration and piping system. When the pump is located below the overflow rim of the pool, a valve shall be installed on the discharge outlet and the suction line.

454.2.8.3 Check valves.

Where check valves are installed they shall be of the swing, spring or vertical check patterns.

454.2.8.4 Combination valves.

Combination valves shall be installed per the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

454.2.9 Water supply.

Unless an approved type of filling system is installed, any water supply which in the judgment of the administrative authority may be used to fill the pool, shall be equipped with backflow protection. No over the rim fill spout shall be accepted unless located under a diving board, or properly guarded.

454.2.10 Waste water disposal.
454.2.10.1 Connection limitations.

Direct or indirect connections shall not be made between any storm drain, sewer, drainage system, seepage pit underground leaching pit, or subsoil drainage line, and any line connected to a swimming pool unless approved by the administrative authority.

454.2.10.2 Disposal through public sewer.

When the waste water from a swimming pool is to be disposed of through a public sewer, a 3-inch (76 mm) P-trap shall be installed on the lower terminus of the building drain and the tall piece from the trap shall extend a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) above finished grade and below finished floor grade. This trap need not be vented. The connection between the filter waste discharge piping and the P-trap shall be made by means of an indirect connection.

454.2.10.3 Deviations.

Plans and specifications for any deviation from the above manner of installation shall first be approved by the administrative authority before any portion of any such system is installed. When waste water disposal is to seepage pit installation, it shall be installed in accordance with the approval granted by the administrative authority.

454.2.11 Separation tank.

A separation tank of an approved type may be used in lieu of the aforementioned means of waste water disposal when connected as a reclamation system.

454.2.12 Tests.
454.2.12.1 Pressure test.

All pool piping shall be tested and proved tight to the satisfaction of the administrative authority, under a static water or air pressure test of not less than 35 psi (241 kPa) for 15 minutes.

Exception: Circulating pumps need not be tested as required in this section.

454.2.12.2 Drain and waste piping.

All drain and waste piping shall be tested by filling with water to the point of overflow and all joints shall be tight.

454.2.13 Drain piping.
454.2.13.1 Slope to discharge.

Drain piping serving gravity overflow gutter drains and deck drains shall be installed to provide continuous grade to point of discharge.

454.2.13.2 Joints and connections.

Joints and connections shall be made as required by the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

454.2.14 Water heating equipment.
454.2.14.1 Labels.

Swimming pool water heating equipment shall conform to the design, construction and installation requirements in accordance with accepted engineering practices and shall bear the label of a recognized testing agency, and shall include a consideration of combustion air, venting and gas supply requirements for water heaters.

454.2.14.2 Water retention.

If a heater is not equipped or designed for an approved permanent bypass or antisiphon device, an approved permanent bypass or antisiphon device shall be installed to provide a positive means of retaining water in the heater when the pump is not in operation.

454.2.14.3 Pit drainage.

When the heater is installed in a pit, the pit shall be provided with approved drainage facilities.

454.2.14.4 Connections.

All water heating equipment shall be installed with flanges or union connection adjacent to the heater.

454.2.14.5 Relief valve.

When water heating equipment which is installed in a closed system has a valve between the appliance and the pool, a pressure relief valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the water heating equipment. For units up to and including 200,000 Btu/hour input, the relief valve shall be rated by the American Gas Association.

454.2.15 Gas piping.

Gas piping shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

454.2.16 Electrical.

Electrical equipment wiring and installation, including the bonding and grounding of pool components, shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Outlets supplying pool pump motors connected to single-phase 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying other electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the low voltage contact limit, connected to single-phase, 120 volt through 240 volt branch circuits, rated 15 or 20 amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.

454.2.17 Residential swimming barrier requirement.

Residential swimming pools shall comply with Sections 454.2.17.1 through 454.2.17.3.

Exception: A swimming pool with an approved safety pool cover complying with ASTM F1346.

454.2.17.1 Outdoor swimming pools.

Outdoor swimming pools shall be provided with a barrier complying with Sections 454.2.17.1.1 through 454.2.17.1.14.

454.2.17.1.1

The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade the barrier may be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102 mm).

454.2.17.1.2

The barrier may not have any gaps, openings, indentations, protrusions, or structural components that could allow a young child to crawl under, squeeze through, or climb over the barrier as herein described below. One end of a removable child barrier shall not be removable without the aid of tools. Openings in any barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch diameter (102 mm) sphere.

454.2.17.1.3

Solid barriers which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

454.2.17.1.4

Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width.

454.2.17.1.5

Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width.

454.2.17.1.6

Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 21/4 inch (57 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or bottom which reduce the openings to no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

454.2.17.1.7

Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

454.2.17.1.8

Access gates, when provided, shall be self-closing and shall comply with the requirements of Sections 454.2.17.1.1 through 454.2.17.1.7 and shall be equipped with a self-latching locking device located on the pool side of the gate. Where the device release is located no less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the device release mechanism may be located on either side of the gate and so placed that it cannot be reached by a young child over the top or through any opening or gap from the outside. Gates that provide access to the swimming pool must open outward away from the pool. The gates and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.

454.2.17.1.9

Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply:

1.	All doors and windows providing direct access from the home to the pool shall be equipped with an exit alarm complying with UL 2017 that has a minimum sound pressure rating of 85 dBA at 10 feet (3048 mm). Any deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the access. Separate alarms are not required for each door or window if sensors wired to a central alarm sound when contact is broken at any opening.

Exceptions:

1.	Screened or protected windows having a bottom sill height of 48 inches (1219 mm) or more measured from the interior finished floor at the pool access level.

2.	Windows facing the pool on the floor above the first story.

3.	Screened or protected pass-through kitchen windows 42 inches (1067 mm) or higher with a counter beneath.

2.	All doors providing direct access from the home to the pool must be equipped with a selfclosing, self-latching device with positive mechanical latching/locking installed a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold, which is approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

3.	A swimming pool alarm that, when placed in a pool, sounds an alarm upon detection of an accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. Such pool alarm must meet and be independently certified to ASTM F2208, titled “Standard Safety Specification for Residential Pool Alarms,” which includes surface motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared alarms. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “swimming pool alarm” does not include any swimming protection alarm device designed for individual use, such as an alarm attached to a child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes submerged in water.

454.2.17.1.10

Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Sections 454.2.17.1.1 through 454.2.17.1.9 and Sections 454.2.17.1.12 through 454.2.17.1.14. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.

454.2.17.1.11

Standard screen enclosures which meet the requirements of Section 454.2.17 may be utilized as part of or all of the “barrier” and shall be considered a “nondwelling” wall. Removable child barriers shall have one end of the barrier nonremovable without the aid of tools.

454.2.17.1.12

The barrier must be placed around the perimeter of the pool and must be separate from any fence, wall, or other enclosure surrounding the yard unless the fence, wall, or other enclosure or portion thereof is situated on the perimeter of the pool, is being used as part of the barrier, and meets the barrier requirements of this section.

454.2.17.1.13

Removable child barriers must be placed sufficiently away from the water’s edge to prevent a young child or medically frail elderly person who may manage to penetrate the barrier from immediately falling into the water. Sufficiently away from the water’s edge shall mean no less than 20 inches (508 mm) from the barrier to the water’s edge. Dwelling or nondwelling walls including screen enclosures, when used as part or all of the barrier and meeting the other barrier requirements, may be as close to the water’s edge as permitted by this code.

454.2.17.1.14

A wall of a dwelling may serve as part of the barrier if it does not contain any door or window that opens to provide direct access from the home to the swimming pool.

454.2.17.1.15

A mesh safety barrier meeting the requirements of Section 454.2.17, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and complying with ASTM F2286, shall be considered a barrier as defined in this section. Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Section 454.2.17.1.8. Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of above-ground/on-ground privateswimming pools.

454.2.17.1.16 Adjacent waterways.

Permanent natural or permanent man-made features such as bulkheads, canals, lakes, navigable waterways, etc., adjacent to a public or private swimming pool or spa may be permitted as a barrier when approved by the authority having jurisdiction. When evaluating such barrier features, the authority may perform on-site inspections and review evidence such as surveys, aerial photographs, water management agency standards and specifications, and any other similar documentation to verify, at a minimum, the following:

1.	The barrier feature is not subject to natural changes, deviations, or alterations and is capable of providing an equivalent level of protection as that provided by the code.

2.	The barrier feature clearly impedes, prohibits or restricts access to the swimming pool or spa.

454.2.17.2 Indoor swimming pools.

All walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall comply with Section 454.2.17.1.9.

454.2.17.3 Prohibited locations.

A barrier may not be located in a way that allows any permanent structure, equipment, or window that opens to provide access from the home to the swimming pool.

454.2.18 Ladders and steps.

All pools whether public or private shall be provided with a ladder or steps in the shallow end where water depth exceeds 24 inches (610 mm). In private pools where water depth exceeds 5 feet (1524 mm) there shall be ladders, stairs or underwater benches/swim-outs in the deep end. Where manufactured diving equipment is to be used, benches or swim-outs shall be recessed or located in a corner.

Exception: In private pools having more than one shallow end, only one set of steps are required. A bench, swimout or ladder may be used at all additional shallow ends in lieu of an additional set of steps.

454.2.19 Final inspection.

Final electrical, and barrier code, inspection shall be completed prior to filling the pool with water.

Exception: Vinyl liner and fiberglass pools are required to be filled with water upon installation.

454.2.20 Filters.

Components shall have sufficient capacity to provide a complete turnover of pool water in 12 hours or less.

454.2.20.1 Sand filters.
454.2.20.1.1 Approved types.

Rapid sand filters [flow up to 5 gpm per square foot (0.3L/s)] shall be constructed in accordance with approved standards. Where high rate sand filters [flow in excess of 5 gpm per square foot (0.3 L/s)] are used, they shall be of an approved type. The circulation system and backwash piping shall be adequate for proper backwashing of said filter and shall provide backwash flow rates of at least 12 gpm per square foot (0.8 L/s) for rapid sand filters or 15 gpm per square foot (0.9 L/s) for high rate sand filters.

454.2.20.1.2 Instructions.

Every filter system shall be provided with written operating instructions.

454.2.20.1.3 Filter system equipment.

On pressure-type filters, a means shall be provided to permit the release of internal pressure. A filter incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have lids which provide a slow and safe release of pressure as part of its design. A separation tank used in conjunction with a filter tank shall have as part of its design a manual means of air release or a lid which provides a slow and safe release of pressure as it is opened.

454.2.20.2 Diatomite-type filters.
454.2.20.2.1 Design.

Diatomite-type filters shall be designed for operation under either pressure or vacuum. The design capacity for both pressure and vacuum filters shall not exceed 2 gpm per square foot (0.13 L/s) of effective filter area.

454.2.20.2.2 Filter aid.

Provision shall be made to introduce filter aid into the filter in such a way as to evenly precoat the filter septum.

454.2.21 Pool fittings.
454.2.21.1 Approved type.

Pool fittings shall be of an approved type and design as to be appropriate for the specific application.

454.2.21.2 Skimmers.

Approved surface skimmers are required and shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Skimmers shall be installed on the basis of one per 800 square feet (74 m2) of surface area or fraction thereof, and shall be designed for a flow rate of at least 25 gpm (94 L/m) per skimmer.

454.2.21.3 Main outlet.

An approved main outlet, when provided, shall be located on a wall or floor at or near the deepest point in the pool for emptying or circulation, or both, of the water in the pool.

454.2.21.4 Hydrostatic relief device.

In areas of anticipated water table an approved hydrostatic relief device shall be installed.

Exception: Plastic liner pools (where there is no structural bottom to the pool).

454.2.21.5 Inlet fittings.

Approved manufactured inlet fittings for the return of recirculated pool water shall be provided on the basis of at least one per 300 square feet (28 m2) of surface area. Such inlet fittings shall be designed and constructed to insure an adequate seal to the pool structure and shall incorporate a convenient means of sealing for pressure testing of the pool circulation piping. Where more than one inlet is required, the shortest distance between any two required inlets shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm).

454.2.22 Equipment foundations and enclosures.

All pool motors and equipment shall be installed in compliance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. All heating and electrical equipment, unless approved for outdoor installation, shall be adequately protected against the weather or installed within a building.

454.2.23 Accessibility and clearances.

Equipment shall be so installed as to provide ready accessibility for cleaning, operating, maintenance and servicing.

SECTION 455
PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
455.1 Scope.

Public lodging establishments shall comply with the following design and construction standards.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Business and Professional Regulations (DBPR) Rules 61C-1 and 61C-3, Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 509, Florida Statutes.

455.2 Definitions.

PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENT. See Section 509.013, Florida Statutes.

455.3 General sanitation and safety requirements.

The following general requirements and standards shall be met by all public lodging establishments:

455.3.1 Water, plumbing and waste.

Except as specifically provided in this code, standards for water, plumbing and waste shall be governed by Chapter 5 of 1999 Food Code and Chapter 509 Part I, Florida Statutes. For the purposes of this section, the term “food establishment” as referenced in the Food Code shall apply to all public lodging establishments as defined in Chapter 509, Florida Statutes.

455.3.2 Public bathrooms.
455.3.2.1

Each public lodging establishment shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located bathroom facilities for its employees and guests in accordance with provisions of this section and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Public access to toilet facilities shall not be permitted through food preparation, storage, or ware washing areas. Bathroom fixtures shall be of readily cleanable sanitary design.

455.3.2.2

Public bathrooms shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-closing doors or have entrances and exits constructed in such a manner as to ensure privacy of occupants. Such doors shall not be left open except during cleaning or maintenance.

455.3.2.3

Resort condominiums, nontransient establishments and resort dwellings are exempt from the provisions of this section.

455.3.3 Vermin control.

Effective control measures shall be taken to protect against the entrance into the establishment, and the breeding or presence on the premises of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin. All buildings shall be effectively rodentproofed. All windows used for ventilation must be screened, except when effective means of vermin control are used. Screening material shall not be less than 16 mesh to the inch or equivalent, tightfitting and free of breaks.

455.3.4 Fire safety.

All fire safety, protection and prevention equipment must be installed, approved, maintained and used in accordance with Chapter 509, Florida Statutes, Chapter 69A-3 Fire Prevention–General Prevention Code, Florida Administrative Codes.

455.3.4.1 Specialized smoke detectors.

Specialized smoke detectors for the deaf and hearing-impaired shall be made available upon request by guests in transient public lodging establishments without charge. Failure of the operator to inform any employee charged with registering guests of the location of such detector constitutes failure to make such detectors available.

455.3.5 Electrical wiring.

To prevent fire or injury, defective electrical wiring shall be replaced and wiring shall be kept in good repair. Only a wall switch or approved pull cord shall be permitted in bathrooms. Electrical wiring shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

455.3.6 Heating and ventilation.

The heating and ventilation system shall be kept in good repair or be installed to maintain a minimum of 68°F (20°C) throughout the building.

455.3.7 Gas appliances.

All appliances, including water heaters using gas, shall be properly vented as required by the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

455.4 Sanitation and safety requirements.
455.4.1 Guest bathrooms.
455.4.1.1

Connecting bathrooms shall provide toilets with open-front seats. Guest and private bathrooms shall provide toilets. Guest, private, and connecting bathrooms shall provide lavatories and shower enclosures with hot and cold running water under pressure.

455.4.1.2

Each transient public lodging establishment shall maintain one public bathroom with a minimum of a toilet, lavatory, and shower enclosure for each sex on every floor for every 15 guests rooming on that floor not having access to private or connecting bathrooms.

455.4.2 Ice storage bins.

Ice storage bins shall be drained through an air gap in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

455.4.3 Locks.

A locking device shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Public lodging establishments as defined in Rule 61C- 1.002(4)(a), Florida Statutes, shall have at least one approved locking device which does not include a sliding chain or hook-and-eye type device, on all outside and connecting doors which cannot be opened by a nonmaster guest room key.

SECTION 456
PUBLIC FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
456.1 Scope.

Public food service establishments or food establishments shall comply with design and construction standards as described in the Food Code, Chapter 509 Part I or Chapter 500, Florida Statutes, as applicable.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Business and Professional Regulation (DBPR) Rule 61C-4, Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 500 and Chapter 509, Florida Statutes.

456.2 Definitions.

FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS. See Section 500.03, Florida Statutes.

PUBLIC FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS. See Section 509.013, Florida Statutes.

456.3 General sanitation and safety requirements.

The following general requirements and standards shall be met by all food service establishments:

456.3.1 Water, plumbing, and waste.

Except as specifically provided in this section, standards for water, plumbing and waste shall be governed by Chapter 5, Food Code, herein adopted by reference.

456.3.1.1

Grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

456.3.2 Public bathrooms.
456.3.2.1

Food service establishment shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located bathroom facilities for its employees and guests in accordance with provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Public access to toilet facilities shall not be permitted through food preparation, storage, or ware washing areas. Bathroom fixtures shall be of readily cleanable sanitary design.

456.3.2.2

Public bathrooms shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight-fitting, self-closing doors or, in public lodging establishments or bathrooms located outside a public food service, have entrances and exits constructed in such a manner as to ensure privacy of occupants.

456.3.3 Vermin control.

Effective control measures shall be taken to protect against the entrance into the establishment, and the breeding or presence on the premises of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin. All buildings shall be effectively rodentproofed. All windows used for ventilation must be screened, except when effective means of vermin control are used. Screening material shall not be less than 16 mesh to the inch or equivalent, tightfitting and free of breaks.

456.3.4 Fire safety.

All fire safety, protection and prevention equipment must be installed, approved, maintained and used in accordance with Chapter 509, Florida Statutes, Chapter 69A-55, Uniform Fire Safety Standards for Public Food Service Establishments, Florida Administrative Codes and the Florida Fire Prevention Code as adopted by the State Fire Marshal.

456.3.5 Electrical wiring.

To prevent fire or injury, defective electrical wiring shall be replaced and wiring shall be kept in good repair. Only a wall switch or approved pull cord shall be permitted in bathrooms. Electrical wiring shall be in accordance with the provisions of Florida Building Code, Building, Chapter 27.

456.3.6 Gas appliances.
456.3.6.1

All appliances, including water heaters using gas, shall be properly vented in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. All appliances shall have a nationally recognized testing laboratory seal such as AGA or UL seal.

456.3.6.2

Heating appliances shall be properly sized in Btu input for room air space. Proper sizing of heating appliances shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

456.4 Sanitation and safety requirements.
456.4.1 Bathroom facilities.

All bathrooms shall be of easy and convenient access to both patrons and employees and shall be located on the same floor of the premises served. For the purpose of this section, the same floor includes any intermediate levels between the floor and ceiling of any room or space not to exceed a vertical height of 8 feet (2438 mm). Public food service establishments whose occupancy is incidental to another occupancy may utilize public restrooms provided on the same floor. The travel distance may vary where adequate directional signs are provided and the number of fixtures is deemed satisfactory by the applicable plumbing authority. Each public food service establishment shall maintain a minimum of one public bathroom for each sex, properly designated, except as provided herein:

456.4.1.1

Places serving food or drink on a take-out, carry-out or delivery basis only which provide no seating shall be required to provide a minimum of one bathroom accessible to the public.

456.4.1.2

Arcades, malls, or flea markets containing public food service establishments which offer no seating within the public food service establishment may have centrally located bathroom facilities accessible to patrons of the establishments in the arcade, mall, or flea market provided such bathroom facilities are within 300 feet (91 440 mm) of each establishment.

456.4.1.3

Public food service establishments located within theme parks and entertainment complexes may utilize centrally located bathroom facilities accessible to patrons of the establishments in the theme park or entertainment complex provided such bathroom facilities are reasonably accessible. For purposes of this section, reasonably accessible means within 300 feet (91 440 mm) of each establishment.

456.4.1.4

Public food service establishments which seat 10 persons or less shall be required to provide a minimum of one bathroom accessible to the public.

456.4.1.5

Public food service establishments located within a public lodging establishment shall be permitted to utilize public bathrooms located within the public lodging establishment, provided such bathrooms are available for use by the patrons of the public food service establishment during all hours of operation, are within 300 feet (91 440 mm) of the public food service establishment, and are located on the same floor as the public food service establishment. For purposes of this section, the same floor includes any intermediate levels between the floor and ceiling of any room or space without restriction as to vertical height.

SECTION 457
MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMS
457.1 Public mental health crisis stabilization units and short-term residential treatment programs.
457.1.1 Scope.

Crisis stabilization units and short-term residential treatment units shall comply with the design and construction standards in this section.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) Rule 65E-12, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 394, Florida Statutes.

457.1.2 Definitions.

CRISIS STABILIZATION UNIT (CSU). A state-supported mental health service or program and is a short-term alternative to inpatient psychiatric hospitalization and an integrated part of a designated public receiving facility under the authority of Chapter 394, Florida Statutes. A CSU provides brief intensive services for individuals who are presented as acutely mentally ill on a 24-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week basis, under the licensing authority of the department of Children and Families and the Agency for Health Care Administration. The purpose of a CSU is emergency psychiatric reception, psychiatric examination, to stabilize and redirect people to the most appropriate and least restrictive treatment settings consistent with their needs.

SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT PROGRAM (SRT). A state-supported acute care 24-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week residential alternative service, generally of 90 days or less, and which is an integrated part of a designated public receiving facility and receives state mental health funds under the authority of Chapter 394, Florida Statutes. The purpose of an SRT is to provide less acute intensive short-term treatment to individuals who have previously been admitted to either a hospital or CSU and have been transferred to the SRT as being temporarily in need of a 24-hour-a-day structured therapeutic setting in a less restrictive, but longer-stay alternative to hospitalization.

457.1.3

Facility standards for facilities licensed prior to or on July 14, 1993.

457.1.3.1 Building construction requirements.
457.1.3.1.1

Construction, additions, refurbishing, renovations, and alterations to existing facilities shall comply with the following codes and standards:

1.	The building codes described in the Florida Building Code;

2.	The fire codes contained in Chapter 69A-44, “Minimum Fire Safety Standards for Residential Alcohol and Drug Abuse Treatment and Prevention Programs, Mental Health Residential Treatment Facilities and Crisis Stabilization Units,” Florida Administrative Code, as described in NFPA 101, Chapters 18 and 19, Special Definitions, as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as applicable to limited health care facilities, which is included by reference in Chapter 59A-3, Florida Administrative Code.

457.1.3.2 Minimum physical plant requirements.

Each CSU and SRT shall conform to the requirements of Sections 457.1.3.2.1 through 457.1.3.2.12.

457.1.3.2.1

In multiple occupancy bedrooms or sleeping areas there shall be a minimum of 60 square feet (6 m2) per bed and no less than a 30-inch (762 mm) separation between beds. Bedrooms shall be limited to a maximum of four occupants.

457.1.3.2.2

The minimum size of a single occupant bedroom shall be 55 square feet (5 m2).

457.1.3.2.3

Each CSU shall have at least one seclusion room and another room which may be used as a seclusion room. Each SRT shall have a seclusion room. Seclusion rooms shall be a minimum of 55 square feet (5 m2). If a restraint bed is utilized it shall have access around it and be bolted to the floor. Seclusion rooms shall minimally include a mattress. Ceilings shall be solid, and all lighting fixtures shall be tamperproof, and power receptacles are not permitted in the room.

457.1.3.2.4

The facility shall have at least one water fountain readily accessible for the use of persons receiving services.

457.1.3.2.5

The facility shall have a minimum ratio of one shower for each eight individuals and one toilet and lavatory for each six individuals. Individual shower stalls and dressing areas shall be provided. The use of gang showers is prohibited. Access to a bathroom shall not be through another person’s room.

457.1.3.2.6

The facility shall have a locked area for personal possessions being held for safekeeping. Individual shelves or other similar dividers shall be provided in the locked area for the storage of personal possessions. The facility shall have written policies and procedures to ensure reasonable access to personal possessions.

457.1.3.2.7

Each facility shall have a fenced outside recreation area with a minimum fence height of no less than 6 feet (1829 mm) suitable for impeding elopements.

457.1.3.2.8

External windows shall have security screens or equivalent protection.

457.1.3.2.9

The facility shall provide an appropriate separate nontreatment area to serve as a general reception area with accommodations for such activities as receiving visitors. This reception area shall be separated from the treatment area by a locked doorway.

457.1.3.2.10

When a CSU is collocated with another program, as provided for in Section 65E-12.106(23), Florida Administrative Code, the following minimum facility requirements shall be met.

Collocation means the operation of CSU and SRT, or CSU and substance abuse detoxification services from a common nurses’ station without treatment system integration. It may result in the administration of those services by the same organization and the sharing of common services, such as housekeeping, maintenance and professional services.

1.	A CSU shall be separated and secured by locked doors, used by persons receiving services, from the SRT and detoxification units.

2.	Whenever a CSU is collocated with an SRT or substance abuse detoxification unit there shall be no compromise in CSU standards. In all instances, whenever there is a conflict between CSU rules and SRT, alcohol or drug abuse rules, the more restrictive rules shall apply.

457.1.3.2.11

All CSUs shall be locked facilities and, to the maximum extent practical, provide a locked perimeter around a living unit and fenced exercise area within which individuals can reside 24 hours-a-day in an environment designed to minimize potential for injury. Where this is not possible, operational compensation shall be made as follows:

1.	Each person receiving services shall be provided a minimum of 175 square feet (16 m2) of usable client space within the CSU. Useable client space is the sum, in gross square feet, of all rooms, interior wall to interior wall, that are part of a CSU and SRT facility. Mechanical and electrical rooms, administrative and staff offices, screening areas, nurses’ stations, visitor and reception areas, crawl space and attic space are excluded. Bedrooms shall be spacious and attractive, and activity rooms or space shall be provided.

2.	CSU facilities shall be locked to provide reasonable control over access to and egress from the unit, recreational area, and emergency reception areas. When individuals are moved to other areas, the pathways shall also be locked or have adequate control provisions to prevent elopement. Such controlled passageways shall include access to the emergency reception area, unit proper, off unit doorways, and recreational areas.

3.	All unit door locks shall employ a common key for rapid access in emergency situations with quick releasing or single-turn mechanisms.

457.1.3.2.12

Food preparation areas for 13 or more persons shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 64E-11, Florida Administrative Code, “Food Hygiene.”

457.1.3.3 Health and sanitation.
457.1.3.3.1

Appropriate health and sanitation inspections shall be obtained before occupying any new physical facility or addition. A report of the most recent inspections must be on file and accessible to authorized individuals.

457.1.3.3.2

Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be readily available in all washing, bathing and food preparation areas. Hot water in areas used by persons being served shall be at least 100°F (38°C) but not exceed 120°F (49°C).

457.1.3.4 Seclusion room.

Each CSU shall have at least one seclusion room located in the CSU facility. Additional space shall be available that can be used either as a seclusion room or bedroom, as need dictates. Policies and procedures shall be developed on handling emergency situations that require seclusion. Each SRT shall have a seclusion room.

457.1.4 Minimum construction standards for CSU and SRT facilities initially licensed after July 14, 1993.
457.1.4.1 Construction requirements.
457.1.4.1.1 New facility construction.

New facility construction and additions, refurbishing, renovations and alterations to existing facilities shall comply with the following codes and standards:

1.	The building codes described in the Florida Building Code.

2.	The fire codes contained in Chapter 69A-44, “Minimum Fire Safety Standards for Residential Alcohol and Drug Abuse Treatment and Prevention Programs, Mental Health Residential Treatment Facilities and Crisis Stabilization Units,” Florida Administrative Code, as described in NFPA 101, Chapters 12 and 13, “Special Definitions,” as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as applicable to limited health care facilities, which is included by reference in Chapter 59A-3, Florida Administrative Code.

3.	The accessibility requirements of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

457.1.4.1.2 Plumbing.

All plumbing shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

457.1.4.1.3 Inspections and certificate of occupancy.

Appropriate health and sanitation inspections and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained before occupying any new facility or addition. A report of the most recent inspections must be on file and accessible to authorized individuals.

457.1.4.1.4 Sprinklers.

No unsprinklered building classification as defined in the Florida Building Code, Building, is allowed. All facilities shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler and smoke detection system to include a smoke detector in every bedroom. Provision shall be made for automatic emergency forces notification.

457.1.4.1.5 Surge protection.

Surge protection in compliance with NFPA 70, National Electric Code, shall be installed to protect the service equipment and have integral visual indication of surge protector failure. Additional surge protection shall be provided for all low-voltage and power connections to all electronic equipment and conductors entering or exiting the building and other life safety systems equipment such as fire alarm, telephone and nurse call. Protection shall be in accordance with appropriate IEEE standards for the type of equipment being protected.

457.1.4.2 Overall functional design.
457.1.4.2.1

The CSU or SRT shall be designed to provide a locked perimeter around a living unit and fenced exercise area within which individuals can reside 24 hours a day in an environment designed to minimize potential for injury. The CSU or SRT structure shall be a single-story ground level facility. These facilities shall have separate off-unit reception and administration areas which may also be locked. Service corridors and pathways to other nonunit activities shall not be through the locked CSU or SRT unit.

457.1.4.2.2

The walls throughout all client areas of the CSU or SRT shall either be concrete block or a double layer of gypsum wallboard or 3/4-inch (19 mm) thick plaster on metal lath to minimize maintenance of the facility. The general architecture of the unit shall provide for optimal line-of-sight observation from the nurses’ station throughout the unit, minimizing hidden spots and blind corners.

457.1.4.2.3

The CSU or SRT shall be designed to create a pleasant functional therapeutic environment throughout, by the use of sunlight, colors, designs, textures, and furnishings. The design shall achieve a secure unit which looks more residential than institutional in its construction and furnishings, while incorporating substantial safety considerations throughout.

457.1.4.2.4

The CSU or SRT shall be designed in order that the general unit be divided into a close observation area and a general observation area based upon the need for frequent physical proximity, singular observation of individuals, and lowered stimulation levels. These areas do not need physical separation; for example, they may be the left and right sides of the unit.

457.1.4.2.4.1 Close observation area.

This area shall include persons brought onto the CSU or SRT needing initial observation or restraints, individualized observation, and lowered stimulation levels, all of which require the frequent physical proximity of nurses. This area shall be directly adjacent to the primary unit doorway and nurses’ station. The immediately adjacent rooms shall be used for single occupancy and restraint or seclusion. These rooms shall be remote from routine high activity areas and corridors.

457.1.4.2.4.2 General observation area.

This shall include areas where persons routinely congregate or walk through such as multioccupant bedrooms, activity rooms, smoking areas, dining room and routine traffic corridors, or pathways. The dining and activity areas shall be directly observable, or under constant staff supervision, but may be a greater distance from the nurses’ station.

457.1.4.2.5

All areas of CSUs and SRTs shall be ventilated by central, ducted supply and return forced air systems. Toilets, bathrooms and soiled function rooms shall be mechanically exhausted to the outside. Ventilation units shall distribute tempered heated or cooled air to all spaces and shall supply outside air in the quantity of either the sum of all exhausts or 20 cfm (0.009 m3/s) per person whichever is greater. The quality of all exhausts must match the intake volume of all outside air. Supply, exhaust, and return fans shall run continuously while the building is occupied. Areas in which smoking is permitted shall be well vented by at least 35 cfm (0.02 m3/s) per person to the outside in order to minimize smoke diffusion throughout the unit.

457.1.4.2.6

All doors opening directly onto the unit from nonclient rooms or office areas shall be equipped with locksets which are key released to leave the client area and permit unobstructed return to the client area. Door closures are required to deny persons receiving services accidental unsupervised access to the contents of staff offices, janitorial closets, and mechanical areas.

457.1.4.2.7

Corridors shall ensure maximum clear distances by recessing water fountains and fire extinguishers, or placing them in alcoves. Corridors in client areas must be at least a 6 foot (1829 mm) clear width; nonclient areas must be at least 44 inches (1118 mm) minimum clear width. Corridor ceilings shall be a minimum height of 7 feet 6 inches (2284 mm).

457.1.4.2.8

Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be readily available in all washing, bathing, food preparation, and food handling areas. Hot water in client areas shall be at least 100°F (38°C), but not exceed 120°F (49°C).

457.1.4.2.9

The minimum size for doors shall be no less than 3 feet (914 mm) wide and 6 feet 8 inches high (2032 mm). Areas accessible to persons with physical disabilities shall comply with applicable codes and standards.

457.1.4.2.10

Since glass fragments are a safety hazard throughout the unit, the use of glass shall be minimal.

457.1.4.2.11

All television sets must be securely fastened.

457.1.4.2.12

Door closures shall not be utilized in unobserved client areas.

457.1.4.2.13

All CSUs and SRTs equipped with electronic locks on internal doors or egress doors shall ensure that such locks have manual common key mechanical override that will operate in the event of a power failure or fire. Egress pathways and doors shall be locked as provided for in the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, Chapter 12, as incorporated by reference in Chapter 59A-3, Florida Administrative Code as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

457.1.4.2.14

CSUs and SRTs with electronic or magnetic door locks or other fundamental operational components which are electric shall have either: a battery back-up system rated for facility emergency power draw and capable of sustaining door locks and emergency operations for a minimum period of 6 hours; or an emergency generator with transfer switch with a battery pack back-up system capable of operating for 2 hours at facility emergency power draw level.

457.1.4.2.15

The use of door vision panels and windows shall minimize the opportunity for isolation of staff or persons served in unobserved areas. This does not include privacy provisions such as bathrooms and bedrooms.

457.1.4.3 Uniform specifications.
457.1.4.3.1

The design shall ensure that each person receiving services in a CSU or SRT is provided a minimum of 175 square feet (16 m2) of usable client space.

457.1.4.3.2

Tamper-resistant screws shall be used to protect electrical switches and outlets throughout the facility in all areas accessible to persons receiving services. Lighting fixtures shall be tamperproof type throughout the facility in all areas accessible to persons receiving services.

457.1.4.3.3

All electrical switches and outlets in wet areas shall be ground-fault protected with a remote breaker switch. Tamperproof, safety-type duplex outlets shall be used in all areas accessible to persons receiving services.

457.1.4.3.4

Air ducts shall be covered with a perforated-type metal grille not residential louvered grilles, throughout the unit in all areas accessible to persons receiving services.

457.1.4.3.5

All hose bibbs shall be equipped with a vacuum breaker device.

457.1.4.3.6

The unit shall have a minimum of one drinking fountain.

457.1.4.3.7

Ceiling height in bedrooms, activity areas, and bathrooms shall be at least 9 feet (2743 mm).

457.1.4.3.8

The operation of all perimeter locks shall ensure reasonable control over both access and egress.

457.1.4.4 Administration and public areas.
457.1.4.4.1

Waiting rooms shall have an adjacent rest room which is designed to accommodate persons with physical disabilities in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

457.1.4.4.2

The entrance shall be grade level, sheltered from inclement weather and accessible to persons with physical disabilities in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

457.1.4.4.3

The lobby shall include a drinking fountain and space for clerical personnel. Private interview space for emergency screening of voluntary persons shall be adjacent to the lobby.

457.1.4.5 Emergency screening area for CSUs.
457.1.4.5.1

This shall be a locked area in which law enforcement admissions may be received. This area shall not be wholly isolated visually from the CSU to provide safety for emergency screening personnel who may become isolated in this area. This area shall provide for medical clearance, emergency screening, bathroom facilities, and other activities which may be necessary.

457.1.4.5.2

A separate entrance shall be provided directly to emergency screening areas and examination rooms for law enforcement personnel. It shall have a driveway where a law enforcement vehicle can pull immediately adjacent to the building before transferring a person through the separate entrance to the emergency screening area. The law enforcement entrance shall also have a lock box where the law enforcement officer can lock his weapons during such time as he or she is in the facility.

457.1.4.5.3

A separate bathroom with supervised shower area shall be located so that all persons being admitted may be showered before being admitted to the residential section of the unit.

457.1.4.6 Seclusion rooms.
457.1.4.6.1

Each CSU shall have a minimum of two seclusion rooms that shall share a common vestibule with a bathroom off the vestibule area. Each SRT shall have at least one seclusion room. Seclusion rooms shall be free of sharp edges or corners and be strongly constructed to withstand repeated physical assaults. Walls shall be either concrete block or double layered to provide resistance and be smooth. The ceilings shall be 9 feet (2743 mm) in clear height, hard-coated, and lighting fixtures recessed and tamperproof. Lighting fixtures shall be nonbreakable, preferably Lexan, and shall be installed with tamperproof screws, as shall any other items in the seclusion rooms. The seclusion room door shall be heavy wood or metal at least 36 inches (914 mm) in width and shall open outward. The door frame shall be heavy steel and shall be thoroughly bolted into the wall and cemented in.

457.1.4.6.2

At least one seclusion room in the CSU shall have a sturdily constructed bed, without sharp edges and bolted to the floor. A bed in the SRT seclusion room is optional; however, if present, the bed shall meet the same requirements as specified for the CSU. Its placement in the room shall provide adequate space for staff to apply restraints and not assist individuals in tampering with the lights, smoke detectors, cameras, or other items that may be in the ceiling of the room. There shall be a rheostat control mechanism outside the room to adjust the illumination of the light in the seclusion room.

457.1.4.6.3

The floor and walls, up to a height of 3 feet (914 mm), shall be coated with an impermeable finish to resist penetration of body fluids. One seclusion room shall have a floor drain. A hose bibb shall be in a readily adjacent area such as a bathroom.

457.1.4.6.4

There shall be a vision panel in the door of the seclusion room, no larger than 8 inches by 8 inches (203 mm by 203 mm), which provides a view of the entire room. This vision panel shall be Lexan or other suitably strong material and it shall be securely mounted in the door. Provisions shall be made to ensure privacy from the public and other persons receiving services while providing easy access for staff observation.

457.1.4.6.5

Seclusion rooms shall be a minimum of 70 square feet (7 m2) and a minimum room dimension of 9 feet (2743 mm).

457.1.4.6.6

Fire sprinkler heads shall be ceiling mounted and either recessed or flush-mounted type without a looped spray dispersal head.

457.1.4.6.7

A voice-activated and switchable emergency calling system for monitoring persons receiving services shall be provided in each seclusion room.

457.1.4.6.8

Each seclusion room shall have an electronic visual monitoring system capable of viewing the entire room and be monitored from the nurses’ station.

457.1.4.7 Janitor’s closet.
457.1.4.7.1

A janitor’s closet shall be on the unit. It shall contain a floor receptor for mop water and provide space for mop bucket, brooms, and other minimal items. Caustic and other dangerous chemicals shall not be stored in this closet.

457.1.4.7.2

This closet shall have an automatic door closer and have automatic-relocking type lock.

457.1.4.8 Bathrooms.
457.1.4.8.1

Access to a bathroom shall not be through another person’s bedroom. Bathrooms shall provide space, in addition to bathing, for dry clothes and changing of clothes and for observation staff. The shower head shall be recessed or have a smooth curve from which items cannot be hung. There shall be no overhead rod, privacy stall supports, protrusions, or fixtures capable of carrying more than 40 pounds (18 kg) of weight. The ceiling shall be hard coated. Sprinkler heads shall be either recessed or a flush-mounted type dispersal head. The toilet shall be a flushometer-type, not residential with water tank and cover. Toilets shall be of heavy duty construction securely fastened to the floor and have seats with locking nuts. Secure cleanout access shall be provided for the toilet to clean out plugs and pipes. Floor drains in bathroom areas shall be of sufficient size that they cannot be plugged by standing on them.

457.1.4.8.2

Mirrors shall not be common glass. A polycarbonate mirror, fully secured, and flat-mounted to the wall is required. Polished metal mirrors shall not be permitted.

457.1.4.8.3

Lighting fixtures shall be recessed and tamperproof with Lexan or other strong translucent material.

457.1.4.8.4

Bathroom fixtures, shower, lavatory, and toilet shall be readily accessible from a common area. If not accessible from a common area, they will be deemed to be available only to the occupants of directly adjoining bedroom or bedrooms.

457.1.4.8.5

Each CSU and SRT shall have a bathroom of sufficient size for use by persons with physical disabilities. It shall include toilet, lavatory, shower, and safety grab bars for shower and toilet.

457.1.4.8.6

The facility shall have a minimum ratio of one shower for each eight persons receiving services and one toilet and lavatory for each six persons receiving services. Individual shower stalls and dressing areas shall be provided. The use of gang showers is prohibited.

457.1.4.9 Nurses’ station.
457.1.4.9.1

The nurses’ station shall be positioned so that the unit may be under constant direct visual surveillance. Charting and records areas shall be located in the rear of the nurses’ station, and not in a separate area, so that staff on duty can readily observe the client areas. A bathroom shall be nearby for staff use. The nurses’ station, if separated from client areas, shall utilize either Lexan or safety wire glass for enclosure to above counter top level. If not enclosed the counter top shall be at least 18 inches (457 mm) in width.

457.1.4.9.2

Thirty is the maximum number of beds which may be served by a common nurses’ station in colocated units, as described in Section 65E-12.106(23), Florida Administrative Code.

457.1.4.9.3

The nurses’ station, which functions as the primary control center, shall have necessary electronic assistance such as camera monitors and intercoms in more remote areas where persons may become isolated. Areas warranting visual and auditory monitoring include remote entrance or egress doors, isolated hallways, after hours law enforcement entrance, emergency screening area, and fenced recreational yard.

457.1.4.10 Medication room.

The medication room shall be located near the nurses’ station. The medication room shall have a sink, refrigerator, locked storage, and facilities for dispensing medication. Security against unauthorized access shall be assured. The refrigerator shall store medications and clean materials only.

457.1.4.11 Examination room.

A suitable examination room shall be provided for physical examinations, nursing assessments, and other related medical activities. It shall include a sink for hand washing.

457.1.4.12 Bedrooms.
457.1.4.12.1

Ceilings shall be nonaccessible to prohibit persons receiving services from entering attic spaces or having access to overhead pipes and beams. Light switches and electrical outlets shall be secured with nontamper-type screws. When feasible each bedroom shall have a window, operable by staff, with an exterior view. Window sills shall not exceed a height of 36 inches (914 mm) above floor level and should incorporate protective screens or Lexan-type material to prevent direct access to glass surfaces. There should be no overhead protrusions available for hanging in excess of 40 pounds (18 kg) weight.

457.1.4.12.2

Beds and other heavy furniture suitable for barricading the door shall be secured to the floor or walls.

457.1.4.12.3

Multiple occupant bedrooms shall be limited to a maximum of four occupants and shall be a minimum size of 60 square feet (6 m2) per bed with no less than a 30-inch (762 mm) separation between beds. Single occupant bedrooms shall be a minimum of 80 square feet (7 m2).

457.1.4.12.4

Bedroom doors shall be a minimum of 36 inches (914 mm) wide.

457.1.4.13 Kitchen and nourishment preparation area.
457.1.4.13.1

Preparation or food handling areas shall have water and plumbing fixtures suitable for cleaning dining utensils. The requirements for nourishment preparation areas are less than that of kitchens due to the minimal scale of operations for these areas. If these areas are accessible to persons receiving services, they should include appropriate safety considerations for sharp and other dangerous instruments and the elimination of hot surfaces. Space shall be provided for disposal of wet garbage. Refrigeration and freezer space shall be provided in these areas for the carryover of a minimum amount of perishable food.

457.1.4.13.2

Kitchens shall comply with Chapter 64E-11, Florida Administrative Code, Food Preparation and Sanitation Requirements, as well as the 1985 NFPA 101, Chapters 12 and 13, Fire Safety Requirements as incorporated by reference in Chapter 59A3, Florida Administrative Code as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Kitchens shall be designed with flow-through type operation where food arriving is immediately placed into dry storage or freezer units without walking through food preparation areas. The flow-through type system would provide for the preparation of food, serving and dishes returned with garbage and waste going out to an adjacent dumpster and can wash with water collection curbing and drain. A concrete pad shall be provided for the trash dumpster and garbage truck entrance.

457.1.4.13.3

Kitchens shall be equipped with fire suppression hoods and through-wall grease laden air evacuation and ventilation systems. All electrical outlets shall be ground-fault circuit interrupter protected. If meals are to be served via an open area, directly from the kitchen, this area shall have a firerated steel retractable overhead-door type mechanism to continue the fire wall protection around the kitchen area. Kitchens shall have heat detectors rather than smoke sensors.

457.1.4.13.4

External to the kitchen, and outside the waste exit door, there shall be a curbed slop sink for mops and dirty kitchen water with an immediately accessible hose bibb and drain. This area shall be external to the kitchen area, but immediately adjacent to it, to provide ready disposal of waste water as well as for the removal of cleaning items from the kitchen when they are not in use.

457.1.4.13.5

There shall be a large food storage pantry in or adjacent to the kitchen.

457.1.4.13.6

Facilities using off-site kitchens for food preparation shall have an on-site food reception, warming, and holding area of sufficient size and with sufficient equipment to warm and hold food for each meal served. Required space shall include provision for proper disposal or holding of used implements and disposal of wet garbage in accordance with Chapter 64E-11, Florida Administrative Code.

457.1.4.14 Dining area.

Each CSU or SRT shall have an attractive dining area on the unit. Seating capacity shall reflect the licensed capacity of the entire CSU or SRT, although residents may eat or be served in shifts during daily operations. Individual, rather than bench seating, shall be used for easy floor cleaning.

457.1.4.15 Unit laundry facilities.
457.1.4.15.1

Provision shall be made for the storage of soiled laundry in an adjacent, isolated, fire-resistant area.

457.1.4.15.2

Each CSU or SRT shall have a personal laundry room which shall incorporate a flow-through design in which dirty laundry enters, is sorted, placed in the washer, dried, folded, and moved out without crossing clean laundry with dirty laundry. CSUs and SRTs shall have a small washer and dryer for immediate unit needs and to wash clothes. These washing and drying units shall be equipped to sanitize clothes as a preventive measure of infection control.

457.1.4.15.3

The soiled laundry room shall have a locked door equipped with automatic door closer to restrict access to cleaning chemicals. The soiled laundry room air shall be exhausted outside the facility.

457.1.4.16 Clean laundry room.
457.1.4.16.1

A separate space shall be provided for clean laundry capable of storing an adequate supply of laundry for the size of the CSU or SRT. The laundry closet shall have a locked door to prevent access to these items by persons receiving services.

457.1.4.16.2

Items stored on the top shelf shall provide an 18 inch (457 mm) clear space from sprinkler heads so as to not block dispersal of water.

457.1.4.17 Fenced recreational area.
457.1.4.17.1

CSUs and SRTs shall have a no less than 6-foot-high (1829 mm) fenced, out-of-doors area where persons receiving services may have access to fresh air and exercise. It must provide privacy for persons receiving services otherwise exposed to public view. This area shall be constructed to retain persons inside the area and minimize elopements from the area, although it is not a secure area.

457.1.4.17.2

The fenced area shall provide some shaded area where persons receiving services may be out of doors without being in direct sunlight or may receive sunlight as they desire. The enclosing fences shall have an exit gate which is located away from the building as a secondary egress from the fenced area, for use in fire situations, or access by lawn maintenance equipment. The gate shall be provided with a lock which is readily accessible from both sides. The area of this fenced enclosure shall be at least 1,100 square feet (102 m2) including an activity area having dimensions of not less than 20 feet by 40 feet (6096 mm by 1219 mm).

457.1.4.17.3

Objects shall not be placed near the fence to provide a ready step ladder over the fence and, if fabric fencing is used, the horizontal bracing used for corners shall be outside the fabric to preclude its use as an escape ladder step. The fenced area shall be designed, without blind corners, to be readily visible by one staff member standing in a central location. If desired, the fence may be topped with a 45-degree inward slanting restraining-type wire. The use of barbed wire and other sharp injurious materials, however, is prohibited.

457.1.4.17.4

This area, as all other primary fire exit routes, shall have egress lighting which is connected to the power side of the facility electrical panel so that in the event of a fire and electrical panel disconnect, the exit and congregation areas would still have lighting.

457.1.4.18 Multipurpose room.

In addition to open, on unit floor space, each CSU and SRT shall have an accessible multipurpose room for group activities of at least 180 square feet (7 m2). This area may be the dining area.

457.1.4.19 Off unit storage areas.
457.1.4.19.1

Each CSU and SRT shall have appropriate storage, in nonclient areas, for operating supplies and materials.

457.1.4.19.2

Adjacent nonclient area storage for personal belongings shall be a minimum of 8 cubic feet (0.23 m3) for each person receiving services.

457.2 Community mental health regulation.

Adult residential treatment facilities (RTFs) shall be limited to adults and comply with the regulations in Sections 457.2.1 through 457.2.4.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS) Rule 65E-4.016, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 394, Florida Statutes.

457.2.1 Facility standards.
457.2.1.1 Building construction requirements.

The construction and renovation of a facility shall comply with the provisions of the Florida Building Code.

457.2.2 Health and safety.

Facilities and additions shall be constructed to allow full compliance with the provisions of this section.

457.2.2.1 Fire safety.
457.2.2.1.1

Residential treatment facilities shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local fire safety standards as follows:

1.	Level IA licensed facilities shall comply with the fire codes contained in Chapter 69A-3, Fire Prevention–General Provisions, Florida Administrative Code, as described in NFPA 101, Chapters 18 and 19, Special Definitions as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as applicable to limited health care facilities.

2.	For facility Level IB, which may have no more than three residents incapable of self-preservation, and for facility Levels II, III, IV and V, which may have no residents incapable of self-preservation, each resident record shall have a signed statement by a physician or licensed psychologist regarding the resident’s capability of self-preservation.

3.	Facility Levels IB, II, III, IV and V shall have a prompt evacuation capability.

457.2.2.1.2

Level IV and V facilities shall have a written policy on the safe use of extension cords and adapters. The use of extension cords and adaptors is prohibited in Level I, II and III facilities.

457.2.2.1.3

Electrical cords and appliances shall be maintained in a safe condition.

457.2.2.1.4

Portable heating devices shall be used only in emergency situations as defined in agency procedures approved by the governing board.

457.2.2.1.5

Flammable liquids or gas cylinders shall not be positioned near flame or heat sources, nor stored with combustible materials.

457.2.2.1.6 Emergency power.

The facility shall provide egress lighting that will operate in the event of a power failure.

457.2.2.1.7 Smoking.

The program shall have a written policy governing smoking in the facilities. Smoking shall be prohibited in any area of the facility where combustible supplies, materials, liquids or gases will be used or stored.

457.2.2.1.8 Fire safety inspections.

A fire safety inspection shall be obtained before occupying any new physical facility or addition.

457.2.2.2 Personal safety.
457.2.2.2.1

The building shall be free of hazards such as cracks in the floors, walls or ceiling; warped or loose boards, tile, linoleum, handrails or railings; and broken window panes or missing window screens.

457.2.2.2.2

Protection shall be provided from sharp or jagged projections, “invisible” glass, moving parts, heated surfaces, heavy objects that could fall, or any other potentially hazardous condition.

457.2.2.2.3

Grab bars shall be nonremovable.

457.2.2.2.4

The temperature of the hot water supply shall be regulated and shall be between 105°F (41°C) and 115°F (46°C) at the outlet.

457.2.2.2.5

Any electrical fans, except ceiling paddle fans, shall be screened. All electrical fans, including paddle fans, shall be placed in a safe location.

457.2.2.2.6

Indoor and outdoor recreational areas shall be provided with safeguards designed for the needs of the residents.

457.2.2.2.7

Outdoor recreational areas shall be well drained.

457.2.2.3 Health and sanitation.
457.2.2.3.1

Appropriate health and sanitation inspection certificates shall be obtained before occupying any new physical facility or addition, and at least yearly or as required by statute, thereafter. A report of the most recent inspection must be on file and accessible to authorized individuals.

457.2.2.3.2

Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be readily available in all washing, bathing and food preparation areas.

457.2.2.3.3

The kitchen and food preparation area shall be well-lighted, ventilated and located apart from areas which could cause food contamination. All doors and windows in the kitchen and food preparation areas that open to the outside shall be screened.

457.2.3 Food service.
457.2.3.1

For food service areas with a capacity of 13 or more residents, all matters pertaining to food service shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 64E-11, Florida Administrative Code.

457.2.3.2 Food preparation, sanitation and storage.
457.2.3.2.1

Each refrigerator or freezer used for storage of perishable foods shall be provided with an accurate indicating thermometer located in the warmest part toward the front side of the refrigerator or freezer so that the temperature can be easily and readily observed.

457.2.3.2.2

Freezers should be kept at or below 0°F (-18°C).

457.2.3.3 Dining.
457.2.3.3.1

Dining tables shall seat small groups of residents unless other arrangements are justified on the basis of resident needs.

457.2.3.3.2

The dining area shall be suitably lighted, ventilated and furnished.

457.2.4 Environment.
457.2.4.1

Residential facilities shall not be identified by an exterior sign or vehicle sign that labels the residents or special functions of the facility. Vehicle traffic and parking relating to the facility shall be similar to that of surrounding structures or residences.

457.2.4.2

The grounds of the facility shall have adequate space for resident activities.

457.2.4.3

The facility shall be accessible to persons with disabilities or the facility shall have written policies and procedures that describe how disabled individuals can gain access to the facility for necessary services.

457.2.4.4

Areas that accommodate the following shall be available:

1.	A full range of social activities;

2.	Private conversations;

3.	Group activities; and

4.	Resident privacy, when appropriate.

457.2.4.5

All areas of the facility occupied by residents shall be climatically controlled in a manner conducive to the comfort and privacy of the residents and shall include the following:

457.2.4.5.1

A design temperature of at least 72°F (22°C) and not to exceed 85°F (29°C) shall be used for waking hours in all areas used by residents. During sleeping hours, a temperature of at least 68°F (20°C) shall be used. These temperature requirements apply unless otherwise mandated by federal or state authorities.

457.2.4.5.2

When cooling devices are used, they shall be placed or adjusted in a manner which minimizes drafts.

457.2.4.6

Drinking water shall be readily available and easily accessible to residents.

457.2.4.7

Mirrors reasonably free of distortion shall be placed in appropriate places to aid in grooming and to enhance self-awareness.

457.2.4.8

Clocks shall be provided to promote awareness of time and day.

457.2.4.9

The use of door locks or closed sections of the building shall comply with all applicable safety standards.

457.2.4.10

Clean, well-lighted and ventilated laundering facilities for resident use shall be available on the premises or in the immediate neighborhood.

457.2.4.11

A telephone which allows private conversations shall be available and easily accessible within the facility.

457.2.4.12

Facility lighting shall promote clear perceptions of people and functions. When and where appropriate, lighting shall be controlled by residents.

457.2.4.13

Whenever feasible, the environment shall provide views of the outdoors.

457.2.4.14 Bedrooms.

Bedrooms shall be designed to meet the following criteria:

457.2.4.14.1

All resident bedrooms shall be ventilated, well-lighted and located convenient to a bathroom.

457.2.4.14.2

Resident bedrooms designated for single occupancy shall provide a minimum inside measurement of 80 square feet (7 m2) of usable floor space.

457.2.4.14.3

Resident bedrooms designated for multiple occupancy shall provide a minimum inside measurement of 60 square feet (6 m2) of usable floor space per bed and be limited to four occupants.

457.2.4.14.4

All resident bedrooms shall open directly into a corridor, a common use area or the outside, except in those facilities comprised of apartments.

457.2.4.14.5

Each resident bedroom where furnishings are supplied by the facility shall be furnished with personal storage space and adequate space for hanging clothes.

457.2.4.14.6

Bedroom doors shall not have vision panels.

457.2.4.15 Bathrooms.

Bathrooms shall be designed to meet the following criteria:

457.2.4.15.1

A toilet and lavatory facility shall be provided for every six residents, and toilets shall be equipped with seats.

457.2.4.15.2

A minimum of one tub or shower facility, equipped with nonslip devices, shall be provided for every eight residents.

457.2.4.15.3

Bathrooms shall be ventilated, adequately lighted and have clearly labeled hot and cold running water.

457.2.4.15.4

Each bathroom shall have a door in working order to assure privacy.

457.2.4.15.5

When there is more than one toilet or bathing facility in a bathroom, provisions are required for privacy.

457.2.4.15.6

Bathrooms used by residents with disabilities shall be equipped to ensure safety and independent mobility.

457.2.4.15.7

Sole access to toilet or bathing facilities shall not be through another resident’s sleeping room, except in facilities comprised of apartments.

457.2.4.16 Common living areas.

Common living areas shall be designed to meet the following criteria:

457.2.4.16.1

A room, separate from sleeping areas, shall be provided where residents may read or engage in socialization or other leisure time activities.

457.2.4.16.2

A minimum of 35 square feet (3 m2) of living and dining space per resident shall be provided by all facilities except those comprised of apartments. This space shall include living, recreational and other space designated accessible to residents, but shall not include bathrooms, corridors, storage space, or screened porches which cannot be adapted for year round use. Facilities with bedrooms which include living space may count the square footage that is in excess of the bedroom square footage requirements as part of the 35 square footage (3 m2) living and dining space requirements.

SECTION 458
MANUFACTURED BUILDINGS
458.1 General.

The following administrative requirements for inspection and plan review apply to manufactured buildings including factory-built schools. Additional technical requirements for factory-built schools can be found in Section 453.

Note: See Department of Business and Professional Regulation Rule 61-41, Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 553, Florida Statutes.

458.2 Definitions.
458.2.1 “Agency”

means an individual or entity authorized to perform inspections of or review plans for manufactured buildings as provided by Rule 61-41, Florida Administrative Code.

458.2.2 “Factory-built school”

means any building designed or intended for use as a school building which is manufactured in whole or in part at an off-site facility, including prefabricated educational facilities, factory-built educational facilities and modular built educational facilities that are designed to be portable, relocatable, demountable or reconstructible, are used primarily as classrooms or the components of an entire school and do not fall under the provisions of Sections 320.822 through 320.862, Florida Statutes.

458.2.3 Department.

Refers to Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

458.3 Inspections.

Inspection of installation of manufactured buildings and construction activities conducted at the site of the installation shall by conducted pursuant to Chapter 1 hereof. Inspections during the manufacturing process shall be conducted by those agencies as follows:

458.3.1

Inspections shall be conducted by an appropriately licensed representative of an agency selected by the manufacturer. The inspections shall ensure that the buildings are being manufactured in compliance with the applicable codes and the approved plans. Once an agency has inspected a manufactured building, the manufacturer shall not seek to have the building inspected by another agency, nor shall any agency inspect a building that has already been inspected by another agency unless the subsequent inspection is at the direction of the department or unless the building or modification thereto is being inspected for recertification by the department.

458.3.2

At a minimum, a certified agency shall meet the criteria in Sections 458.3.2.1 through 458.3.2.4.

458.3.2.1

With regard to manufactured buildings, observe the first building built, or with regard to components, observe the first unit assembled, after certification of the manufacturer, from start to finish, inspecting all subsystems: electrical, plumbing, structural, mechanical, or thermal. Continue observation of the manufacturing process until the approved inspection agency determines that the manufacturer’s quality control program, in conjunction with the application of the plans approved by the approved inspection agency, will result in a building and components that meet or exceed the applicable Florida Building Code requirements. Thereafter, inspect each module produced during at least one point of the manufacturing process and inspect at least 75 percent of the subsystems of each module: electrical, plumbing, structural, mechanical, or thermal.

458.3.2.2

With respect to components, inspect at least 75 percent of the manufactured building components and at least 20 percent of the storage sheds that are not designed for human habitation and that have a floor area of 720 square feet or less.

458.3.2.3

During each inspection, the agency shall verify the manufacturer’s inplant quality control program is working as set forth in the approved quality control manual.

458.3.2.4

Should work stop on a particular module or component for a period of two months, reinspection shall be required.

458.3.3

When an agency discovers a deviation from the code or the approved plans which creates or threatens to create an imminent life safety hazard, all buildings or components which have progressed through that stage of production since the agency’s previous inspection shall be inspected to ensure the absence of that deviation, and the agency shall immediately notify the manufacturer and the department in writing. Any building or component exhibiting the deviation shall be brought into conformance with the applicable code and the approved plans by the manufacturer within thirty days of notification of the deviation by the agency. The corrective action must be left available for reinspection by the agency.

458.3.4

The agency shall note all inspections, deviations and corrective actions in a written inspection report and shall complete the inspection report portion of the building code information system available via the Internet.

458.3.5

The agency shall give a copy of the inspection report(s) to the manufacturer for record and shall retain another copy. The agency or the manufacturer shall provide a copy of an inspection report to the department when requested.

458.4 Design plan and systems approval.

Plan review pertaining to installation of manufactured buildings and construction activities conducted at the site of the installation shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 1 hereof. Plan review pertaining to construction activities occurring within the manufacturing process shall be conducted by Department approved agencies. If the residential manufactured building is transportable in one or more sections and is 8 body feet (24 584 mm) or more in width or 40 body feet (12 192 mm) or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 square feet (29 m2) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis, the manufacturer shall certify the manufactured building has been excluded from regulation by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

458.4.1 Plan approval expiration.

Plan approvals for manufactured buildings shall expire upon the effective date of the new code. Upon revision of the Florida Building Code, plan approvals shall expire upon the effective date of that revision unless the manufacturer files, with the department, a sworn statement by an agency the plans have been reviewed and are in compliance with the revisions to the Florida Building Code. The agency shall transmit plans electronically through the building code information system to the Department.

Exception: In accordance with Section 105.3.7, manufacturers should be permitted to complete all buildings designed and approved prior to the effective date of a new code edition, provided a clear signed contract is in place. The contract shall provide specific data mirroring that required by an application for permit, specifically, without limitation, date of execution, building owner or dealer, and anticipated date of completion. However, the construction activity must commence within 6 months of the contract’s execution. The contract is subject to verification by the Department of Business and Professional Regulation.

458.4.2 Evidence of agency approval.

Approved plans and specifications shall be evidenced by a letter of certification from the agency. No manufacturing activity shall commence until plan approval has been obtained from the agency.

Approved copies of the design plans and specifications shall be returned to the manufacturer with an agency approval letter indicating the limitations, if any, of such approval. An approved copy of the plans shall be available at each place of manufacture, which shall be made available for inspection and monitoring. Upon approval of the plans, the agency shall electronically submit the plans bearing the approval stamp, with a list of any limitations of that plan approval, to the department via the building code information system at www.floridabuilding.org.

458.5 Factory-built schools, plan review (also see Section 453, State Requirements for Education Facilities).

Plan review of plans for constructed factory-built schools shall be performed by the agency selected by the department. An applicant for plan approval shall submit complete plans to the agency in the manner and format agreed to by the agency and the applicant. Upon determination by the agency that the submitted plans comply with all applicable standards, the agency shall certify such determination by affixing an approval stamp on each page of the plans, and shall return one copy to the applicant, maintain an original set, and submit one copy electronically to the department. The agency shall be compensated for the actual cost of the plan review by the applicant. No manufacturing activity shall commence until plan approval has been obtained from the agency. Plan review at a minimum shall include those items identified in Chapter 1 hereof.

458.6 Factory-built schools, plan review, inspections and work progress reports (also see Section 453, State Requirements for Education Facilities).
458.6.1 Inspectors.

The school board or Florida college (educational entity) which is to utilize the factory-built school shall be responsible for compliance with inspection requirements. Inspections may be performed by an agency.

458.6.2 New construction.

All buildings shall be subject to inspection during the manufacturing process. The educational entity shall ensure that factory inspections are performed periodically and are sufficient to ensure the building and its systems comply with the applicable standards. Inspections may be performed by an agency. The inspector shall require the correction of all deficiencies found during the manufacturing process. Upon an inspector’s determination that the building complies with the applicable standards, the inspector shall provide the department the information as required on the data plate for the building and identify the building as satisfactory for use as an educational facility on the building code information system.

SECTION 459
BOOT CAMPS FOR CHILDREN
459.1

Boot camps for children shall comply with the design and construction standards as described herein. Enforcement and interpretation of these provisions shall be by the entities authorized by Chapter 553.80, Florida Statutes.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Juvenile Justice Rule 63-E 2, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 39, Florida Statutes.

459.2 Facility structural and operational standards.
459.2.1

The facility shall conform to the Florida Fire Prevention Code. All new construction and building renovations shall comply with the Florida Building Code.

459.2.2

All juvenile justice residential treatment program facilities shall conform to the Florida Building Code.

459.2.3

All juvenile justice residential treatment program facilities shall comply with the sanitation, health and fire codes set forth in the Florida Building Code and in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 460
MAUSOLEUMS AND COLUMBARIUMS
460.1 General.

The provisions of Section 460 shall apply to buildings or structures as defined in Section 202 as chapel mausoleums, garden mausoleums, nonvisitation crypt mausoleums, and columbariums. All crypts and niches built after this code becomes effective shall conform to this code.

460.2 Occupancy classification.

Mausoleums and columbariums shall be classified as a Group S2 low hazard storage occupancy.

460.3 Construction type.

Mausoleums, columbariums and accessory occupancies shall be of Type I unsprinklered, Type II unsprinklered, or Type IIB unsprinklered construction.

460.4 Accessory occupancies.

Accessory occupancies shall comply with Section 508.2.

460.5 Structural loads.

Mausoleums and columbariums shall be designed to comply with the structural design requirements of Chapter 16. Crypts shall be designed for a minimum total live load of 35 psf (2 kN/m2).

460.6 Mausoleum and columbarium construction.

The design and construction of mausoleums and columbariums shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Building and Section 460.6.

460.6.1 Plumbing systems.

Mausoleums and columbariums shall not be required to comply with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

Exception: Accessory areas and an occupancy in a mixed occupancy building shall comply with Florida Building Code, Plumbing. The number and location of plumbing facilities shall be based on the accessory areas and the mixed occupancy areas.

460.6.2 Mechanical systems.

Mausoleums and columbariums shall not be required to comply with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

Exceptions:

1.	Accessory areas and an occupancy in a mixed occupancy building shall comply with Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Mechanical systems shall be based on the accessory areas and the mixed occupancy areas.

2.	Crypt pressure relief systems shall comply with Section 460.7.2 except that for family mausoleum units where all crypts are bordering an exterior wall, pressure relief ventilation shall be provided from the crypt to the outside of the mausoleum through the exterior wall or roof.

3.	Niches shall not require pressure relief systems.

460.6.3 Fire protection systems.

Mausoleums and columbariums shall not be required to comply with Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems.

Exception: Accessory areas and an occupancy in a mixed occupancy building shall comply with Chapter 9. The fire protection systems shall be based on the accessory areas and the mixed occupancy areas.

460.6.4 Interior finish.

The interior finish for mausoleums and columbariums shall be Class A for exits and exit access and Class B for other spaces. The floor tile, marble, and granite used in a chapel mausoleum shall comply with the Marble Institute of America (1998).

460.6.5 Exterior finish.

The exterior finish for mausoleums and columbariums shall be one or more of the following finishes:

Granite

Marble

Rubbed concrete

Painted concrete

Stucco

Synthetic stucco

Waterproofing products

Tile

460.7 Crypts.
460.7.1 Crypts construction.

Crypts and companion crypts shall be constructed of reinforced concrete complying with Chapter 19 and Section 460.7.1.

460.7.1.1 Cast in place crypt.

Cast in place crypts shall have a minimum thickness of 3 inches (76 mm) for floor slabs, walls, and other structural framework.

460.7.1.2 Precast crypt.

Concrete shall have a minimum specified compressive strength f'c of 5,000 psi (34.5 mPa). Crypt floor slabs and roof slabs shall have a minimum thickness of 21/2 inches (63.5 mm) Crypt walls shall be a minimum thickness of 31/2 inches (88.9 mm) at the top of the wall to a minimum of 2 inches (50.8 mm) at the bottom of the wall.

460.7.1.3 Crypt front.

Crypt fronts are to be independent of the crypt panel. The front shall be Grade A exterior-type granite or marble according to the Marble Institute of America (1998), or travertine, or bronze, or tile mosaic. The front shall be installed with a hanger system. The hangers, clips, and other exterior or interior fastenings shall be of copper-based alloy, copper, or stainless steel designed for strength and durability. Aluminum fastenings may be used if they will not react with any material or metal that they may come in contact with and when not embedded in concrete. The front, trim, and wall stone shall be a minimum 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) thick, other materials used for crypt fronts shall be the thickness as dictated at the time by modern mausoleum construction.

460.7.2 Crypt relief vent.

For family mausoleum units where all crypts are bordering an exterior wall, pressure relief ventilation shall be provided from the crypt to the outside of the mausoleum through the exterior wall or roof. For all other mausoleum units, each crypt shall have a pressure relief vent from the crypt to the roof of the mausoleum complying with Section M515, Mausoleum relief system, of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Niches shall not require pressure relief systems.

460.8 Casket placement.

Casket placement shall have minimum interior dimensions of 2 feet 6 inches (762 mm) wide mm) by 2 feet 1 inch (635 mm) high by 7 feet 31/2 inches (2223 mm) deep.

460.9 Niches.

Niches shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 460.9.

460.9.1 Minimum size.

Niches shall have a minimum volume of 200 cubic inches (7 m3) with a minimum width of 41/2 inches (114.3 mm), a minimum height of 9 inches (228.6 mm), and a minimum depth of 5 inches (127 mm).

460.9.2 Niche front.

The niche front shall be Grade A exterior-type granite or marble according to the Marble Institute of America (1998), or travertine, bronze, tile mosaic, glass, lexan, or plexiglass.

460.9.3 Pressure relief systems.

Niches shall not require pressure relief systems.

460.9.4 Wall thickness.

Niche wall thickness shall be the thickness as dictated at the time of construction by modern mausoleum and columbarium construction.

460.10 Family mausoleum.

Family mausoleums consisting of six or fewer casket placements shall comply with either Section 460.1 or 460.10.

460.10.1 Materials.

Family mausoleums shall be constructed of the materials in Sections 460.10.1.1 through 460.10.1.6.

460.10.1.1 Reinforced concrete floor.

Reinforced concrete floor shall have a minimum specified compressive strength f'c of 5,000 psi (34.5 mPa).

460.10.1.2 Hardware.

Hardware and fasteners shall be of stainless steel or bronze.

460.10.1.3 Doors.

When installed, doors and door hardware shall be bronze.

460.10.1.4 Crypt front.

Crypt fronts shall be granite or marble.

460.10.1.5 Walls and roof.

Walls and roof shall be of granite, marble or reinforced concrete.

460.10.1.6 Floor.

The floor shall be granite, marble, or reinforced concrete.

460.10.2 Crypt relief vent.

For family mausoleum units where all crypts are bordering an exterior wall, pressure relief ventilation shall be provided from the crypt to the outside of the mausoleum through the exterior wall or roof.

For family mausoleum units where all crypts are not bordering an exterior wall, each crypt shall have a pressure relief vent from the crypt to the roof of the mausoleum complying with Section M515, Mausoleum relief system, of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

460.10.3 Minimum thickness.

The minimum thickness for the components of a family mausoleum shall comply with Section 460.10.3.

460.10.3.1 Family mausoleum.

Exterior walls shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm). The roof shall be minimum of 6 inches (152 mm). The floor shall be a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. Shelves shall be a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm). Crypt fronts shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm).

460.10.3.2 Burial chamber mausoleum.

Exterior walls shall be a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm). The roof shall be a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm). The floor shall be a minimum of 8 inches (203 mm) granite. Shelves shall be a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm). Crypt fronts shall be a minimum of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm).

SECTION 461
TRANSIENT PUBLIC LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS
461.1

Any transient public lodging establishment, as defined in Chapter 509, Florida Statutes, and used primarily for transient occupancy as defined in Section 83.43(10), Florida Statutes, or any timeshare unit of a timeshare plan as defined in Chapters 718 and 721, Florida Statutes, which is of three stories or more and for which the construction contract has been let after the effective date of this code, with interior corridors which do not have direct access from the guest area to exterior means of egress and on buildings over 75 feet (22 860 mm) in height that have direct access from the guest area to exterior means of egress and for which the construction contract has been let after the effective date of this code, shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in compliance with the provisions prescribed in the NFPA 13, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. Each guestroom and each timeshare unit shall be equipped with an approved listed single-station smoke detector meeting the minimum requirements of NFPA 74, Standards for the Installation, Maintenance and Use of Household Fire Warning Equipment, powered from the building electrical service, notwithstanding the number of stories in the structure, if the contract for construction is let after the effective date of this code. Single-station smoke detectors shall not be required when guest-rooms or timeshare units contain smoke detectors connected to a central alarm system which also alarms locally.

SECTION 462
USE OF ASBESTOS IN NEW PUBLIC BUILDINGS
OR BUILDINGS NEWLY CONSTRUCTED FOR
LEASE TO GOVERNMENT ENTITIES—
PROHIBITION
462.1

The use of asbestos or asbestos-based fiber materials is prohibited in any building, construction of which is commenced after September 30, 1983, which is financed with public funds or is constructed for the express purpose of being leased to any governmental entity.

SECTION 463
ADULT DAY CARE
463.1 General.

Adult day care facilities shall comply with the following design and construction standards.

Note: See Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) Rule 58A-6, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 400, Part V, Florida Statutes.

463.2 Definitions.

“Adult day care center” or “center” means any building, buildings, or part of a building, whether operated for profit or not, in which is provided through its ownership or management, for a part of a day, basic services to three or more persons who are 18 years of age or older, who are not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services. The following are exempt from this part:

1.	Any facility, institution, or other place that is operated by the federal government or any agency thereof.

2.	Any freestanding inpatient hospice facility that is licensed by the state and which provides day care services to hospice patients only.

3.	A licensed assisted living facility, a licensed hospital, or a licensed nursing home facility that provides services during the day which include, but are not limited to, social, health, therapeutic, recreational, nutritional and respite services, to adults who are not residents, so long as the facility does not hold itself out as an adult day care center.

“Capacity” shall mean the number of participants for which a center has been licensed to provide care at any given time and shall be based upon required net floor space.

“Net floor space” shall mean the actual climatically controlled occupied area, not including accessory unoccupied areas such as hallways, stairs, closets, storage areas, bathrooms, kitchen or thickness of walls, set aside for the use of the day care center participants.

“Participant space” shall mean the required net floor space per participant. Maximum participant capacity shall refer to the licensed capacity.

463.3

The following minimum conditions shall be met:

463.3.1

The floor surface in kitchens, all rooms and areas in which food is stored or prepared and in which utensils are washed or stored shall be of smooth nonabsorbent material and constructed so it can be easily cleaned and shall be washable up to the highest level reached by splash or spray.

463.3.2

The walls and ceilings of all food preparation, utensil washing and hand washing rooms or areas shall have smooth, easily cleanable surfaces. Walls shall be washable up to the highest level reached by splash or spray.

463.3.3

Hot and cold running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms where food is prepared or utensils are washed.

463.3.4

Hand-washing facilities, provided with hot and cold running water, shall be located within the food preparation area in new adult day care facilities and adult day care facilities which are extensively altered.

463.3.5

Multiuse equipment and utensils shall be constructed and repaired with materials that are nontoxic, corrosion resistant and nonabsorbent; and shall be smooth, easily cleanable and durable under conditions of normal use; and shall not impart odors, color or taste nor contribute to the contamination of food.

463.3.6

A three-compartment sink or a two-compartment sink and a dishwater with an effective, automatic sanitizing cycle, shall be provided.

463.3.7

Refrigeration units and hot food storage units used for the storage of potentially hazardous foods shall be provided with a numerically scaled indicating thermometer accurate to ±3°F (-16°C). The thermometer shall be located in the warmest or coldest part of the units and of such type and so situated that the temperature can be easily and readily observed.

463.4 Participant and program data, emergency procedures.

Fire safety protection shall be governed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

463.5 Physical plant, sanitary conditions, housekeeping standards and maintenance.
463.5.1

The participant capacity shall be determined by the total amount of net floor space available for all of the participants. Centers shall provide not less than 45 square feet (4 m2) of net floor area per participant. Centers shall be required to provide additional floor space for special target populations to accommodate activities required by participant care plans.

463.5.2

Facilities exempt pursuant to Section 400.553, Florida Statutes, shall utilize separate space over and above the minimum requirement needed to meet their own licensure certification approval requirements. Only congregate space shall be included in determining minimum space. For purposes of this section, congregate space shall mean climatically controlled living room, dining room, specialized activity rooms, or other rooms to be commonly used by all participants.

463.5.3

Center facilities shall consist of, but not be limited to, the following:

1.	Bathrooms.

2.	Dining areas.

3.	Kitchen areas.

4.	Rest areas.

5.	Recreation and leisure time areas.

463.5.4

A private area shall be available for the provision of first aid, special care and counseling services when provided, or as necessary for other services required by participants. This area shall be appropriately furnished and equipped.

463.5.5

Bathrooms shall be ventilated and have hot and cold running water, supplying hot water at a minimum of 105°F (41°C) and a maximum of 115°F (46°C).

463.5.6

Recreation and leisure time areas shall be provided where a participant may read, engage in socialization or other leisure time activities. The recreation areas also may be utilized for dining areas.

463.5.7

All areas used by participants shall be suitably lighted and ventilated and maintained at a minimal inside temperature of 72°F (22°C) when outside temperatures are 65°F (18°C) or below, and all areas used by participants must not exceed 90°F (32°C). Mechanical cooling devices must be provided when indoor temperatures exceed 84°F (29°C). The facility shall have a thermometer which accurately identifies the temperature.

SECTION 464
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
464.1 Scope.

Assisted living facilities shall comply with the following design and construction standards as described herein.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Agency of Health Care Administration (AHCA) Rule 58A-5, Florida Administrative Code and Chapter 400 Part III, Florida Statutes.

464.2 Definitions.

AGENCY. The Agency for Health Care Administration.

AHCA CENTRAL OFFICE. The Assisted Living Unit, Agency for Health Care Administration.

ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. Any building or buildings, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or administrator. The following are exempted from this definition:

1.	Any facility, institution, or other place operated by the federal government or any agency of the federal government.

2.	Any facility or part of a facility licensed under Chapter 393, Florida Statutes, or Chapter 394, Florida Statutes.

3.	Any facility licensed as an adult family care home under Part VII Chapter 400, Florida Statutes.

4.	Any person who provides housing, meals and one or more personal services on a 24-hour basis in the person’s own home to not more than two adults who do not receive optional state supplementation. The person who provides the housing, meals, and personal services must own or rent the home and reside therein.

5.	Any home or facility approved by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs as a residential care home wherein care is provided exclusively to three or fewer veterans.

6.	Any facility that has been incorporated in this state for 50 years or more on or before July 1, 1983, and the board of directors of which is nominated or elected by the residents, until the facility is sold or its ownership is transferred; or any facility, with improvements or additions thereto, which has existed and operated continuously in this state for 60 years or more on or before July 1, 1989, is directly or indirectly owned and operated by a nationally recognized fraternal organization, is not open to the public, and accepts only its own members and their spouses as residents.

7.	Any facility certified under Chapter 651, Florida Statutes, or a retirement community, may provide services authorized under this section or Part IV of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes to its residents who live in single-family homes, duplexes, quadruplexes, or apartments located on the campus without obtaining a license to operate an assisted living facility if residential units within such buildings are used by residents who do not require staff supervision for that portion of the day when personal services are not being delivered and the owner obtains a home health license to provide such services. However, any building or distinct part of a building on the campus that is designated for persons who receive personal services and require supervision beyond that which is available while such services are being rendered must be licensed in accordance with this section. If a facility provides personal services to residents who do not otherwise require supervision and the owner is not licensed as a home health agency, the buildings or distinct parts of buildings where such services are rendered must be licensed under this section. A resident of a facility that obtains a home health license may contract with a home health agency of his or her choice, provided that the home health agency provides liability insurance and workers’ compensation coverage for its employees. Facilities covered by this exemption may establish policies that give residents the option of contracting for services and care beyond that which is provided by the facility to enable them to age in place. For purposes of this section, a retirement community consists of a facility licensed under this section or under Part II of Chapter 400, Florida Statutes, and apartments designed for independent living located on the same campus.

8.	Any residential unit for independent living which is located within a facility certified under Chapter 651 Florida Statutes, or any residential unit which is colocated with a nursing home licensed under Part II of Chapter 400 Florida Statutes. or colocated with a facility licensed under this section in which services are provided through an outpatient clinic or a nursing home on an outpatient basis.

CAPACITY. The number of residents for which a facility has been licensed to provide residential care.

DEPARTMENT. The Department of Elderly Affairs.

DISTINCT PART. Designated bedrooms or apartments, bathrooms and a living area; or a separately identified wing, floor or building which includes bedrooms or apartments, bathrooms and a living area. The distinct part may include a separate dining area, or meals may be served in another part of the facility.

DOEA ASSISTED LIVING PROGRAM. The Assisted Living Program, Department of Elder Affairs.

EXTENDED CONGREGATE CARE. Acts beyond those authorized in subsection (5) that may be performed pursuant to Part I of Chapter 464, Florida Statutes, by persons licensed thereunder while carrying out their professional duties. The purpose of such services is to enable residents to age in place in a residential environment despite mental or physical limitations that might otherwise disqualify them from residency in a facility licensed under this part.

FOOD SERVICE. The storage, preparation, serving and cleaning up of food intended for consumption in a facility or a formal agreement that meals will be regularly catered by a third party.

PERSONAL SERVICES. Direct physical assistance with or supervision of the activities of daily living and the self-administration of medication and other similar services which the department may define by rule. Personal services shall not be construed to mean the provision of medical, nursing, dental or mental health services.

RELATIVE. An individual who is the father, mother, stepfather, stepmother, son, daughter, brother, sister, grandmother, grandfather, great-grandmother, greatgrandfather, grandson, granddaughter, uncle, aunt, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-inlaw, sister-in-law, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother or half sister of an owner or administrator.

RENOVATION. Additions, repairs, restorations or other improvements to the physical plant of the facility within a five-year period that costs in excess of 50 percent of the value of the building as reported on the tax rolls, excluding land, before the renovation.

RESIDENT. A person 18 years of age or older, residing in and receiving care from a facility.

RESIDENT’S REPRESENTATIVE OR DESIGNEE. A person other than the owner, or an agent or employee of the facility, designated in writing by the resident, if legally competent, to receive notice of changes in the contract executed pursuant to Section 400.424, Florida Statutes; to receive notice of and to participate in meetings between the resident and the facility owner, administrator or staff concerning the rights of the resident; to assist the resident in contacting the ombudsman council if the resident has a complaint against the facility; or to bring legal action on behalf of the resident pursuant to Section 400.429, Florida Statutes.

464.3 Codes and standards for the design and construction of assisted living facilities.
464.3.1

Except as modified and required by this section of the code, Chapter 59A-36, Florida Administrative Code or Chapter 429 Part I, Florida Statutes, all new assisted living facilities and all additions, alterations, or renovations to existing assisted living facilities with more than 16 licensed beds shall also be in compliance with The Guidelines for the Design and Construction of Residential Health, Care, and Support Facilities (The Guidelines) Part 1 General, and Chapter 4.1 Special Requirements for Assisted Living Facilities as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

464.4 Additional physical plant requirements for assisted living facilities.

In addition to the codes and standards referenced in Section 464.3 of the code, the following minimum essential facilities shall apply to all new assisted living facilities.

464.4.1

Indoor radon testing as mandated by Section 404.056(5), Florida Statutes, shall be completed by all facilities.

464.4.2 Heating and cooling.
464.4.2.1

Mechanical systems shall be designed to maintain dry-bulb temperatures between 70°F (18°C) and 81°F (27°C) in resident-occupied areas and in areas intended for resident occupancy. Residents who have individually controlled thermostats in their bedrooms or apartments shall be permitted to control temperatures in those areas, including maintaining temperatures outside the range stated previously.

464.4.2.2

A new facility shall be equipped with either a permanent on-site alternate power source to operate at least the equipment necessary to maintain safe indoor air temperatures, life safety systems and equipment for resident care needs, or there shall be a permanently installed predesigned electrical service entry for the electrical system that will allow a quick connection to a temporary alternate power source to operate at least the equipment necessary to maintain safe indoor air temperatures, life safety systems and equipment for resident care needs. This quick connection shall be installed inside of a permanent metal enclosure rated for this purpose and may be located on the exterior of the building. See Chapter 59A-36.025, Florida Administrative Code, “Emergency Environmental Control for Assisted Living Facilities” for additional requirements.

464.4.2.2.1

If the alternate power source is a generator, it shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 70 for either an optional standby system or a legally required system.

464.4.2.2.2

If the alternate power source is a generator, gasoline shall not be permitted as a fuel source.

464.4.3 Common areas.
464.4.3.1

A minimum of 35 square feet (3 m2) of living and dining space per resident, live-in staff and livein family member shall be provided except in facilities comprised of apartments. This space shall include living, dining, recreational or other space designated accessible to all residents, and shall not include bathrooms, corridors, storage space or screened porches which cannot be adapted for year round use. Facilities with apartments may count the apartment’s living space square footage as part of the 35 square footage (3 m2) living and dining space requirement.

Those facilities also serving as adult day care centers must provide an additional 35 square feet (3 m2) of living and dining space per adult day care client. Excess floor space in residents’ bedrooms or apartments cannot be counted toward meeting the requirement of 35 square feet (3 m2) of living and dining space requirements for adult day care participants. Day care participants may not use residents’ bedrooms for resting unless the room is currently vacant.

464.4.3.2

A room, separate from resident bedrooms, shall be provided where residents may read, engage in socialization or other leisure time activities. Comfortable chairs or sofas shall be provided in this communal area.

464.4.3.3

The dining area shall be furnished to accommodate communal dining.

464.4.4 Bedrooms.
464.4.4.1

Resident sleeping rooms designated for single occupancy shall provide a minimum inside measurement of 80 square feet (7 m2) of usable floor space. Usable floor space does not include closet space or bathrooms.

464.4.4.2

Resident bedrooms designated for multiple occupancy shall provide a minimum inside measurement of 60 square feet (6 m2) of usable floor space per room occupant.

464.4.4.3

Resident bedrooms designated for multiple occupancy in facilities newly licensed or renovated 6 months after October 17, 1999, shall have a maximum occupancy of two persons.

464.4.4.4

All resident bedrooms shall open directly into a corridor, common use area or to the outside. A resident must be able to exit his bedroom without having to pass through another bedroom unless the two rooms have been licensed as one bedroom.

464.4.4.5

All resident bedrooms shall be for the exclusive use of residents. Live-in staff and their family members shall be provided with sleeping space separate from the sleeping and congregate space required for residents.

464.4.5 Bathrooms.
464.4.5.1

There shall be at least one bathroom with one toilet and sink per six persons, and one bathtub or shower per eight persons. All residents, all live-in staff and family members, and respite care participants must be included when calculating the required number of toilets, sinks, bathtubs and showers. All adult day care participants shall be included when calculating the required number of toilets and sinks.

464.4.5.2

Each bathroom shall have a door in working order to assure privacy. The entry door to bathrooms with a single toilet shall have a lock which is operable from the inside by the resident with no key needed. A nonlocking door shall be permitted if the resident’s safety would otherwise be jeopardized.

464.4.5.3

There shall be nonslip safety devices such as bath mats or peel off stickers in the showers and bathtubs of all facilities. Showers and bathtubs with a nonskid surface require a separate nonskid device only if the surface is worn. Grab bars shall be required in showers and bathtubs. Grab bars, whether portable or permanent, must be securely affixed to the floor or adjoining walls. Facilities newly licensed or renovated six months after October 17, 1999 must have grab bars next to the commode.

464.4.5.4

Sole access to a toilet or bathtub or shower shall not be through another resident's bedroom, except in apartments within a facility.

464.4.6 Security.

External boundaries of a facility or a distinct part of a facility, including outside areas, may be secured using egress control or perimeter control devices if the following conditions are met.

464.4.6.1

The use of the device complies with all lifesafety requirements.

464.4.6.2

Residents residing within a secured area are able to move freely throughout the area, including the resident’s bedroom or apartment, bathrooms and all common areas, and have access to outdoor areas on a regular basis and as requested by each resident.

464.4.6.3

Residents capable of entering and exiting without supervision have keys, codes or other mechanisms to exit the secured area without requiring staff assistance.

464.4.6.4

Staff who provide direct care or who have regular contact with residents residing in secured areas complete Level 1 Alzheimer’s training as described in Rule 58A-5.0191.

464.4.6.5

Pursuant to Section 400.441, Florida Statutes, facilities with 16 or fewer residents shall not be required to maintain an accessible telephone in each building where residents reside, maintain written staff job descriptions, have awake night staff or maintain standardized recipes as provided in Rules 58A- 5.0182(6)(g), 58A-5.019(2)(e), 58A-5.019(4)(a) and 58A-5.020(2)(b), respectively.

464.5 Extended congregate care.
464.5.1 Physical site requirements.

Each extended congregate care facility shall provide a homelike physical environment which promotes resident privacy and independence including:

464.5.1.1

A private room or apartment, or a semiprivate room or apartment shared with a roommate of the resident’s choice. The entry door to the room or apartment shall have a lock which is operable from the inside by the resident with no key needed. The resident shall be provided with a key to the entry door on request. The resident’s service plan may allow for a nonlocking entry door if the resident’s safety would otherwise be jeopardized.

464.5.1.2

A bathroom, with a toilet, sink and bathtub or shower, which is shared by a maximum of four residents. A centrally located hydromassage bathtub may substitute for the bathtub or shower in two of the bath rooms. The entry door to the bathroom shall have a lock which is operable from the inside by the resident with no key needed. The resident’s service plan may allow for a nonlocking bathroom door if the resident’s safety would otherwise be jeopardized.

SECTION 465
CONTROL OF RADIATION HAZARDS
465.1 Scope.

Control of radiation hazards shall comply with the following design and construction standards as described herein.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Health (DOH) Rule 64E-5, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 404, Florida Statutes.

465.2 Control of access to high radiation areas.
465.2.1 Definitions.

HIGH RADIATION AREA. An area, accessible to individuals, in which radiation levels from radiation sources external to the body could result in an individual receiving a dose equivalent in excess of 1 mSv (0.1 rem) in 1 hour at 30 cm from any source of radiation or from any surface that the radiation penetrates. For purposes of this section, rooms or areas in which diagnostic X-ray systems are used for healing arts purposes are not considered high radiation areas.

VERY HIGH RADIATION AREA. An area, accessible to individuals, in which radiation levels from radiation sources external to the body could result in an individual receiving an absorbed dose in excess to 500 rad (5 gray) in 1 hour at 1 m from a source of radiation or from any surface that the radiation penetrates. At very high doses received at high dose rates, units of absorbed dose, gray and rad, are appropriate, rather than units of dose equivalent, sievert and rem.

465.2.2

The licensee or registrant shall ensure that each entrance or access point to a high radiation area has one or more of the following features:

465.2.2.1

A control device that upon entry into the area causes the level of radiation to be reduced below that level at which an individual might receive a deep dose equivalent of 0.1 rem (1 millisievert) in 1 hour at 30 cm from the source of radiation from any surface that the radiation penetrates;

465.2.2.2

A control device that energizes a conspicuous visible or audible signal so that the individual entering the high radiation area and the supervisor of the activity are made aware of the entry; or

465.2.2.3

Entryways that are locked except during periods when access to the areas is required with positive control over each individual entry.

465.3 Caution signs.
465.3.1 Standard radiation symbol.

Unless otherwise authorized by the department, the symbol prescribed in this section shall use the colors magenta or purple or black on yellow background. The symbol prescribed is the three-bladed design as follows:

465.3.1.1 Radiation symbol.
465.3.1.1.1

Cross-hatched area is to be magenta or purple or black.

465.3.1.1.2

The background is to be yellow.

465.3.2 Exception to color requirements for standard radiation symbol.

In spite of the requirements of Section 465.3.1, licensees or registrants are authorized to label sources, source holders or device components containing sources of radiation that are subjected to high temperatures, with conspicuously etched or stamped radiation caution symbols and without a color requirement.

465.3.3 Additional information on signs and labels.

In addition to contents of signs and labels prescribed in this part, the licensee or registrant shall provide on or near the required signs and labels additional information to make individuals aware of potential radiation exposures and to minimize the exposures.

465.4 Posting requirements.
465.4.1 Posting of radiation areas.

The licensee or registrant shall post each radiation area with a conspicuous sign or signs bearing the radiation symbol and the words “CAUTION, RADIATION AREA.”

465.4.2 Posting of high radiation areas.

The licensee or registrant shall post each high radiation area with a conspicuous sign or signs bearing the radiation symbol and the words “CAUTION, HIGH RADIATION AREA” or “DANGER, HIGH RADIATION AREA.”

465.4.3 Posting of very high radiation areas.

The licensee or registrant shall post each very high radiation area with a conspicuous sign or signs bearing the radiation symbol and words “GRAVE DANGER, VERY HIGH RADIATION AREA.”

465.4.4 Posting of airborne radioactivity areas.

The licensee shall post each airborne radioactivity area with a conspicuous sign or signs bearing the radiation symbol and the words “CAUTION, AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVITY AREA” or “DANGER, AIRBORNE RADIOACTIVITY AREA.”

465.4.5 Posting of areas or rooms in which licensed material is used or stored.

The licensee shall post each area or room in which there is used or stored an amount of licensed material exceeding 10 times the quantity of such material specified in State of Florida Office of Radiation Control Radioactive Material Requiring Labeling, May 2000, which is herein incorporated by reference and which is available from the department, with a conspicuous sign or signs bearing the radiation symbol and the words “CAUTION, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL(S)” or “DANGER, RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL(S).”

465.4.6

A licensee or registrant is not required to post caution signs in areas or rooms containing sources of radiation for periods of less than 8 hours if each of the following conditions is met.

465.4.6.1

The sources of radiation are constantly attended during these periods by an individual who takes the precautions necessary to prevent the exposure of individuals to sources of radiation in excess of the limits established in this section, and

465.4.6.2

The area or room is subject to the licensee's or registrant’s control.

465.4.7

Rooms or other areas in hospitals that are occupied by patients are not required to be posted with caution signs as specified in Rule 64E-5.323 if the patient could be released from confinement as specified in Rule 64E-5.622.

465.4.8

A room or area is not required to be posted with a caution sign because of the presence of a sealed source provided the radiation level at 30 cm from the surface of the sealed source container or housing does not exceed 0.005 rem (0.05 millisievert) per hour.

465.4.9

A room or area is not required to be posted with a caution sign because of the presence of radiation machines used solely for diagnosis in the healing arts.

465.5 General requirements.
465.5.1 Shielding.

Each x-ray facility shall have primary and secondary protective barriers as needed to assure that an individual will not receive a radiation dose in excess of the limits specified in Part III of Chapter 64E-5, Florida Administrative Code.

465.5.1.1

Structural shielding in walls and other vertical barriers required for personnel protection shall extend without breach from the floor to a height of at least 7 feet (2.1 m).

465.5.1.2

Doors, door frames, windows and window frames shall have the same lead equivalent shielding as that required in the wall or other barrier in which they are installed.

465.5.1.3

Prior to construction, the floor plans and equipment arrangement of all new installations, or modifications of existing installations, utilizing x-ray energies of 200 keV and above for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes shall be submitted to the Department of Health for review and approval. In computation of protective barrier requirements, the maximum anticipated workload, use factors, occupancy factors and the potential for radiation exposure from other sources shall be taken into consideration.

465.5.1.3.1

The plans shall show, as a minimum, the following:

465.5.1.3.1.1

The normal location of the x-ray system’s radiation port; the port’s travel and traverse limits; general direction of the useful beam; locations of any windows and doors; the location of the operator’s booth; and the location of the xray control panel.

465.5.1.3.1.2

The structural composition and thickness or lead equivalent of all walls, doors, partitions, floor and ceiling of the room concerned.

465.5.1.3.1.3

The dimensions of the room concerned.

465.5.1.3.1.4

The type of occupancy of all adjacent areas inclusive of space above and below the room concerned. If there is an exterior wall, the distance to the closest area where it is likely that individuals may be present.

465.5.1.3.1.5

The make and model of the x-ray equipment and the maximum technique factors.

465.5.1.3.1.6

The type of examinations or treatments which will be performed with the equipment.

465.5.1.3.2

Information shall be submitted on the anticipated maximum workload of the x-ray system.

465.5.1.3.3

If the services of a qualified person have been utilized to determine the shielding requirements, a copy of the report, including all basic assumptions used, shall be submitted with the plans.

465.5.2 X-ray film processing facilities.
465.5.2.1 Processing facilities.

Each installation using a radiographic x-ray system shall provide suitable equipment for handling and processing radiographic film in accordance with the following provisions:

465.5.2.1.1

The area in which undeveloped films are handled for processing shall be devoid of light with the exception of light in the wave lengths having no significant effect on the radiographic film.

465.5.2.1.2

Film pass boxes, if provided, shall be so constructed as to exclude light when film is placed in or removed from the boxes, and shall incorporate adequate shielding to prevent exposure of undeveloped film to stray radiation.

465.5.2.1.3

Darkrooms used by more than one individual shall be provided a positive method to prevent accidental entry while undeveloped films are being handled or processed.

465.5.2.1.4

Where film is developed manually, the following conditions shall be met:

465.5.2.1.4.1

At least one trisectional tank made of mechanically rigid, corrosion-resistant material shall be utilized; and

465.5.2.1.4.2

The temperature of each solution shall be maintained within the range of 600°F to 800°F (160°C to 270°C). Film shall be developed in accordance with the time-temperature relationships specified by the film manufacturer, or, in the absence of such recommendations by the film manufacturer, with the following time-temperature chart:

TIME-TEMPERATURE CHART

Thermom Reading (Degrees)	Minimum Developing
Time (minutes)

C	F
26.7	80	2
26.1	79	2
25.6	78	21/2
25.0	77	21/2
24.4	76	3
23.9	75	3
23.3	74	31/2
22.8	73	31/2
22.2	72	4
21.7	71	4
21.1	70	41/2
20.6	69	41/2
20.0	68	5
19.4	67	51/2
18.9	66	51/2
18.3	65	6
17.8	64	61/2
17.2	63	7
16.7	62	8
16.1	61	81/2
15.6	60	91/2
465.5.2.1.4.3

Devices shall be utilized which will:

1.	Indicate the actual temperature of the developer; and

2.	Signal the passage of a preset time as short as 2 minutes.

465.6 Doors, interlocks, and warning systems.
465.6.1

A licensee shall control access to the teletherapy room by a door at each entrance.

465.6.2

A licensee shall equip each entrance to the teletherapy room with an electrical interlock system that shall:

1.	Prevent the operator from turning on the primary beam of radiation unless each treatment room entrance door is closed;

2.	Turn off the beam of radiation immediately when an entrance door is opened; and

3.	Prevent the primary beam of radiation from being turned on following an interlock interruption until all treatment room entrance doors are closed and the beam on-off control is reset at the console.

465.6.3

A licensee shall equip each entrance to the teletherapy room with a conspicuously visible beam condition indicator light.

465.7 Radiation monitoring devices.
465.7.1

A licensee shall have a permanent radiation monitor in each teletherapy room capable of continuously monitoring beam status.

465.7.2

Each radiation monitor shall be capable of providing visible notice of a teletherapy unit malfunction that results in an exposed or partially exposed source. The visible indicator of high radiation levels shall be observable by an individual entering the teletherapy room.

465.7.3

Each radiation monitor shall be equipped with a backup power supply separate from the power supply to the teletherapy unit. This backup power supply may be a battery system.

465.8 Viewing systems.

A licensee shall construct or equip each teletherapy room to permit continuous observation of the patient from the teletherapy unit console during irradiation.

465.9 Warning devices.
465.9.1

All locations designated as high radiation areas, and all entrances to such locations shall be equipped with easily observable warning lights that operate when and only when radiation is being produced.

465.9.2

Except in facilities designed for human exposure, each high radiation area shall have an audible warning device which shall be activated for 15 seconds prior to the possible creation of such high radiation area. Such warning device shall be clearly discernible in all high radiation areas and in any adjacent radiation areas.

465.9.3

Barriers, temporary or otherwise, and pathways leading to high radiation areas shall be identified in accordance with the Department of Health.

465.10 Design requirements for radiation rooms.

Panoramic irradiators shall not be operated unless the following are met:

465.10.1

Each entrance to a radiation room must have a door or other physical barrier to prevent inadvertent entry of personnel while the sources are exposed. Product conveyor systems can serve as barriers as long as they reliably and consistently function as a barrier. It must not be possible to move the sources out of their shielded position if any door or barrier to the radiation room is open. Opening the door or barrier while the sources are exposed must cause the sources to return promptly to their shielded position. The primary entry door must have a lock which is operated by the same key used to control source movement. The doors and barriers must not prevent any individual in the radiation room from leaving.

465.10.2

Each entrance to a radiation room must have an independent backup access control to detect personnel entry while the sources are exposed if the primary access control fails. Entry while the sources are exposed must cause the sources to return to their fully shielded position and also must activate a visible and audible alarm to make the individual entering the room aware of the hazard. The alarm also must alert at least one other individual of the entry who is on site and who is trained to render or summon assistance promptly.

465.10.3

A radiation monitor must be provided to detect the presence of high radiation levels in the radiation room before personnel entry. The monitor must be integrated with personnel access door locks to prevent room access when the monitor detects high radiation levels. The monitor must generate audible and visible alarms if high radiation levels are detected when personnel entry is attempted. The monitor can be located in the entrance or maze but not in the direct radiation beam.

465.10.4

Before sources move from their shielded position, the source control automatically must activate conspicuous visible and audible alarms to alert people in the radiation room that the sources will be moved from their shielded position. The alarms must give individuals enough time to leave the room before the sources leave the shielded position.

465.10.5

Each radiation room must have a clearly visible and readily accessible control which will allow an individual in the room to return the sources to their fully shielded position.

465.10.6

Each radiation room must contain a control which allows the sources to move from the shielded position only if the control has been activated and the door or barrier to the radiation room subsequently has been closed within a preset time.

465.10.7

Each entrance to the radiation room and each entrance to the area within the personnel access barrier of an underwater irradiator must be posted as required by this section. Panoramic irradiators also must be posted as required by this section. The sign can be removed, covered or otherwise made inoperative when the sources are shielded fully.

465.10.8

If the radiation room has roof plugs or other movable shielding, it must not be possible to operate the irradiator unless the shielding is in its proper location. This requirement can be met by interlocks which prevent operation if shielding is not placed properly or by an operating procedure requiring inspection of shielding before operating.

465.10.9

Underwater irradiators must have a personnel access barrier around the pool which must be locked to prevent access when the irradiator is not attended. Only operators and facility management shall have access to keys to the personnel access barrier. There must be an intrusion alarm to detect unauthorized entry when the personnel access barrier is locked. Activation of the intrusion alarm must alert an individual, not necessarily on site, who is prepared to respond or summon assistance.

465.11 Fire protection.
465.11.1

The radiation room at a panoramic irradiator must have heat and smoke detectors. The detectors must activate an audible alarm. The alarm must be capable of alerting a person who is prepared to summon assistance promptly. The sources must become fully shielded automatically and the air handling systems within the radiation room must be disabled automatically if a fire is detected.

465.11.2

The radiation room at a panoramic irradiator must be equipped with a fire suppression or extinguishing system capable of extinguishing a fire without the entry of personnel into the room. The system for the radiation room must have a shutoff valve to control flooding into unrestricted areas.

465.12 Irradiator pools.
465.12.1

Irradiator pools must possess a watertight stainless steel liner or a liner metallurgically compatible with other components in the pool or be constructed so that there is a low likelihood of substantial leakage and have a surface designed to facilitate decontamination and must include a means of safely storing sources during repairs of the pool.

465.12.2

Irradiator pools must have no penetration more than 0.5 m below the normal low water level which could allow water to drain out of the pool. Pipes which have intakes more than 0.5 m below the normal low water level must have siphon breakers to prevent the siphoning of the pool.

465.12.3

A means must be provided to replenish water losses from the pool.

465.12.4

An audible and visible indicator must be provided to indicate if the pool water level is below the normal low water level or above the normal high water level.

465.12.5

Irradiator pools must be equipped with a purification system designed to maintain the water during normal operation at a level of conductance not exceeding 20 microsiemens per centimeter and with a clarity so the sources can be seen clearly.

465.12.6

A physical barrier such as a railing or cover must be used around irradiator pools during normal operation to prevent personnel from accidentally falling into the pool. The barrier can be removed during maintenance, inspection, and service operations.

465.12.7

If long-handled tools or poles are used in irradiator pools, the radiation dose rate on the handling areas of the tools must not exceed 2 millirem (0.02 millisievert) per hour.

465.13 Design requirements.
465.13.1

Panoramic irradiators shall meet the following design requirements:

465.13.1.1 Shielding.

The shielding walls shall be designed to meet generally accepted building code requirements for reinforced concrete and shall design the walls, wall penetrations, and entrance ways to meet the radiation shielding requirements of Rule 64E-5.1407. If the irradiator will use more than 2 × 1017 becquerels (5 million curies) of activity, the licensee shall evaluate the effects of heating of the shielding walls by the irradiator sources.

465.13.1.2 Foundations.

The foundation shall be designed with consideration given to soil characteristics to ensure it is adequate to support the weight of the facility.

465.13.1.3 Fire protection.

The number, design, locations and spacing of the smoke and heat detectors and extinguishing system shall be appropriate to detect fires and that the detectors are protected from mechanical and radiation damage. The fire extinguishing system shall be designed to provide the necessary discharge patterns, densities, and flow characteristics for complete coverage of the radiation room and that the system is protected from mechanical and radiation damage.

465.13.1.4 Wiring.

The electrical wiring and electrical equipment in the radiation room shall be selected to minimize failures due to prolonged exposure to radiation.

465.13.2 Pool irradiators shall meet the following design requirements.
465.13.2.1 Pool integrity.

The pool shall be designed to assure that it is leak resistant, that it is strong enough to bear the weight of the pool water and shipping casks, that a dropped cask would not fall on sealed sources, that all penetrations meet the requirements of Section 465.12.2, and that metal components are metallurgically compatible with other components in the pool.

465.13.2.2 Water-handling system.

The water purification system shall be designed to meet the requirements of Section 465.12.5. The system must be designed so that water leaking from the system does not drain to unrestricted areas without being monitored. The licensee shall design the water chiller system so that it shall compensate adequately for the amount of heat generated by the sealed sources. The water-handling system must have remote controls capable of safely operating a contaminated system.

465.13.3 Floor penetrations.

No floor penetrations, including expansion joints, floor joints and drains, shall allow the uncontrolled release of water from the radiation room that has not been analyzed for its radioactive content.

465.14 Construction control.

The requirements of this section must be met before loading sources. Panoramic irradiators shall meet the following construction requirements:

465.14.1 Shielding.

The construction of the shielding shall be monitored to verify that it meets design specifications and generally accepted building code requirements for reinforced concrete.

465.14.2 Foundations.

The construction of the foundations shall be monitored to verify that they meet design specifications.

465.14.3 Fire protection.

The ability of the heat and smoke detectors shall be verified to detect a fire, to activate alarms and to cause the source rack to become fully shielded automatically. The operability of the fire suppression or extinguishing system shall also be verified

465.14.4 Wiring.

The electrical wiring and electrical equipment that were installed shall be verified to meet the design specifications.

465.15 Pool irradiators shall meet the following construction requirements.
465.15.1 Pool integrity.

The integrity of the pool shall be tested to verify that the pool meets the design specifications. The penetrations and water intakes shall be verified to meet the requirements of Section 465.12.2.

SECTION 466
DAY CARE OCCUPANCIES
466.1 General.
466.1.1

Places of religious worship shall not be required to meet the provisions of this section in order to operate a nursery while services are being held in the building.

466.1.2

Where day care occupancies with clients 24 months or less in age or incapable of self-preservation are located one or more stories above the level of exit discharge or where day care occupancies are located two or more stories above the level of exit discharge, smoke barriers shall be provided to divide such stories into a minimum of two smoke compartments. The smoke barriers shall be constructed in accordance with Section 709 but shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.

466.2 Closet doors.

Every closet door latch shall be such that clients can open the door from inside the closet.

466.3 Bathroom doors.

Every bathroom door lock shall be designed to permit opening of the locked door from the outside in an emergency. The opening device shall be readily accessible to the staff.

466.4 Door closure.

Any exit door designed to be normally closed shall be kept closed and shall comply with Section 716.5.

466.5 Location and construction types.

Day care occupancies shall be limited to the locations and construction types specified in Table 466.5. Day care homes and adult day care shall be permitted to be of any type construction permitted by this code.

TABLE 466.5 DAY CARE LOCATION AND TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

LOCATION OF DAY CARE	TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
Sprinklered Building	Construction Type
1 story below LED1	Yes	I, II, IIIA, IV, V-A
Level of Exit Discharge	No	Any type permitted by this code
1 story above LED1	Yes
No
	Any type
2 or 3 stories above LED1	Yes	I, II, III-A, V-A
> 3 stories above LED1 but not high rise	Yes	I
High rise	Yes	I

Notes:

1 LED means Level of Exit Discharge.

466.6 Protection from hazards.

Rooms or spaces for the storage, processing or use of materials specified below shall be protected in accordance with the following:

466.6.1

The following rooms or spaces shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour or shall be protected by an approved automatic extinguishing system.

1.	Boiler and furnace rooms.

Exception: Rooms enclosing only air-handling equipment.

2.	Rooms or spaces used for the storage of combustible supplies in quantities deemed hazardous by the building official.

3.	Rooms or spaces used for the storage of hazardous materials or flammable or combustible liquids in quantities deemed hazardous by recognized standards.

4.	Janitor closets.

Exception: Doors to janitor closets shall be permitted to have ventilating louvers where the space is protected by automatic sprinklers.

466.6.2

The following rooms or spaces shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour and shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.

1.	Laundries.

2.	Maintenance shops, including woodworking and painting areas.

3.	Rooms or spaces used for processing or use of combustible supplies deemed hazardous by the building official.

4.	Rooms or spaces used for processing or use of hazardous materials or flammable or combustible liquids in quantities deemed hazardous by recognized standards.

Exception: Food preparation facilities protected in accordance with NFPA 96 shall not be required to have openings protected between food preparation areas and dining areas. Where domestic cooking equipment is used for food warming or limited cooking, protection or segregation of food preparation facilities shall not be required if approved by the building official.

466.6.3

Where automatic extinguishing is used to meet the requirements of this section, sprinkler piping serving not more than six sprinklers for any isolated hazardous area shall be permitted to be connected directly to a domestic water supply system having a capacity sufficient to provide 0.15 gpm/per square foot (6.1 L/min/m2) of floor area throughout the entire enclosed area. An indicating shutoff valve shall be installed in an accessible location between the sprinklers and the connection to the domestic water supply.

466.7 Detection and alarm systems.

Day care occupancies shall be provided with a fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907 and this section.

Exception: Day care occupancies housed in one room.

466.7.1

Initiation of the required fire alarm system shall be by manual means and by operation of any required smoke detectors and required sprinkler systems.

466.7.1.1

Occupant notification signals shall be audible and visual signals in accordance with NFPA 72 and Florida Building Code, Accessibility. The general evacuation alarm signal shall operate throughout the entire building.

Exceptions:

1.	Where total evacuation of occupants is impractical because of building configuration, only the occupants in the affected zones shall be initially notified. Provisions shall be made to selectively notify occupants in other zones to afford orderly evacuation of the entire building.

2.	Where occupants are incapable of evacuating themselves because of age, physical or mental disability or physical restraint, the private operating mode as described in NFPA 72 shall be permitted to be used. Only the attendants and other personnel required to evacuate occupants from a zone, area, floor, or building shall be required to be notified. This notification shall include means to readily identify the zone, area, floor or building in need of evacuation.

466.7.1.2 Fire department notification.

The fire alarm system shall be arranged to transmit the alarm automatically to the fire department in accordance with NFPA 72 by means of one of the following methods as approved by the building official:

1.	An auxiliary alarm system, or

2.	A central station connection, or

3.	A proprietary system, or

4.	A remote station connection.

Exception: Where none of the above means of notification is available, a plan for notification of the fire department, acceptable to the building official, shall be provided.

466.7.2 Detection.

A smoke detection system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72, with placement of detectors in each story in front of doors to the stairways and in the corridors of all floors occupied by the day care occupancy. Detectors also shall be installed in lounges, recreation areas and sleeping rooms in the day care occupancy.

Exception: Day care occupancies housed in one room.

466.8 Corridors.

Every interior corridor shall be constructed of walls having not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

Exceptions:

1.	In buildings protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 901.6 and 903.3.1.1 corridor walls shall not be required to be rated, provided that such walls form smoke partitions in accordance with Section 710.

2.	Where the corridor ceiling is an assembly having a 1-hour fire-resistance rating where tested as a wall, the corridor walls shall be permitted to terminate at the corridor ceiling.

3.	Lavatories in unsprinklered buildings shall not be required to be separated from corridors, provided that they are separated from all other spaces by walls having not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 709.

4.	Lavatories shall not be required to be separated from corridors, provided the building is protected throughout by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 901.6 and 903.3.1.1.

466.9 Flexible plan and open plan buildings.

Flexible plan and open plan buildings shall comply with the requirements of this chapter as modified as follows:

466.9.1

Each room occupied by more than 300 persons shall have two or more means of egress entering into separate atmospheres. Where three or more means of egress are required, not more than two of them shall enter into a common atmosphere.

466.9.2

Flexible plan buildings shall be evaluated while all folding walls are extended and in use as well as when they are in the retracted position.

466.10 Day care homes.
466.10.1

This section establishes life safety requirements for day care homes in which more than three but not more than 12 clients receive care, maintenance and supervision by other than their relative(s) or legal guardian(s) for less than 24 hours per day.

Exception: Facilities that supervise clients on a temporary basis with a parent or guardian in close proximity.

466.10.2 Definitions.

For definitions, see Chapter 2.

466.10.3

Places of religious worship shall not be required to meet the provisions of this section in order to operate a nursery while services are being held in the building.

466.10.4

Occupancies that include part-day preschools, kindergartens and other schools whose purpose is primarily educational even though the children are of preschool age shall comply with the provisions for Group E occupancy.

466.10.5 Smoke detection systems.
466.10.5.1

Single-station smoke alarms installed in accordance with the household fire warning equipment requirements of Chapter 2 of NFPA 72 shall be installed within day care homes.

Exception: System smoke detectors installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and arranged to function in the same manner shall be permitted.

466.10.5.2

Where the day care home is located within a building of another occupancy, any corridors serving the day care home shall be provided with a complete smoke detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

466.10.5.3

Single-station smoke alarms shall be powered by the building electrical system.

466.10.5.4

Single-station smoke alarms shall be provided in all rooms used for sleeping.

466.10.5.5

Where two or more smoke alarms are required within a living unit, suite of rooms, or similar area, they shall be arranged so that operation of any smoke alarm shall cause all smoke alarms within the living unit, suite of rooms or similar area to sound.

466.10.5.5.1

The alarms shall sound only within an individual living unit, suite of rooms or similar area and shall not actuate the building fire alarm system. Remote annunciation shall be permitted.

SECTION 467
HOSPICE INPATIENT FACILITIES AND
UNITS AND HOSPICE RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
467.1 Scope.

All hospice inpatient facilities and units and residential facilities shall comply with the following design and construction standards. Enforcement and interpretation of these provisions shall be by the state agency authorized by Section 553.73, Florida Statutes.

Note: Other administrative and programmatic provisions may apply. See Department of Elder Affairs (DOEA) Rule 58A-2, Florida Administrative Code, Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA) Rule 59C-1, Florida Administrative Code, and Chapter 400 Part VI, Florida Statutes.

467.1.2

The following are exempt from review under this section:

467.1.2.1

Change of ownership of an existing licensed hospice facility or unit.

467.1.2.2

Change of the functional use of a space, room or area when no physical plant revisions are made or are required to be made by this code.

467.1.3

The Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Section 101.2, Scope exempts state licensed facilities such as hospices from compliance with that code. Any repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition or relocation of an existing state licensed inpatient hospice facility shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and this section.

467.2 Physical plant definitions.
467.2.1

As used in this section, “inpatient facility and unit” means the location where inpatient services are provided to hospice patients that are in need of hospice inpatient care.

467.2.2

As used in this section, the term “inpatient facility” means a freestanding building or structure that houses inpatient beds licensed exclusively to the hospice program but does not house any inpatient beds licensed to a hospital or nursing home.

467.2.3

As used in this section, the term “unit” means a distinct part, section, wing or unit within a hospital or nursing home that houses beds licensed to the hospital or nursing home but which is leased by a hospice for the provision of hospice inpatient care to its patients.

467.2.4

As used in this section, the term “existing” means an inpatient hospice facility, unit or hospice residential facility constructed and approved under a previous edition of the Florida Building Code, Building.

467.3 Codes and standards.
467.3.1

All new inpatient facilities and units, and additions or renovations to existing facilities and units, shall be in compliance with the requirements for:

467.3.1.1

Institutional Occupancy - Group I-2, Condition 1, as described in Section 308.3 of this code.

467.3.1.2

The National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101, Chapter 18, New Health Care Occupancy as applicable to nursing homes, as described in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code, Standards of the National Fire Protection Association and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code.

467.3.1.3

Part 1 of the Guidelines for the Design and Construction of Residential Health, Care, and Support Facilities as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

467.3.1.4

Inpatient sleeping rooms shall be made accessible in accordance with the requirements for medical care facilities of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

467.3.1.5

In renovations and additions to existing facilities, only that portion of the total facility affected by the project must comply with applicable sections of the codes for new facilities and units.

467.3.1.6

Existing portions of the facility that are not included in the renovation or addition but are essential to the functioning of the complete facility, as well as existing areas that receive less than substantial amounts of new work, shall comply with the applicable sections of the codes for existing inpatient facilities and units.

467.3.1.7

All existing inpatient facilities and units licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration shall be in compliance with National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101, Chapter 19, Existing Health Care Occupancy, as applicable to nursing homes and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code.

467.4 Design requirements for inpatient facilities and units.

The following shall be provided in each inpatient facility or unit:

467.4.1

Each new patient sleeping room shall have a minimum room area exclusive of toilet room, or permanently attached or built-in closets, lockers or wardrobes, of 120 square feet (11.15 m2) per bed for private rooms and 100 square feet (9.29 m2) per bed for double occupancy rooms.

467.4.1.1

In new construction and additions, the maximum room capacity of each patient room shall be two persons. In double occupancy patient rooms, sleeping areas shall be separated from each other by a wall or partition to increase acoustic and visual privacy. Each person lying in bed shall have direct visual access to an exterior window at all times. For visual privacy, either doors or cubicle curtains to these individual patient sleeping areas shall be provided.

467.4.1.2

The design for privacy shall not restrict a patient’s access at any time to the room entrance, resident armchair, toilet or bathroom, wardrobe, exterior window or closet.

467.4.2

Each patient sleeping room shall have a window(s), with a maximum sill height of 36 inches (0.914 m) for any building constructed after July 5, 2016, or door with a clear glass light in compliance with Section 1205.2 of this code. The window or door shall open directly to an atrium or to the outside of the building with a minimum of 20 feet (6.10 m) in clear and unobstructed vista measured perpendicularly from the window or door.

467.4.3

Each patient sleeping room shall have a wardrobe, locker or closet suitable for hanging clothing of the patient.

467.4.4

Each patient sleeping room shall have access to a toilet room without having to enter the general corridor area. One toilet room shall serve no more than two beds and no more than one resident room unless the hospice unit is located inside of an existing hospital or nursing home.

467.4.4.1

The door shall be side hinged and swing out from the toilet room, or shall be a sliding barn-type door without a bottom track and have at least 32 inches (813 mm) wide clear opening.

467.4.4.2

The toilet room shall contain a water closet with grab bars on both sides.

467.4.4.3

The water closet shall be equipped with a bedpan-rinsing device unless the Functional Program as described in Part 1 of the Guidelines for the Design and Construction of Residential Health, Care, and Support Facilities as referenced in Chapter 35 provides for disposable bedpans after every use.

467.4.4.4

There shall be an emergency nurse call station inside of each toilet room.

467.4.5

A hand washing facility shall be provided within each patient toilet room or, if the hospice unit is located inside of an existing hospital or nursing home, within each patient bedroom.

467.4.6

A nurses’ station, clean workroom and soiled workroom shall be provided. Access to these rooms shall be from a corridor or ante room.

467.4.7

A charting space for clinical staff shall be provided at each nurses’ station.

467.4.8

A hand washing facility shall be located in or near each nurses’ station.

467.4.9

The clean workroom shall be provided with a work counter, hand wash facility, storage facilities and covered waste receptacle.

467.4.10

The soiled workroom shall be provided with a service sink equipped with rinsing device, work counter, a hand-washing facility, storage facilities, covered waste receptacle and covered linen receptacle.

467.4.11

A drug distribution system shall be provided with provisions for the locked storage of medications. The use of the clean workroom for drug distribution shall be permitted.

467.4.12

A clean linen storage room or closet shall be provided.

467.4.13

A nourishment station with equipment for preparing or serving nourishments between scheduled meals shall be provided and shall be available for patient, family, volunteers, guests and staff use. Provisions shall be made for the use and storage of small appliances such as coffee makers or toasters. A minimum of two duplex receptacles connected to a small appliance circuit shall be provided.

467.4.14

Storage for administrative supplies shall be provided.

467.4.15

Parking for stretchers and wheelchairs in an area out of the path of normal traffic and of adequate size for the unit shall be provided.

467.4.16

A janitor’s closet with a floor drain and storage space for housekeeping equipment and supplies shall be provided.

467.4.17

A multipurpose lounge suitable and furnished for reception, recreation, dining, visitation, group social activities and worship shall be provided.

467.4.18

A conference or consultation room for patient and family use shall be provided for every hospice facility or unit.

467.4.19

A washer and dryer for patients’ personal use shall be provided.

467.4.20 Bathing facilities.
467.4.20.1

A centralized resident bathing room(s) shall be provided with a minimum of one bathtub, hydro tub or shower for every 20 hospice inpatients or fraction thereof not otherwise served by shower facilities designed to accommodate a shower chair, connected directly to the resident rooms.

467.4.20.2

A separate private toilet room shall be provided that is directly accessible to each central bathing area with multiple bathing fixtures without requiring entry into the general corridor.

467.4.20.3

All showers located in bathing rooms connected directly to the resident rooms shall be designed so that a shower chair can be easily rolled in and out of the shower area.

467.5 Details for inpatient facilities and units.
467.5.1

Fixtures, such as drinking fountains, public telephone, vending machines and portable equipment, shall not be located or stored so as to restrict corridor traffic or reduce the minimum required corridor width.

467.5.2

Doors to patient tub rooms, showers and water closets that swing into the room shall be equipped with reversible hardware that will allow the door to swing out in an emergency.

467.5.3

Doors, except those to closets or spaces not subject to occupancy, shall not swing into the exit access corridors.

467.5.4

Windows and outer doors, if operable, shall be equipped with insect screens.

467.5.5

Interior thresholds and expansion joint covers shall be made flush with the floor surface.

467.5.6

Grab bars shall be provided at all patient toilets, showers and tubs. The bars shall have a clearance of 11/2 inches (38 mm) to the walls and shall be sufficiently anchored to sustain a concentrated applied load of not less than 250 pounds (113 kg).

467.5.7

Single paper towel dispensers, soap dispensers and covered waste receptacles shall be provided at all hand washing facilities.

467.5.8

Staff hand washing facilities shall be fitted with wrist blades and a gooseneck-type spout.

467.5.9

All hand washing facilities shall be securely anchored to withstand an applied vertical load of not less than 250 pounds (113 kg) on the front of the fixture.

467.6 Elevators.
467.6.1 Elevators.

In new multistory units and facilities an elevator shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 30 of the Florida Building Code, Building. In addition, a hospital-type elevator large enough to accommodate a bed and attending staff shall service all patient sleeping rooms and patient treatment areas located above the ground floor. The car shall be at least 5 feet 8 inches (1.73 m) wide by 9 feet (2.74 m) deep and the car doors shall have a clear opening of not less than 4 feet (1.22 m) wide and 7 feet (2.13 m) high.

467.7 Mechanical system requirements for inpatient facilities and units.
467.7.1 Air conditioning, heating and ventilating systems.
467.7.1.1

All patient-occupied areas shall be heated or cooled by individual or central units. Heating units shall be designed to provide a minimum of 72°F (22.22°C) ambient indoor temperature and air conditioning units shall be designed to provide a minimum of 78°F (25.55°C) ambient indoor temperature.

467.7.1.2

All air-supply and air-exhaust systems shall be mechanically operated. Fans serving exhaust systems shall be located at the discharge end of the system.

467.7.2 Carbon monoxide detector.

See Section 915.

467.7.3 Plumbing and other piping systems.

Water distribution systems shall be arranged to provide hot water at each hot water outlet at all times. Hot water at shower, bathing, and hand washing facilities for patients’ personal use shall not exceed 110°F (43.3°C).

467.8 Electrical systems for inpatient facilities and units.
467.8.1 Lighting.
467.8.1.1

All spaces occupied by people, machinery and equipment within the building, approaches to the building and parking areas shall have electric lighting.

467.8.1.2

All patients’ rooms shall have general lighting and night lighting. General room luminaires shall be switched at the entrance to the patient room.

467.8.2 Receptacles.

All patient rooms shall have hospital grade duplex grounding-type receptacles.

467.8.3 Emergency electrical system.
467.8.3.1

A Type III essential electrical system shall be provided in all hospice facilities as described in National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 99, “Health Care Facilities”, and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code. The emergency power for this system shall meet the requirements of a Level II, type 10, Class 48 generator as described in National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 110, “Emergency Standby Power Systems”, and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code.

467.8.3.2

The essential electrical system shall have at a minimum one transfer switch. Separate electrical branches are not required.

467.8.3.3

There shall be selected life safety lighting provided at a minimum of 1 footcandle (10 lux) and designed for automatic dusk-to-dawn operation along the travel paths from the exits to the public way or to safe areas located a minimum of 30 feet (9.14 m) from the building.

467.8.3.4

A minimum of one elevator per bank serving any patient use floor shall be connected to the essential electric system and arranged for automatic operation during loss of normal power. Elevator cab lighting, controls, and communication and signal systems shall be connected to the essential electrical system.

467.8.3.5

If required by the facility’s emergency food plan, there shall be power connected to the essential electrical system for kitchen refrigerators, freezers and range hood exhaust fans. Selected lighting within the kitchen and dry storage areas shall be connected to the essential electrical system.

467.8.3.6 Nurse call systems.
467.8.3.6.1

Wired- or wireless-type nurse call systems shall be permitted if they have been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) to meet the requirements of UL 1069, 7th edition, published October 12, 2007, as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All wireless systems shall have been tested and approved by an NRTL to meet the requirements of Section 49, Wireless Systems of UL 1069, 7th edition as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code. All nurse call systems, whether wired or wireless, shall have electronically supervised visual and audible annunciation in accordance with the supervision criteria of UL 1069, 7th edition for nurse call systems and be tested and approved by an NRTL to meet those requirements.

467.8.3.6.2

A nurse call system accessible by the patient shall be provided in each patient sleeping room. A nurse call master panel shall be provided at the nurses’ station. Nurse call duty stations shall be provided in each clean workroom, soiled workroom, medicine preparation room and nourishment room.

467.9 Residential facilities.
467.9.1

Residential facilities shall comply with the Florida Building Code and the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101 as adopted by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

467.9.2

Residential facilities shall comply with the following codes and standards:

467.9.2.1

All new facilities and additions and renovations to existing facilities shall be in compliance with:

467.9.2.1.1

Section 310.6 of this code for Group R-4 occupancy;

467.9.2.1.2

The National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101, Chapter 32, Residential Board and Care Occupancy and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code; and

467.9.2.1.3

The Florida Building Code, Accessibility for residential facilities.

467.9.2.2

All existing facilities shall comply with National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code 101, Chapter 33, Existing Residential Board and Care Occupancy and incorporated by reference in Rule 69A-3.012, Florida Administrative Code.

SECTION 468
SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
468.1 Scope:

Florida’s public and private schools, colleges, and universities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the code and the following standards. These are minimum standards; boards or owners may impose more restrictive requirements. Additional requirements for public educational facilities in Florida, including public schools and Florida’s colleges, are found in Section 453, State Requirements for Educational Facilities.

468.2 Sites.
468.2.1 Drainage.

Soil, grass, and planting beds shall provide positive drainage away from sidewalks, but shall not fall away at more than a 3-percent gradient slope for a minimum distance of 5 feet (1524 mm) from the edge. Gutters or other water funneling devices shall prevent storm water from pouring onto or draining across walks.The location of all drains, grates, drop inlets, catch basins, other drainage elements and curb cuts shall be out of the main flow of pedestrian traffic.

468.2.2 Playgrounds and equipment.

Playgrounds shall be evenly graded and sloped to provide positive surface drainage. Playground equipment shall be safe, structurally sound, verminproof, and shall not have jagged or sharp projections. Playground equipment shall be anchored to suitable foundations to prevent toppling or dislodgement. Cushioning materials such as mats, wood chips, or sand shall be used under climbing equipment, slides, and swings as required by the Public Playground Safety Handbook.

468.2.3 Outdoor waste containers.

A smooth nonabsorbent surface shall be provided for outdoor waste containers.

468.2.4 Transmission line right-of-way.

Buildings, play areas and common use areas shall not be located within a high-voltage power transmission line right-of-way.

468.3 Building construction.
468.3.1 Rodent proofing.

Buildings for Group E occupancies shall be rodent proofed per Appendix F, Rodent proofing.

468.3.2 Glare from natural light.

Sources of natural light in instructional spaces shall be glazed with glare reducing materials or shall be shielded to prevent glare that can interfere with seeing tasks within the instructional space.

468.3.3 Automated external defibrillator.

Automated external defibrillators shall be provided in public educational facilities that are a member of the Florida High School Athletic Association.

468.3.4 Diaper changing stations.

INSIGHTS

A diaper changing station shall be located in or adjacent to any classroom where children wearing diapers are in attendance. A hand washing lavatory shall be provided within the changing station area. Access shall be provided to the lavatory without opening doors or touching a handle.

 INSIGHTS (1)
468.3.5 Plumbing.

INSIGHTS

 INSIGHTS (1)
468.3.5.1 Standards.

INSIGHTS

Educational and ancillary facilities shall be provided with toilets, hand washing facilities, and drinking fountains for all occupants, in ratios and accessible as required by the Florida Building Code, Florida law, and federal requirements.

Exception: A single unisex toilet room is allowed where provided in child care, pre-kindergarten through grade 3 and ESE classrooms.

 INSIGHTS (1)
468.3.5.2 Teacher toilets.

Faculty and staff toilets shall be separate from student toilets.

Exception: Separation of faculty/staff and student toilet facilities is not required for colleges and universities.

468.3.5.3 Toilet room access.
468.3.5.3.1

Toilet facilities for pre-k through grade 12 shall be accessible under continuous roof cover from all student occupied spaces.

Exception: Relocatable classrooms installed for temporary use.

468.3.5.3.2 Access to group toilet rooms.

Access to student group toilet rooms shall not be through an occupied space, storage space, or equipment space.

468.3.5.3.3

Toilet rooms adjacent to food preparation or dining areas shall be completely enclosed, have self-closing doors, and shall open into vestibules with self-closing doors. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into food preparation areas, serving areas, or dining areas.

468.3.5.4 Shielding device.

The entry to each group toilet room shall be provided with a door, partition, or other shielding device to block from view the occupants in the toilet room. If a door is provided, it shall have a closer and shall swing out in the direction of egress.

468.3.5.5 Walls.

Walls in toilet rooms shall be impervious to a height of at least 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor. Walls in kitchens, sculleries, can wash areas, and shower rooms shall be impervious to a height of at least 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor. Toilet and shower partitions shall be impervious.

468.3.5.6 Floor drains and hose bibbs.

All group toilet rooms shall be provided with at least one floor drain and one easily accessible hose bibb or wall hydrant. The floor shall be sloped down to the drain.

468.3.5.6.1 Stall urinals.

Stall urinals shall not serve as the required floor drains.

468.3.5.6.2 Location.

Floor drains shall be provided in the food serving area, kitchen area, scullery, garbage and rubbish rooms, and can wash area.

468.3.5.7 Handwashing facilities.
468.3.5.7.1

Handwashing facilities shall be located within or adjoining each toilet room.

468.3.5.7.2

Soap dispensers for liquid, foam, or powdered soap shall be provided at all handwashing basins.

468.3.5.7.3

Individual towel dispensers or hot-air hand drying devices shall be provided near handwashing basins.

468.3.5.8 Showers.
468.3.5.8.1

Shower heads shall be based on the peak load to be accommodated at one time and provided at the ratio of one shower head for each five students, located a minimum of 30 inches (762 mm) apart.

468.3.5.8.2

Floors shall be drained in such a manner that waste water from any shower head will not pass over areas occupied by other bathers.

468.3.5.8.3

Water shall be heated and the temperature at the shower head shall not exceed 110°F (43°C) nor be less than 95°F (35°C).

468.3.5.9 Floors.

Floors in gymnasium locker rooms, showers, drying areas, toilet rooms, kitchens, sculleries, food storage areas and can wash areas shall be impervious.

468.3.5.10 Ceilings.

Ceilings in group toilet rooms, kitchens, sculleries, can wash areas, showers and locker rooms shall be impervious.

468.3.5.11 Urinals.

Trough urinals shall not be installed in any location.

468.3.5.12 Hot water.

When hot water is supplied to handwash sinks or lavatories in toilet rooms, a mixing valve shall be installed to control the temperature, at the fixture, which shall not exceed 110°F (43°C) nor be less than 95°F (35°C).

468.3.6 Mechanical.
468.3.6.1 Natural ventilation.

Natural ventilation shall not be provided in toilet rooms, shower rooms, lockers rooms, and storage rooms for athletic equipment or soiled clothes.

468.3.6.2 Fans and blowers.

Fans and blowers shall be sized and designed to provide the required air movement without excessive or disturbing noise that would interfere with the educational program provided in the space being ventilated.

468.3.6.3 Kilns.

Kiln rooms and areas shall be provided with adequate exhaust to dispel emitted heat to the exterior, and they shall not be connected to any other exhaust system.

468.3.6.4 Chemistry laboratories and science classrooms.

HVAC systems in chemistry labs and science classrooms shall be designed and installed to ensure that chemicals originating from the space are not recirculated.

Exception: A high capacity emergency exhaust system providing 20 air changes per hour may be used in chemistry laboratories and science classrooms with fume hoods. Positive ventilation may be provided via doors or windows opening to the exterior. Signs providing operational instructions shall be permanently installed at the emergency exhaust system fan switch and adjacent to the door(s) or window(s) to be opened.

468.3.6.5 Chemical storage.

Rooms used for the storage, handling, and disposal of chemicals used in school, college, and university laboratories shall be vented to the exterior. The ventilation system shall not be connected to the air-conditioning return air system, and the rooms shall be kept at moderate temperatures. Chemical storage cabinets, when vented to the exterior, shall be mechanically vented in accordance with NFPA 30 and NFPA 91.

468.3.6.6 Floor drains and plumbing fixtures in equipment rooms.

No floor drain or other plumbing fixture shall be installed in a room containing air handling machinery when such room is used as a plenum. When rooms are used as a plenum, equipment drains shall be conveyed through an indirect waste receptor located outside such rooms or other approved point of disposal.

468.3.6.7 Toilet room ventilation.

Toilet rooms shall be continuously ventilated during building occupancy.

Exception: Individual toilet rooms shall be ventilated continuously during building occupancy or ventilation shall turn on with the light switch and run for at least 10 minutes after the light has been turned off.

468.3.7 Lighting.
468.3.7.1 Illumination level in classrooms/instructional spaces.

Illumination at the normal task level for the type of classroom/instruction space shall be designed to provide and maintain an average of 40 footcandles (400 lux).

468.3.7.2 Illumination uniformity in classrooms/instruction spaces.

Luminaires shall have a ceiling arrangement or be positioned around the walls such that a uniformed illumination level, within 10 footcandles (100 Lux), is maintained at the students required normal task level for the type of classroom/instruction space.

468.3.7.3 Brightness ratio in classrooms/instructional spaces.

The brightness ratio between the student task level and the instruction area or areas or visual display location shall be one to five or less.

468.3.7.4 Illumination failure of general and means of egress luminaires.

Illumination systems shall be designed and maintained so that the failure of any single lighting unit, such as an electric luminaire, does not leave any occupied space or means of egress in the dark (see Section 1008 for additional means of egress requirements).

468.3.7.5 Glare elimination.

Illumination of permanently installed markerboards, chalkboards, and other instruction aids shall be designed to eliminate glare and shadows.

SECTION 469
OFFICE SURGERY SUITE
469.1 Scope.

An office surgery suite is that portion of a physician’s office where surgery is performed according to Rule 64B-8-9009 Standard of Care for Office Surgery, Florida Administrative Code. These minimum standards of design and construction apply to a physician’s office required to register under Rule 64B8-9009.(1)(a), Florida Administrative Code.

469.1.1

The minimum standards of design, construction and specified minimum essential utilities and facilities of this section shall be applicable to all office surgery suites that are required to be registered but have not yet been registered with the Florida Department of Health in accordance with Rule 64B8-9.0091 Requirement for Physician Office Registration; Inspection or Accreditation, Florida Administrative Code, and to all newly constructed office surgery suites, and all additions, alterations or renovations to all existing office surgery suites on the effective date of this code.

469.2 Codes and standards.
469.2.1

In addition to the minimum requirements of this section, an office surgery suite shall also be in compliance with the following:

469.2.1.1

The fire codes as described in Chapter 69A-3.012, “Standards of the National Fire Protection Association Adopted,” Florida Administrative Code.

469.2.1.2

Part 1 and Part 2: Outpatient Facility Types, Chapter 2.1, Common Elements for Outpatient Facilities of The Guidelines for Design and Construction of Outpatient Facilities (The Guidelines), as referenced in Chapter 35 of this code.

469.2.1.3

The architectural, mechanical and electrical design criteria and processes as specified in the physical plant standards in this section shall take precedence over those in The Guidelines with no additional requirements.

469.3 Office surgery suite occupancy classification.
469.3.1

Office surgery suites that provide services or treatment on an outpatient basis to four or more patients at the same time that either renders the patients incapable of taking action for self-preservation under emergency conditions without the assistance from others or that provide surgical treatment requiring general anesthesia to four or more patients at the same time, shall meet the requirements of Ambulatory Health Care Occupancies as described in NFPA 101, Life Safety Code and this code.

469.3.2

All other office surgery suites shall comply with the requirements of Business occupancy as described in NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, and this code.

469.4 Physical plant standards.
469.4.1 Administration and public areas.

There shall be a waiting room or lobby area of sufficient size to accommodate patients and visitors.

469.4.1.1

There shall be a public toilet(s) with handwashing station(s), public access to a telephone for local calls, and an electric water fountain or a water and cup-dispensing unit. When the office surgery suite is located within an office building, these functions may be provided as part of the office building’s public areas.

469.4.1.2

As determined by the functional program of the office surgery suite, there shall be an admitting office, secure medical record storage, director of nursing office, in-service training or conference area.

469.4.1.3

There shall be a toilet room(s) with handwashing station located within the office surgery suite for patients.

469.4.2 Pre-operative area(s).
469.4.2.1

As determined by the functional program of the office surgery suite the following elements shall be provided for clinical services:

469.4.2.2 Patient change areas.

An area(s) shall be provided for patients to change from street clothing into surgical gowns and to prepare for surgery. Provisions shall be made for patient privacy and for securing patients’ personal effects.

469.4.2.3

A separate and distinct primary recovery area(s) shall be provided that is located adjacent to the operating room(s). It shall contain a minimum of one pre-operative station per each operating room and shall not be part of the restricted area of the office surgery suite. There shall be 3 feet (0.9 m) of clear floor area around three sides of each recovery station for work and circulation.

469.4.2.4

The pre-operative area(s) shall be located in direct view of a nurse station.

469.4.2.5

Cubicle curtains or other provisions for privacy during pre-operative care shall be provided.

469.4.2.6

There shall be a dedicated hand-washing station located in or immediately adjacent to the pre-operative area(s).

469.4.2.7

If determined by the functional program taking into consideration the types of surgery and procedures performed, the types of anesthesia used, average recovery periods, and staffing levels, this area may be shared with the post-operative area.

469.4.3 Operating room(s).
469.4.3.1

There shall be at a minimum one operating room in each office surgery suite. The size and location of the operating room(s) shall be dependent on the level of care provided and equipment utilized based on the functional program.

469.4.3.2

The size of the operating room(s) shall be as follows:

469.4.3.2.1

An operating room shall have a minimum clear floor area of 255 square feet (23.69 m2).

469.4.3.2.2

An operating room where anesthetics will be administered using an anesthesia machine and supply cart shall have a minimum clear floor area of 270 square feet (25.08 m2).

469.4.3.2.3

An operating room where surgery that may require additional staff and equipment will be performed shall have a minimum clear floor area of 400 square feet (37.16 m2).

469.4.3.3

See The Guidelines, Chapter 2.1, Common Elements of Outpatient Facilities, for design details regarding clearances and space requirements for operating rooms.

469.4.3.4

The operating room(s) shall be equipped with an emergency communication system connected to at least one continuously occupied location within the office surgery suite such as a control or nurse station.

469.4.4 Post-operative area(s).
469.4.4.1

Area(s) for recovery in office surgery suites shall be provided in accordance with the functional program with the following minimum requirements:

469.4.4.2

A separate and distinct primary recovery area(s) shall be provided that is located within or adjacent to the operating room(s). It shall contain a minimum of one recovery station per each operating room and shall not be part of the restricted area of the office surgery suite. There shall be 3 feet (0.9 m) of clear floor area around three sides of each recovery station for work and circulation.

469.4.4.3

The recovery area shall be located in direct view of the nurse station.

469.4.4.4

Cubicle curtains or other provisions for privacy during post-operative care shall be provided.

469.4.4.5

There shall be a dedicated handwashing station located in or immediately adjacent to the recovery area(s).

469.4.5 Step-down recovery area(s).
469.4.5.1

As required by the functional program, a designated supervised step-down recovery area may be provided for patients who do not require post-anesthesia recovery but need additional time for their vital signs to stabilize before safely leaving the office surgery suite. This area shall contain a clinical workspace, space for family members, and provisions for privacy. It shall have convenient patient access to toilets large enough to accommodate a patient and an assistant. Handwashing stations and nourishment facilities shall be included within or immediately adjacent to this area(s).

469.4.6 Surgical service areas.

The following areas and spaces shall be provided.

469.4.6.1 Control station.

As determined by the office surgery suite, a control station located to permit visual surveillance of all traffic entering the restricted corridor (access to operating rooms and other ancillary clean/sterile areas) shall be provided.

469.4.6.2 Drug distribution station.

Provisions shall be made for storage and preparation of medications administered to patients. A refrigerator for pharmaceuticals and a double-locked storage for controlled substances shall be provided.

469.4.6.3 Scrub station(s).

Scrub station(s) shall be provided outside of and near the entrance to each operating room and may service two operating rooms if needed. Scrub station(s) shall be arranged to minimize incidental splatter on nearby personnel or supply carts. The scrub stations shall be trimmed with foot, knee, or ultrasonic controls (no single lever wrist blades).

469.4.6.4 Soiled workroom.

The soiled workroom shall contain a handwashing station, a sink large enough to accommodate the cleaning of the largest piece of surgical instrument utilized in the operating room, a work counter, and waste receptacle(s). This may be the same workroom as described in Section 469.4.7, “Sterilizing facilities.”

469.4.6.5 Fluid waste disposal station(s).

This station(s) shall be convenient to the general operating room(s) and post-anesthesia recovery area(s). A clinical sink or toilet equipped with a rinsing device may meet this requirement.

469.4.6.6 Anesthesia equipment and supplies.

As required by the functional program, provisions shall be made for cleaning, testing, and storing anesthesia equipment and supplies.

469.4.6.7 Medical gas storage.

Medical gas storage with space for reserve nitrous oxide and oxygen cylinders, if such gas is used in the office surgery suite, shall be provided and located outside of the restricted surgical area(s). Service and delivery access shall be possible without entering the restricted surgical area(s). All cylinders shall be securely chained or fastened to prevent accidental damage.

469.4.6.8 General storage room(s).

General, surgical and equipment storage room(s) or closet enclosures shall be provided for equipment and supplies used or required in the surgical suite.

469.4.6.9 Staff clothing change area(s).

A minimum of one change area shall be provided for staff working within the office surgery suite. This area(s) shall contain locker(s), toilet(s), handwashing station(s), and space for donning scrub attire.

469.4.6.10 Patient change areas.

An area shall be provided for patients to change from street clothing into surgical gowns and to prepare for surgery. Provisions shall be made for patient privacy and for securing patients’ personal effects.

469.4.6.11 Stretcher/wheelchair storage area.

This area shall be convenient for use and out of the required exit access.

469.4.6.12 Lounge and toilet facilities.

Lounge and toilet facilities with a handwashing station for staff shall be provided as required by the functional program.

469.4.6.13 Nourishment room or area.

For office surgery suites that provide accommodations for overnight stays, a nourishment room or area shall be provided. It shall contain a refrigerator, double compartment sink, counter, and storage for food items and utensils.

469.4.6.14 Housekeeping room.

A room containing a floor receptor or service sink shall be provided exclusively for the office surgery suite. Storage space for housekeeping supplies and equipment shall be provided in this room or in the general storage room(s). Hazardous supplies such as cleaning chemicals shall be protected in accordance with the requirements of the referenced fire safety codes.

469.4.6.15 Crash/anesthesia cart(s).

Space shall be provided for emergency resuscitation equipment and supplies such as crash/anesthesia cart(s) with convenient access to and use from both the surgery and recovery areas.

469.4.7 Sterilizing facilities.
469.4.7.1

A system for providing sterilized equipment and supplies shall be provided. When sterilization is provided off-site, adequate handling (receiving and distribution) and on-site storage of sterile supplies shall be accommodated, and shall meet the minimum requirements for sterilization performed on-site.

469.4.7.2

Adequate space shall be available for the cleaning and sanitizing of clean and soiled carts and vehicles transporting supplies.

469.4.7.3

If on-site processing facilities are provided they shall include the following:

469.4.7.3.1 Soiled workroom.

This room shall be physically separated from all other areas of the office surgery suite. Workspace shall be provided to handle the cleaning and the gross cleaning, debridement, and disinfections of all medical/surgical instruments and equipment. The soiled workroom shall contain work surfaces(s), sink(s), flush-type devices(s), and washer/sterilizer decontaminators or other decontamination equipment as appropriate to the functional program.

469.4.7.3.2 Clean/assembly workroom.

This workroom shall have access to an immediately adjacent handwashing station and shall contain appropriate and sufficient workspace and equipment for terminal sterilizing of medical and surgical equipment and supplies. Clean and soiled work areas shall be physically separated. Access to sterilization room shall be restricted. The clean assembly room shall have adequate space for the designated number of work areas as defined in the functional program as well as space for storage of clean supplies, sterilizer carriages, and instrumentation.

469.4.7.3.3 Clean/sterile supplies.

Storage for packs, etc., shall include provisions for ventilation, humidity, and temperature control.

469.4.8 Details and finishes.
469.4.8.1

The minimum nominal door width for patient use shall be 3 feet (0.9 m) except doors requiring gurney/stretcher access, shall have a nominal width of 3 feet, 8 inches (1.11 m).

469.4.8.2

Toilet room doors for patient use shall open outward or be equipped with hardware that permits access from the outside in emergencies.

469.4.8.3

Handwashing stations shall be located and arranged to permit proper use and operation. Each handwashing station shall be equipped with single service paper towel dispensers and a soap dispenser.

469.4.8.4

Provisions for hand drying shall be included at all handwashing stations except scrub stations. Hand drying shall be accomplished by single towel dispensers or electrical hand driers.

469.4.8.5

Wall bases in operating rooms and areas that are frequently subject to wet cleaning shall be monolithic and coved directly up from the floor, tightly sealed to the wall, and constructed without voids. Seam welds in sheet flooring shall utilize manufacturer’s weld product recommendations. Vinyl composition tile (VCT) shall not be used in these areas.

469.4.8.6

Heavy ceiling mounted equipment such as operating room lights, tracks or other equipment shall have suspension systems specially designed for that application.

469.4.8.7

Cubicle curtains and draperies designed for appropriate patient privacy shall be noncombustible or flame retardant.

469.4.8.8

Floors subject to continuous use while wet, such as showers areas, shall have a nonslip surface.

469.4.8.9

Floor finishes in areas such as surgical suite, central sterile supply spaces, radiographic rooms, and minor surgical procedure rooms shall be washable, smooth, and capable of withstanding chemical cleaning.

469.4.8.10

Wall finishes shall be washable and, in the proximity of plumbing fixtures, shall be smooth and moisture resistant.

469.4.8.11

Wall finishes in areas such as operating suite, central sterile supply spaces, radiographic rooms, and minor surgical procedure rooms shall be washable, smooth, and capable of withstanding chemical cleaning.

469.4.8.12

Wall finishes in operating room(s) shall be scrubbable, capable of withstanding harsh chemical cleaning, and monolithic.

469.4.8.13

Ceiling finishes in semirestricted areas such as clean corridors, central sterile supply spaces, radiographic rooms, minor surgical procedure rooms and existing operating rooms shall be smooth, scrubbable, nonabsorptive, nonperforated, capable of withstanding cleaning with chemicals, and without crevices that can harbor mold and bacteria growth.

469.4.8.14

Ceilings finishes in operating rooms shall be monolithic, scrubbable, and capable of withstanding chemicals. Ceiling access panels shall be provided as required.

469.4.9 Elevators.
469.4.9.1

Installation and testing of elevators shall comply with ANSI/ASME A17.1 for new construction and ANSI/ASME A17.3 for existing facilities.

469.4.9.2

At least one elevator car shall have a minimum inside car platform of 51 inches by 80 inches (1295 m by 2032 m) with a minimum clear opening width of 42 inches (1067 mm) unless otherwise designed to provide equivalent space to allow the entrance and exit of an ambulance stretcher in the horizontal position. The elevator entrance may be of the side opening entrance type in order to accommodate a stretcher in its horizontal position. If more than one elevator is present, this elevator shall be identified.

469.4.9.3

The elevator car to be used for emergency evacuation of patients shall derive its power from an emergency electrical system.

469.4.9.4

Elevator call buttons and controls shall not be activated by heat or smoke. Light beams, if used for operating door reopening devices without touch, shall be used in combination with door-edge safety devices and shall be interconnected with a system of smoke detectors so that the light control feature will be overridden or disengaged should it encounter smoke at any landing.

469.4.10 Waste processing services.
469.4.10.1 Storage and disposal.

Facilities shall provide for sanitary storage and treatment or disposal of waste using techniques acceptable to the appropriate health and environmental authorities. The functional program shall stipulate the categories and volumes of waste for disposal and shall stipulate the methods of disposal for each.

469.4.10.2 Medical waste.

Medical waste shall be disposed of either by incineration or other approved technologies.

469.4.11 Mechanical system standards.
469.4.11.1 Medical gas and vacuum standards.
469.4.11.1.1

If the functional program of the office surgery suite requires a medical gas system, it shall be a minimum a Level III piped medical gas system in accordance with NFPA 99. In lieu of a Level III piped oxygen system, anesthetizing equipment with a double yoke oxygen system is acceptable. If an anesthesia ventilator is planned to be used during the surgical procedure, then a Level III piped gas system shall be required.

469.4.11.1.2

As required by the functional program of the office surgery suite, either a piped clinical vacuum system in accordance with NFPA 99 or portable electrical vacuum equipment shall be provided. In either case, there shall be a redundant vacuum system or equipment exclusively dedicated to the anesthetizing equipment.

469.4.11.1.3

For piped systems, the number of station outlets shall meet the needs of the functional program. However, the minimum number of station outlets shall be as described in Table 469.4.11.1.3.

TABLE 469.4.11.1.3 MINIMUM STATION OUTLETS FOR PIPED GAS SYSTEMS IN OFFICE SURGERY SUITES

LOCATION	OXYGEN	VACUUM
Class A	NA	NA
Class B and C	2	2∗
Post Operative Recovery	1	1

∗ An additional outlet shall be provided for anesthesia evacuation if necessary.

469.4.11.1.4

All piping, except control-line tubing, shall be identified. All valves shall be tagged, and a valve schedule shall be provided to the office surgery suite owner for permanent record and reference.

469.4.11.1.5

All gas cylinders in service and in storage shall be individually secured and located to prevent falling or being knocked over.

469.4.12 Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC).
469.4.12.1

All rooms and areas in the office surgery suite used for patient care shall be required to have HVAC systems as described in this section and as described for similar rooms and areas in the 2010 edition of The Guidelines for the Design and Construction of Health Care Facilities, Part 6, ANSI/ASHRAE/ASHE Standard 170, Ventilation of Health Care Facilities.

469.4.12.2

Fans serving exhaust systems shall be located at the discharge end and shall be readily serviceable. Air supply and exhaust in rooms for which no minimum total air change rate is noted may vary down to zero in response to room load.

469.4.12.3

The outdoor air introduced through the VAV air handling unit(s) shall remain constant throughout the range of operation.

469.4.12.4

Exhaust outlets, piping and ductwork shall be permanently and clearly identified.

469.4.13 Plumbing systems.
469.4.13.1

The material used for plumbing fixtures shall be nonabsorptive and acid resistant.

469.4.13.2

Water spouts for staff use in lavatories and sinks shall have the discharge point a minimum of 5 inches (127 m) above the rim of the fixture.

469.4.13.3

General handwashing stations used by staff shall be trimmed with valves that can be operated without hands. (Single lever or wrist blade devices may be used.) Blade handles used for this purpose shall be not less than 31/2 inches (88.9 mm) nor exceed 41/2 inches (114.3 mm) in length. If clinical sinks are utilized, handles on clinical sinks shall be at least 6 inches (152.4 mm) long.

469.4.13.4

The water-heating system shall have sufficient supply capacity to deliver at the temperatures of between 105° F to 120°F (41°C to 49°C). Water temperature is measured at the point of use or inlet to the equipment. Water shall be permitted to be stored at higher temperatures.

469.4.13.5

Drain lines from sinks used for acid waste disposal shall be made of acid-resistant material.

469.4.13.6

Drainage piping shall not be installed within the ceiling or exposed in operating rooms or other sensitive areas. If there is existing drainage piping from a floor directly above, special precautions such as safety drain pans shall be provided.

469.4.13.7

Floor drains or sinks shall not be permitted in operating rooms.

469.4.13.8

If a floor drain is installed in a cystoscopy room, it shall contain a nonsplash, horizontal-flow flushing bowl beneath the drain plate.

469.4.13.9

Where plaster traps are used, provisions shall be made for appropriate access and cleaning.

469.4.13.10

All piping, except control-line tubing, shall be identified. All valves shall be tagged, and a valve schedule shall be provided to the office surgery suite owner for permanent record and reference.

469.4.14 Electrical standards.
469.4.14.1

All electrical material and equipment, including conductors, controls, and signaling devices, shall be installed in compliance with applicable sections of NFPA 70 and NFPA 99 and shall be listed as complying with available standards of listing agencies, or other similar established standards where such standards are required.

469.4.14.2

The electrical installations, including alarm and communication systems, shall be tested to demonstrate that equipment installation and operation is appropriate and functional.

469.4.14.3 Services and switchboards.
469.4.14.3.1

Main switchboards shall be located in an area separate from plumbing and mechanical equipment and shall be accessible to authorized persons only.

469.4.14.3.2

Switchboards shall be convenient for use, readily accessible for maintenance, away from traffic lanes, and located in dry, ventilated spaces free of corrosive or explosive fumes, gases, or any flammable material. Overload protective devices shall operate properly in ambient room temperatures.

469.4.14.4 Panelboards.
469.4.14.4.1

Panelboards serving normal lighting, appliance circuits and critical branch emergency circuits shall be located on the same floor as the circuits they serve. Panelboards serving life safety emergency circuits may be located on another floor and serve floors above and/or below.

469.4.14.5 Lighting.
469.4.14.5.1

All occupied spaces shall have fixtures for lighting that can be illuminated as necessary.

469.4.14.5.2

Each operating room shall have general lighting for the room in addition to local lighting provided by special lighting unit(s) at the surgical table.

469.4.14.6 Receptacles (convenience outlets).
469.4.14.6.1

Duplex grounded-type receptacles shall be installed in all areas in sufficient quantities for tasks to be performed as needed.

469.4.14.6.2

Each operating room, primary recover station shall have a minimum of three hospital grade duplex receptacles that shall be sufficient to connect all equipment and devices and that shall include one spare duplex receptacle.

469.4.14.6.3

At least one of these receptacles shall be connected to the emergency system and one connected to the normal system. The emergency system receptacles shall be distinctively marked so as to be readily identified.

469.4.14.6.4

There shall be no more than two duplex receptacles per circuit in these areas.

469.4.14.6.5

Multiple outlet extenders shall not be permitted except electrical strips with full surge protectors may be utilized.

469.4.14.7 Equipment.
469.4.14.7.1

At inhalation anesthetizing locations, all electrical equipment and devices, receptacles, and wiring shall comply with applicable sections of NFPA 99 and NFPA 70.

469.4.14.8 Nurse call system.
469.4.14.8.1

In facilities that contain more than one operating room and where recovery beds are not in direct view from the nurses’ station, the following nurses’ calling system shall be provided.

469.4.14.8.2

Each recovery bed shall be provided with a call button. Two call buttons serving adjacent beds may be served by one calling station.

469.4.14.8.3

Calls shall activate a visual and audible signal at the nurses’ or control station and in the clean workroom and soiled workroom. If voice circuits are provided, indicating lights shall be used and shall remain lighted as long as the voice circuit is operating.

469.4.14.8.4

A nurses’ call emergency system shall be provided at each patient toilet and dressing room. Activation shall be by a pull cord that extends to near the floor. This system will activate audiovisual signals in the recovery room nurses’ station and in the surgical suite nurses’ station. The emergency call system shall be designed so that signal light activation will remain lighted until turned off at the patient’s calling station.

469.4.14.9 Emergency electrical service.
469.4.14.9.1

There shall be an emergency electrical service to provide power and light to the office surgery suite for a minimum period of 2 hours as prescribed in Rule 64B8-9.009, Florida Administrative Code. The system shall operate emergency exit lighting, fire alarm systems, nurses’ calling systems, surgical room lighting, recovery room lighting and shall power monitoring equipment, selected receptacles in the operating and recovery areas and medical refrigerator if provided.

469.4.14.9.2

Power may be supplied by batteries or an emergency generator in accordance with NFPA 111 and NFPA 110 respectively.

469.4.14.9.3

All office surgery suites shall at a minimum be equipped with a Type III nonportable, permanently installed emergency electrical system designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 99. New office surgery suites providing Level III surgical procedures as defined by the Board of Medicine should provide a Type I emergency electrical system in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 99.

469.4.14.10 Fire alarm system.
469.4.14.10.1

The fire alarm system shall be as required by NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, and installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-5]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS
SECTION 501
GENERAL
501.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter control the height and area of structures hereafter erected and additions to existing structures.

[F] 501.2 Address identification.

New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.

SECTION 502
DEFINITIONS
502.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

AREA, BUILDING.

BASEMENT.

EQUIPMENT PLATFORM.

GRADE PLANE.

HEIGHT, BUILDING.

MEZZANINE.

SECTION 503
GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHT AND
AREA LIMITATIONS
503.1 General.

Unless otherwise specifically modified in Chapter 4 and this chapter, building height, number of stories and building area shall not exceed the limits specified in Sections 504 and 506 based on the type of construction as determined by Section 602 and the occupancies as determined by Section 302 except as modified hereafter. Building height, number of stories and building area provisions shall be applied independently. Each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls complying with Section 706 shall be considered to be a separate building.

503.1.1 Special industrial occupancies.

Buildings and structures designed to house special industrial processes that require large areas and unusual building heights to accommodate craneways or special machinery and equipment, including, among others, rolling mills; structural metal fabrication shops and foundries; or the production and distribution of electric, gas or steam power, shall be exempt from the building height, number of stories and building area limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506.

503.1.2 Buildings on same lot.

Two or more buildings on the same lot shall be regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as portions of one building where the building height, number of stories of each building and the aggregate building area of the buildings are within the limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506. The provisions of this code applicable to the aggregate building shall be applicable to each building.

503.1.3 Type I construction.

Buildings of Type I construction permitted to be of unlimited tabular building heights and areas are not subject to the special requirements that allow unlimited area buildings in Section 507 or unlimited building height in Sections 503.1.1 and 504.3 or increased building heights and areas for other types of construction.

503.1.4 Occupied roofs.

A roof level or portion thereof shall be permitted to be used as an occupied roof provided the occupancy of the roof is an occupancy that is permitted by Table 504.4 for the story immediately below the roof. The area of the occupied roofs shall not be included in the building area as regulated by Section 506.

Exceptions:

1.	The occupancy located on an occupied roof shall not be limited to the occupancies allowed on the story immediately below the roof where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and occupant notification in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.1 and 907.5.2.3 is provided in the area of the occupied roof. Emergency voice/alarm communication system notification per Section 907.5.2.2 shall also be provided in the area of the occupied roof where such system is required elsewhere in the building.

2.	Assembly occupancies shall be permitted on roofs of open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction, in accordance with the exception to Section 903.2.1.6.

Elements or structures enclosing the occupied roof areas shall not extend more than 48 inches (1220 mm) above the surface of the occupied roof.

Exception: Penthouses constructed in accordance with Section 1510.2 and towers, domes, spires and cupolas constructed in accordance with Section 1510.5.

SECTION 504
BUILDING HEIGHT AND NUMBER OF STORIES
504.1 General.

The height, in feet, and the number of stories of a building shall be determined based on the type of construction, occupancy classification and whether there is an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the building.

Exception: The building height of one-story aircraft hangars, aircraft paint hangars and buildings used for the manufacturing of aircraft shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system or automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Chapter 9 and is entirely surrounded by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half times the building height.

504.1.1 Unlimited area buildings.

The height of unlimited area buildings shall be designed in accordance with Section 507.

504.1.2 Special provisions.

The special provisions of Section 510 permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable heights of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in Section 510.

504.2 Mixed occupancy.

In a building containing mixed occupancies in accordance with Section 508, no individual occupancy shall exceed the height and number of story limits specified in this section for the applicable occupancies.

504.3 Height in feet.

The maximum height, in feet, of a building shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 504.3.

Exception: Towers, spires, steeples and other roof structures shall be constructed of materials consistent with the required type of construction of the building except where other construction is permitted by Section 1510.2.5. Such structures shall not be used for habitation or storage. The structures shall be unlimited in height where of noncombustible materials and shall not extend more than 20 feet (6096 mm) above the allowable building height where of combustible materials (see Chapter 15 for additional requirements).

TABLE 504.3a

ALLOWABLE BUILDING HEIGHT IN FEET ABOVE GRADE PLANE

OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION	TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
SEE FOOTNOTES	TYPE I	TYPE II	TYPE III	TYPE IV	TYPE V
A	B	A	B	A	B	HT	A	B
A, B, E, F, M, S, U	NSb	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S	UL	180	85	75	85	75	85	70	60
H-1, H-2, H-3, H-5	NSc, d	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S
H-4	NSc, d	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S	UL	180	85	75	85	75	85	70	60
I-1 Condition 1, I-3	NSd, e	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S	UL	180	85	75	85	75	85	70	60
I-1 Condition 2, I-2	NSd, e, f	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S	UL	180	85
I-4	NSd, g	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S	UL	180	85	75	85	75	85	70	60
R	NSd, h	UL	160	65	55	65	55	65	50	40
S13R	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60	60
S	UL	180	85	75	85	75	85	70	60

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

Note: UL = Unlimited; NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; S = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; S13R = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

a.	See Chapters 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b.	See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.

c.	New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d.	The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building height in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building.

e.	New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f.	New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

g.	For new Group I-4 occupancies, see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h.	New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

504.4 Number of stories.

The maximum number of stories above grade plane of a building shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 504.4.

TABLE 504.4a, b

ALLOWABLE NUMBER OF STORIES ABOVE GRADE PLANE

OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION	TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
SEE FOOTNOTES	TYPE I	TYPE II	TYPE III	TYPE IV	TYPE V
A	B	A	B	A	B	HT	A	B
A-1	NS	UL	5	3	2	3	2	3	2	1
S	UL	6	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
A-2	NS	UL	11	3	2	3	2	3	2	1
S	UL	12	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
A-3	NS	UL	11	3	2	3	2	3	2	1
S	UL	12	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
A-4	NS	UL	11	3	2	3	2	3	2	1
S	UL	12	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
A-5	NS	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL
S	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL
B	NS	UL	11	5	3	5	3	5	3	2
S	UL	12	6	4	6	4	6	4	3
E	NS	UL	5	3	2	3	2	3	1	1
S	UL	6	4	3	4	3	4	2	2
F-1	NS	UL	11	4	2	3	2	4	2	1
S	UL	12	5	3	4	3	5	3	2
F-2	NS	UL	11	5	3	4	3	5	3	2
S	UL	12	6	4	5	4	6	4	3
H-1	NSc, d	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	1	NP
S
H-2	NSc, d	UL	3	2	1	2	1	2	1	1
S
H-3	NSc, d	UL	6	4	2	4	2	4	2	1
S
H-4	NSc, d	UL	7	5	3	5	3	5	3	2
S	UL	8	6	4	6	4	6	4	3
H-5	NSc, d	4	4	3	3	3	3	3	3	2
S
I-1 Condition 1	NSd, e	UL	9	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
S	UL	10	5	4	5	4	5	4	3
I-1 Condition 2	NSd, e	UL	9	4	3	4	3	4	3	2
S	UL	10	5
I-2	NSd, f	UL	4	2	1	1	NP	1	1	NP
S	UL	5	3
I-3	NSd, e	UL	4	2	1	2	1	2	2	1
S	UL	5	3	2	3	2	3	3	2
I-4	NSd, g	UL	5	3	2	3	2	3	1	1
S	UL	6	4	3	4	3	4	2	2
M	NS	UL	11	4	2	4	2	4	3	1
S	UL	12	5	3	5	3	5	4	2
R-1	NSd, h	UL	11	4	4	4	4	4	3	2
S13R	4	4	4	3
S	UL	12	5	5	5	5	5	4	3
R-2	NSd, h	UL	11	4	4	4	4	4	3	2
S13R	4	4	4	4	3
S	UL	12	5	5	5	5	5	4	3
R-3	NSd, h	UL	11	4	4	4	4	4	3	3
S13R	4	4	4	4
S	UL	12	5	5	5	5	5	4	4
R-4	NSd, h	UL	11	4	4	4	4	4	3	2
S13R	4	4	4	3
S	UL	12	5	5	5	5	5	4	3
S-1	NS	UL	11	4	2	3	2	5	3	1
S	UL	12	5	3	4	3	6	4	2
S-2	NS	UL	11	5	3	4	3	5	4	2
S	UL	12	6	4	5	4	6	5	3
U	NS	UL	5	4	2	3	2	4	2	1
S	UL	6	5	3	4	3	5	3	2

Note: UL = Unlimited; NP = Not Permitted; NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; S = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; S13R = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

a.	See Chapters 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b.	See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.

c.	New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d.	The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building height in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building.

e.	New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies, Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f.	New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

g.	For new Group I-4 occupancies, see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h.	New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

SECTION 505
MEZZANINES AND EQUIPMENT PLATFORMS
505.1 General.

Mezzanines shall comply with Section 505.2. Equipment platforms shall comply with Section 505.3.

505.2 Mezzanines.

A mezzanine or mezzanines in compliance with Section 505.2 shall be considered a portion of the story below. Such mezzanines shall not contribute to either the building area or number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the mezzanine shall be included in determining the fire area. The clear height above and below the mezzanine floor construction shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

505.2.1 Area limitation.

The aggregate area of a mezzanine or mezzanines within a room shall be not greater than one-third of the floor area of that room or space in which they are located. The enclosed portion of a room shall not be included in a determination of the floor area of the room in which the mezzanine is located. In determining the allowable mezzanine area, the area of the mezzanine shall not be included in the floor area of the room.

Where a room contains both a mezzanine and an equipment platform, the aggregate area of the two raised floor levels shall be not greater than two-thirds of the floor area of that room or space in which they are located.

Exceptions:

1.	The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and structures of Type I or II construction for special industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1 shall be not greater than two-thirds of the floor area of the room.

2.	The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and structures of Type I or II construction shall be not greater than one-half of the floor area of the room in buildings and structures equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and an approved emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

3.	In sprinklered Group S2 occupancies of Type III construction, the enclosed and unenclosed areas under mezzanines shall be allowed to be included when calculating the permissible size of mezzanines.

505.2.2 Means of egress.

The means of egress for mezzanines shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 10.

505.2.3 Openness.

A mezzanine shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which such mezzanine is located except for walls not more than 42 inches (1067 mm) in height, columns and posts.

Exceptions:

1.	Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the occupant load of the aggregate area of the enclosed space is not greater than 10.

2.	A mezzanine having two or more exits or access to exits is not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located.

3.	Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the aggregate floor area of the enclosed space is not greater than 10 percent of the mezzanine area.

4.	In industrial facilities, mezzanines used for control equipment are permitted to be glazed on all sides.

5.	In occupancies other than Groups H and I, that are no more than two stories above grade plane and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, a mezzanine having two or more means of egress shall not be required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located.

505.3 Equipment platforms.

Equipment platforms in buildings shall not be considered as a portion of the floor below. Such equipment platforms shall not contribute to either the building area or the number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the equipment platform shall not be included in determining the fire area in accordance with Section 903. Equipment platforms shall not be a part of any mezzanine and such platforms and the walkways, stairways, alternating tread devices and ladders providing access to an equipment platform shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from the building.

505.3.1 Area limitation.

The aggregate area of all equipment platforms within a room shall be not greater than two-thirds of the area of the room in which they are located. Where an equipment platform is located in the same room as a mezzanine, the area of the mezzanine shall be determined by Section 505.2.1 and the combined aggregate area of the equipment platforms and mezzanines shall be not greater than two-thirds of the room in which they are located.

505.3.2 Automatic sprinkler system.

Where located in a building that is required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system, equipment platforms shall be fully protected by sprinklers above and below the platform, where required by the standards referenced in Section 903.3.

505.3.3 Guards.

Equipment platforms shall have guards where required by Section 1015.2.

SECTION 506
BUILDING AREA
506.1 General.

The floor area of a building shall be determined based on the type of construction, occupancy classification, whether there is an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the building and the amount of building frontage on public way or open space.

506.1.1 Unlimited area buildings.

Unlimited area buildings shall be designed in accordance with Section 507.

506.1.2 Special provisions.

The special provisions of Section 510 permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable areas of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in Section 510.

506.1.3 Basements.

Basements need not be included in the total allowable floor area of a building provided the total area of such basements does not exceed the area permitted for a one-story above grade plane building.

506.2 Allowable area determination.

The allowable area of a building shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 506.2.1 through 506.2.4 and Section 506.3.

TABLE 506.2a, b

ALLOWABLE AREA FACTOR (At = NS, S1, S13R, or SM, as applicable) IN SQUARE FEET

OCCUPANCY
CLASSIFICATION
	SEE FOOTNOTES	TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION
TYPE I	TYPE II	TYPE III	TYPE IV	TYPE V
A	B	A	B	A	B	HT	A	B
A-1	NS	UL	UL	15,500	8,500	14,000	8,500	15,000	11,500	5,500
S1	UL	UL	62,000	34,000	56,000	34,000	60,000	46,000	22,000
SM	UL	UL	46,500	25,500	42,000	25,500	45,000	34,500	16,500
A-2	NS	UL	UL	15,500	9,500	14,000	9,500	15,000	11,500	6,000
S1	UL	UL	62,000	38,000	56,000	38,000	60,000	46,000	24,000
SM	UL	UL	46,500	28,500	42,000	28,500	45,000	34,500	18,000
A-3	NS	UL	UL	15,500	9,500	14,000	9,500	15,000	11,500	6,000
S1	UL	UL	62,000	38,000	56,000	38,000	60,000	46,000	24,000
SM	UL	UL	46,500	28,500	42,000	28,500	45,000	34,500	18,000
A-4	NS	UL	UL	15,500	9,500	14,000	9,500	15,000	11,500	6,000
S1	UL	UL	62,000	38,000	56,000	38,000	60,000	46,000	24,000
SM	UL	UL	46,500	28,500	42,000	28,500	45,000	34,500	18,000
A-5	NS	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL
S1
SM
B	NS	UL	UL	37,500	23,000	28,500	19,000	36,000	18,000	9,000
S1	UL	UL	150,000	92,000	114,000	76,000	144,000	72,000	36,000
SM	UL	UL	112,500	69,000	85,500	57,000	108,000	54,000	27,000
E	NS	UL	UL	26,500	14,500	23,500	14,500	25,500	18,500	9,500
S1	UL	UL	106,000	58,000	94,000	58,000	102,000	74,000	38,000
SM	UL	UL	79,500	43,500	70,500	43,500	76,500	55,500	28,500
F-1	NS	UL	UL	25,000	15,500	19,000	12,000	33,500	14,000	8,500
S1	UL	UL	100,000	62,000	76,000	48,000	134,000	56,000	34,000
SM	UL	UL	75,000	46,500	57,000	36,000	100,500	42,000	25,500
F-2	NS	UL	UL	37,500	23,000	28,500	18,000	50,500	21,000	13,000
S1	UL	UL	150,000	92,000	114,000	72,000	202,000	84,000	52,000
SM	UL	UL	112,500	69,000	85,500	54,000	151,500	63,000	39,000
H-1	NSc	21,000	16,500	11,000	7,000	9.500	7,000	10,500	7,500	NP
S1
H-2	NSc	21,000	16,500	11,000	7,000	9.500	7,000	10,500	7,500	3,000
S1
SM
H-3	NSc	UL	60,000	26,500	14,000	17,500	13,000	25,500	10,000	5,000
S1
SM
H-4	NSc, d	UL	UL	37,500	17,500	28,500	17,500	36,000	18,000	6,500
S1	UL	UL	150,000	70,000	114,000	70,000	144,000	72,000	26,000
SM	UL	UL	112,500	52,500	85,500	52,500	108,000	54,000	19,500
H-5	NSc, d	UL	UL	37,500	23,000	28,500	19,000	36,000	18,000	9,000
S1	UL	UL	150,000	92,000	114,000	76,000	144,000	72,000	36,000
SM	UL	UL	112,500	69,000	85,500	57,000	108000	54,000	27,000
I-1	NSd, e	UL	55,000	19,000	10,000	16,500	10,000	18,000	10,500	4,500
S1	UL	220,000	76,000	40,000	66,000	40,000	72,000	42,000	18,000
SM	UL	165,000	57,000	30,000	49,500	30,000	54,000	31,500	13,500
I-2	NSd, f	UL	UL	15,000	11,000	12,000	NP	12,000	9,500	NP
S1	UL	UL	60,000	44,000	48,000	NP	48,000	38,000	NP
SM	UL	UL	45,000	33,000	36,000	NP	36,000	28,500	NP
I-3	NSd, e	UL	UL	15,000	10,000	10,500	7,500	12,000	7,500	5,000
S1	UL	UL	60,000	40,000	42,000	30,000	48,000	30,000	20,000
SM	UL	UL	45,000	30,000	31,500	22,500	36,000	22,500	15,000
I-4	NSd, g	UL	60.500	26,500	13,000	23,500	13,000	25,500	18,500	9,000
S1	UL	121,000	106,000	52,000	94,000	52,000	102,000	74,000	36,000
SM	UL	181,500	79,500	39,000	70,500	39,000	76,500	55,500	27,000
M	NS	UL	UL	21,500	12,500	18,500	12,500	20,500	14,000	9,000
S1	UL	UL	86,000	50,000	74,000	50,000	82,000	56,000	36,000
SM	UL	UL	64,500	37,500	55,500	37,500	61,500	42,000	27,000
R-1	NSd, h	UL	UL	24,000	16,000	24,000	16,000	20,500	12,000	7,000
S13R
S1	UL	UL	96,000	64,000	96,000	64,000	82,000	48,000	28,000
SM	UL	UL	72,000	48,000	72,000	48,000	61,500	36,000	21,000
R-2	NSd, h	UL	UL	24,000	16,000	24,000	16,000	20,500	12,000	7,000
S13R
S1	UL	UL	96,000	64,000	96,000	64,000	82,000	48,000	28,000
SM	UL	UL	72,000	48,000	72,000	48,000	61,500	36,000	21,000
R-3	NSd, h	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL	UL
S13R
S1
SM
R-4	NSd, h	UL	UL	24,000	16,000	24,000	16,000	20,500	12,000	7,000
S13R
S1	UL	UL	96,000	64,000	96,000	64,000	82,000	48,000	28,000
SM	UL	UL	72,000	48,000	72,000	48,000	61,500	36,000	21,000
S-1	NS	UL	48,000	26,000	17,500	26,000	17,500	25,500	14,000	9,000
S1	UL	192,000	104,000	70,000	104,000	70,000	102,000	56,000	36,000
SM	UL	144,000	78,000	52,500	78,000	52,500	76,500	42,000	27,000
S-2	NS	UL	79,000	39,000	26,000	39,000	26,000	38,500	21,000	13,500
S1	UL	316,000	156,000	104,000	156,000	104,000	154,000	84,000	54,000
SM	UL	237,000	117,000	78,000	117,000	78,000	115,500	63,000	40,500
U	NS	UL	35,500	19,000	8,500	14,000	8,500	18,000	9,000	5,500
S1	UL	142,000	76,000	34,000	56,000	34,000	72,000	36,000	22,000
SM	UL	106,500	57,000	25,500	42,000	25,500	54,000	27,000	16,500

Note: UL = Unlimited; NP = Not permitted;

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; S1 = Buildings a maximum of one story above grade plane equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; SM = Buildings two or more stories above grade plane equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; S13R = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

a.	See Chapters 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b.	See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.

c.	New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d.	The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building area in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building.

e.	New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies, Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f.	New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

g.	New Group I-4 occupancies see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h.	New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

506.2.1 Single-occupancy, one-story buildings.

The allowable area of a single-occupancy building with no more than one story above grade plane shall be determined in accordance with Equation 5-1:

(Equation 5-1)

where:

Aa = Allowable area (square feet).

At = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S1, or S13R value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.

NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for nonsprinklered building (regardless of whether the building is sprinklered).

If = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

506.2.2 Mixed-occupancy, one-story buildings.

The allowable area of a mixed-occupancy building with no more than one story above grade plane shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 508.1 based on Equation 5-1 for each applicable occupancy.

506.2.2.1 Group H-2 or H-3 mixed occupancies.

For a building containing Group H-2 or H-3 occupancies, the allowable area shall be determined in accordance with Section 508.4.2, with the automatic sprinkler system increase applicable only to the portions of the building not classified as Group H-2 or H-3.

506.2.3 Single-occupancy, multistory buildings.

The allowable area of a single-occupancy building with more than one story above grade plane shall be determined in accordance with Equation 5-2:

(Equation 5-2)

where:

Aa = Allowable area (square feet).

At = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S13R or SM value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.

NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for a nonsprinklered building (regardless of whether the building is sprinklered).

If = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

Sa = Actual number of building stories above grade plane, not to exceed three. For buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, use the actual number of building stories above grade plane, not to exceed four.

No individual story shall exceed the allowable area (Aa) as determined by Equation 5-2 using the value of Sa = 1.

506.2.4 Mixed-occupancy, multistory buildings.

Each story of a mixed-occupancy building with more than one story above grade plane shall individually comply with the applicable requirements of Section 508.1. For buildings with more than three stories above grade plane, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by the allowable area of such stories, determined in accordance with Equation 5-3 based on the applicable provisions of Section 508.1, shall not exceed three.

(Equation 5-3)

where:

Aa = Allowable area (square feet).

At = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S13R or SM value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.

NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for a nonsprinklered building (regardless of whether the building is sprinklered).

If = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

Exception: For buildings designed as separated occupancies under Section 508.4 and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by the allowable area of such stories determined in accordance with Equation 5-3 based on the applicable provisions of Section 508.1, shall not exceed four.

506.2.4.1 Group H-2 or H-3 mixed occupancies.

For a building containing Group H-2 or H-3 occupancies, the allowable area shall be determined in accordance with Section 508.4.2, with the sprinkler system increase applicable only to the portions of the building not classified as Group H-2 or H-3.

506.3 Frontage increase.

Every building shall adjoin or have access to a public way to receive an area factor increase based on frontage. Area factor increase shall be determined in accordance with Sections 506.3.1 through 506.3.3.

506.3.1 Minimum percentage of perimeter.

To qualify for an area factor increase based on frontage, a building shall have not less than 25 percent of its perimeter on a public way or open space. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane.

506.3.2 Minimum frontage distance.

To qualify for an area factor increase based on frontage, the public way or open space adjacent to the building perimeter shall have a minimum distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) measured at right angles from the building face to any of the following:

1.	The closest interior lot line.

2.	The entire width of a street, alley or public way.

3.	The exterior face of an adjacent building on the same property.

The frontage increase shall be based on the smallest public way or open space that is 20 feet (6096 mm) or greater, and the percentage of building perimeter having a minimum 20 feet (6096 mm) public way or open space.

506.3.3 Amount of increase.

The area factor increase based on frontage shall be determined in accordance with Table 506.3.3.

TABLE 506.3.3

FRONTAGE INCREASE FACTORa

	OPEN SPACE
Percentage (%) of
Perimeter
	0 to less
than 20 feet
	20 to less
than 25 feet
	25 to less
than 30 feet
	30 feet or
greater

0 to less than 25	0	0	0	0
25 to less than 50	0	0.17	0.21	0.25
50 to less than 75	0	0.33	0.42	0.50
75 to 100	0	0.5	0.63	0.75

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Interpolation is permitted.

506.3.3.1 Section 507 Buildings.

Where a building meets the requirements of Section 507, as applicable, except for compliance with the minimum 60-foot (18 288 mm) public way or yard requirement, the area factor increase based on frontage shall be determined in accordance with Table 506.3.3.1.

TABLE 506.3.3.1

SECTION 507 BUILDINGSa

	OPEN SPACE
Percentage (%) of
Perimeter
	30 to less than
35 feet
	35 to less than
40 feet
	40 feet to less than
45 feet
	45 feet to less than
50 feet
	50 feet to less than
55 feet
	55 feet to less than
60 feet

0 to less than 25	0	0	0	0	0	0
25 to less than 50	0.29	0.33	0.38	0.42	0.46	0.5
50 to less than 75	0.58	0.67	0.75	0.83	0.92	1.00
75 to 100	0.88	1.00	1.13	1.25	1.38	1.5

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Interpolation is permitted.

SECTION 507
UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS
507.1 General.

The area of buildings of the occupancies and configurations specified in Sections 507.1 through 507.12 shall not be limited. Basements not more than one story below grade plane shall be permitted.

507.1.1 Accessory occupancies.

Accessory occupancies shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings in accordance with the provisions of Section 508.2, otherwise the requirements of Sections 507.3 through 507.13 shall be applied, where applicable.

507.2 Measurement of open spaces.

Where Sections 507.3 through 507.13 require buildings to be surrounded and adjoined by public ways and yards, those open spaces shall be determined as follows:

1.	Yards shall be measured from the building perimeter in all directions to the closest interior lot lines or to the exterior face of an opposing building located on the same lot, as applicable.

2	Where the building fronts on a public way, the entire width of the public way shall be used.

507.2.1 Reduced open space.

The public ways or yards of 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width required in Sections 507.3, 507.4, 507.5, 507.6 and 507.12 shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in width provided all of the following requirements are met:

1.	The reduced width shall not be allowed for more than 75 percent of the perimeter of the building.

2.	The exterior walls facing the reduced width shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours.

3.	Openings in the exterior walls facing the reduced width shall have opening protectives with a fire protection rating of not less than 3 hours.

507.3 Nonsprinklered, one-story buildings.

The area of a Group F-2 or S-2 building no more than one story in height shall not be limited where the building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.4 Sprinklered, one-story buildings.

The area of a Group A-4 building no more than one story above grade plane of other than Type V construction, or the area of a Group B, F, M or S building no more than one story above grade plane of any construction type, shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings and structures of Type I or II construction for rack storage facilities that do not have access by the public shall not be limited in height, provided that such buildings conform to the requirements of Sections 507.4 and 903.3.1.1 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

2.	The automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in areas occupied for indoor participant sports, such as tennis, skating, swimming and equestrian activities in occupancies in Group A-4, provided that both of the following criteria are met:

2.1.	Exit doors directly to the outside are provided for occupants of the participant sports areas.

2.2.	The building is equipped with a fire alarm system with manual fire alarm boxes installed in accordance with Section 907.

507.4.1 Mixed occupancy buildings with Groups A-1 and A-2.

Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies of other than Type V construction shall be permitted within mixed occupancy buildings of unlimited area complying with Section 507.4, provided all of the following criteria are met:

1.	Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies are separated from other occupancies as required for separated occupancies in Section 508.4.4 with no reduction allowed in the fire-resistance rating of the separation based upon the installation of an automatic sprinkler system.

2.	Each area of the portions of the building used for Group A-1 or A-2 occupancies shall not exceed the maximum allowable area permitted for such occupancies in Section 503.1.

3.	Exit doors from Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies shall discharge directly to the exterior of the building.

507.5 Two-story buildings.

The area of a Group B, F, M or S building no more than two stories above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.6 Group A-3 buildings of Type II construction.

The area of a Group A-3 building no more than one story above grade plane, used as a place of religious worship, community hall, dance hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor swimming pool or tennis court of Type II construction, shall not be limited provided all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.

2.	The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.7 Group A-3 buildings of Type III and IV construction.

The area of a Group A-3 building of Type III or IV construction, with no more than one story above grade plane and used as a place of religious worship, community hall, dance hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor swimming pool or tennis court, shall not be limited provided all of the following criteria are met:

1.	The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.

2.	The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	The assembly floor shall be located at or within 21 inches (533 mm) of street or grade level and all exits are provided with ramps complying with Section 1012 to the street or grade level.

4.	The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.8 Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies.

Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings containing Group F or S occupancies in accordance with Sections 507.4 and 507.5 and the provisions of Sections 507.8.1 through 507.8.4.

507.8.1 Allowable area.

The aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies located in an unlimited area building shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the building or the area limitations for the Group H occupancies as specified in Section 506 based on the perimeter of each Group H floor area that fronts on a public way or open space.

507.8.1.1 Located within the building.

The aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies not located at the perimeter of the building shall not exceed 25 percent of the area limitations for the Group H occupancies as specified in Section 506.

507.8.1.1.1 Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems.

Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems having a floor area of not more than 500 square feet (46.5 m2) need not be located on the outer perimeter of the building where they are in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 30.

507.8.1.1.2 Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems.

Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems having a floor area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) need not be located on the outer perimeter where they are in accordance with the FloridaFire Prevention Code and NFPA 30.

507.8.1.1.3 Spray paint booths.

Spray paint booths that comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code need not be located on the outer perimeter.

507.8.2 Located on building perimeter.

Except as provided for in Section 507.8.1.1, Group H occupancies shall be located on the perimeter of the building. In Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies, not less than 25 percent of the perimeter of such occupancies shall be an exterior wall.

507.8.3 Occupancy separations.

Group H occupancies shall be separated from the remainder of the unlimited area building and from each other in accordance with Table 508.4.

507.8.4 Height limitations.

For two-story, unlimited area buildings, Group H occupancies shall not be located more than one story above grade plane unless permitted based on the allowable height and number of stories and feet as specified in Section 504 based on the type of construction of the unlimited area building.

507.9 Unlimited mixed occupancy buildings with Group H-5.

The area of a Group B, F, H-5, M or S building no more than two stories above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width, provided all of the following criteria are met:

1.	Buildings containing Group H-5 occupancy shall be of Type I or II construction.

2.	Each area used for Group H-5 occupancy shall be separated from other occupancies as required in Sections 415.11 and 508.4.

3.	Each area used for Group H-5 occupancy shall not exceed the maximum allowable area permitted for such occupancies in Section 503.1 including modifications of Section 506.

Exception: Where the Group H-5 occupancy exceeds the maximum allowable area, the Group H-5 shall be subdivided into areas that are separated by 2-hour fire barriers.

507.10 Aircraft paint hangar.

The area of a Group H-2 aircraft paint hangar no more than one story above grade plane shall not be limited where such aircraft paint hangar complies with the provisions of Section 412.6 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half times the building height.

507.11 Group E buildings.

The area of a Group E building no more than one story above grade plane, of Type II, IIIA or IV construction, shall not be limited provided all of the following criteria are met:

1.	Each classroom shall have not less than two means of egress, with one of the means of egress being a direct exit to the outside of the building complying with Section 1022 or the building is provided with smoke barriers having a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating dividing the building into areas not to exceed 30,000 square feet (2787 m2) in floor area.

2.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	The building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.12 Motion picture theaters.

In buildings of Type II construction, the area of a motion picture theater located on the first story above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in width.

507.13 Covered and open mall buildings and anchor buildings.

The area of covered and open mall buildings and anchor buildings not exceeding three stories in height that comply with Section 402 shall not be limited.

SECTION 508
MIXED USE AND OCCUPANCY
508.1 General.

Each portion of a building shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Where a building contains more than one occupancy group, the building or portion thereof shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 508.2, 508.3, 508.4, or 508.5 or a combination of these sections.

Exceptions:

1.	Occupancies separated in accordance with Section 510.

2.	Where required by Table 415.6.5, areas of Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be located in a detached building or structure.

508.2 Accessory occupancies.

Accessory occupancies are those occupancies that are ancillary to the main occupancy of the building or portion thereof. Accessory occupancies shall comply with the provisions of Sections 508.2.1 through 508.2.4.

508.2.1 Occupancy classification.

Accessory occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy classification of that space.

508.2.2 Allowable building height.

The allowable height and number of stories of the building containing accessory occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 504 for the main occupancy of the building.

508.2.3 Allowable building area.

The allowable area of the building shall be based on the applicable provisions of Section 506 for the main occupancy of the building. Aggregate accessory occupancies shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the floor area of the story in which they are located and shall not exceed the tabular values for nonsprinklered buildings in Table 506.2 for each such accessory occupancy.

508.2.4 Separation of occupancies.

No separation is required between accessory occupancies and the main occupancy.

Exceptions:

1.	Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be separated from all other occupancies in accordance with Section 508.4.

2.	Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and sleeping units shall be separated from other dwelling or sleeping units and from accessory occupancies contiguous to them in accordance with the requirements of Section 420.

508.3 Nonseparated occupancies.

Buildings or portions of buildings that comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered as nonseparated occupancies.

508.3.1 Occupancy classification.

Nonseparated occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy classification of that space. In addition, the most restrictive provisions of Chapter 9 that apply to the nonseparated occupancies shall apply to the total nonseparated occupancy area. Where nonseparated occupancies occur in a high-rise building, the most restrictive requirements of Section 403 that apply to the nonseparated occupancies shall apply throughout the high-rise building.

508.3.2 Allowable building area and height.

The allowable building area and height of the building or portion thereof shall be based on the most restrictive allowances for the occupancy groups under consideration for the type of construction of the building in accordance with Section 503.1.

508.3.3 Separation.

No separation is required between nonseparated occupancies.

Exceptions:

1.	Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be separated from all other occupancies in accordance with Section 508.4.

2.	Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and sleeping units shall be separated from other dwelling or sleeping units and from other occupancies contiguous to them in accordance with the requirements of Section 420.

508.4 Separated occupancies.

Buildings or portions of buildings that comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered as separated occupancies.

TABLE 508.4

REQUIRED SEPARATION OF OCCUPANCIES (HOURS)

OCCUPANCY	A, E	I-1a, I-3, I-4	I-2	Ra	F-2, S-2b, U	Be, F-1, M,
S-1
	H-1	H-2	H-3, H-4	H-5
S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS	S	NS
A, E	N	N	1	2	2	NP	1	2	N	1	1	2	NP	NP	3	4	2	3	2	NP
I-1a, I-3, I-4	—	—	N	N	2	NP	1	NP	1	2	1	2	NP	NP	3	NP	2	NP	2	NP
I-2	—	—	—	—	N	N	2	NP	2	NP	2	NP	NP	NP	3	NP	2	NP	2	NP
Ra	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	N	1c	2c	1	2	NP	NP	3	NP	2	NP	2	NP
F-2, S-2b, U	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	N	1	2	NP	NP	3	4	2	3	2	NP
Be, F-1, M, S-1	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	N	NP	NP	2	3	1	2	1	NP
H-1	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP
H-2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	NP	1	NP	1	NP
H-3, H-4	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	1d	NP	1	NP
H-5	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	N	NP

S = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

N = No separation requirement.

NP = Not permitted.

a	See Section 420.

b.	The required separation from areas used only for private or pleasure vehicles shall be reduced by 1 hour but not to less than 1 hour.

c.See Sections 406.3.2 and 406.6.4.

d.	Separation is not required between occupancies of the same classification.

e.	See Section 422.2 for ambulatory care facilities.

508.4.1 Occupancy classification.

Separated occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Each separated space shall comply with this code based on the occupancy classification of that portion of the building.

508.4.2 Allowable building area.

In each story, the building area shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual building area of each separated occupancy divided by the allowable building area of each separated occupancy shall not exceed 1.

508.4.3 Allowable height.

Each separated occupancy shall comply with the building height limitations based on the type of construction of the building in accordance with Section 503.1.

Exception: Special provisions of Section 510 shall permit occupancies at building heights other than provided in Section 503.1.

508.4.4 Separation.

Individual occupancies shall be separated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with Table 508.4.

508.4.4.1 Construction.

Required separations shall be fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, so as to completely separate adjacent occupancies.

508.5 Live/work units.

A live/work unit shall comply with Sections 508.5 through 508.5.11.

Exception: Dwelling or sleeping units that include an office that is less than 10 percent of the area of the dwelling unit are permitted to be classified as dwelling units with accessory occupancies in accordance with Section 508.2.

508.5.1 Limitations.

The following shall apply to all live/work areas:

1.	The live/work unit is permitted to be not greater than 3,000 square feet (279 m2) in area.

2.	The nonresidential area is permitted to be not more than 50 percent of the area of each live/work unit.

3.	The nonresidential area function shall be limited to the first or main floor only of the live/work unit.

4.	Not more than five nonresidential workers or employees are allowed to occupy the nonresidential area at any one time.

508.5.2 Occupancies.

Live/work units shall be classified as a Group R-2 occupancy. Separation requirements found in Sections 420 and 508 shall not apply within the live/work unit where the live/work unit is in compliance with Section 508.5. Nonresidential uses that would otherwise be classified as either a Group H or S occupancy shall not be permitted in a live/work unit.

Exception: Storage shall be permitted in the live/work unit provided that the aggregate area of storage in the nonresidential portion of the live/work unit shall be limited to 10 percent of the space dedicated to nonresidential activities.

508.5.3 Means of egress.

Except as modified by this section, the means of egress components for a live/work unit shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 10 for the function served.

508.5.4 Egress capacity.

The egress capacity for each element of the live/work unit shall be based on the occupant load for the function served in accordance with Table 1004.5.

508.5.5 Spiral stairways.

Spiral stairways that conform to the requirements of Section 1011.10 shall be permitted.

508.5.6 Vertical openings.

Floor openings between floor levels of a live/work unit are permitted without enclosure.

508.5.7 Fire protection.

The live/work unit shall be provided with a monitored fire alarm system where required by Section 907.2.9 and an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

508.5.8 Structural.

Floors within a live/work unit shall be designed for the live loads in Table 1607.1, based on the function within the space.

508.5.9 Accessibility.

Accessibility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 11 for the function served.

508.5.10 Ventilation.

The applicable ventilation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical shall apply to each area within the live/work unit for the function within that space.

508.5.11 Plumbing facilities.

The nonresidential area of the live/work unit shall be provided with minimum plumbing facilities as specified by Chapter 29, based on the function of the nonresidential area. Where the nonresidential area of the live/work unit is required to be accessible by the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, the plumbing fixtures specified by Chapter 29 shall be accessible.

SECTION 509
INCIDENTAL USES
509.1 General.

Incidental uses located within single occupancy or mixed occupancy buildings shall comply with the provisions of this section. Incidental uses are ancillary functions associated with a given occupancy that generally pose a greater level of risk to that occupancy and are limited to those uses listed in Table 509.1.

Exception: Incidental uses within and serving a dwelling unit are not required to comply with this section.

TABLE 509.1 INCIDENTAL USES

ROOM OR AREA	SEPARATION AND/OR PROTECTION
Furnace room where any piece of equipment is over 400,000 Btu per
hour input
	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
Rooms with boilers where the largest piece of equipment is over 15
psi and 10 horsepower
	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
Refrigerant machinery room	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
Hydrogen fuel gas rooms, not classified as Group H	1 hour in Group B, F, M, S and U occupancies; 2 hours in Group A, E,
I and R occupancies.

Incinerator rooms	2 hours and provide automatic sprinkler system
Paint shops, not classified as Group H, located in occupancies other
than Group F
	2 hours; or 1 hour and provide automatic sprinkler system
In Group E occupancies, laboratories and vocational shops not
classified as Group H
	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
In Group I-2 occupancies, laboratories not classified as Group H	1 hour and provide automatic sprinkler system
In ambulatory care facilities, laboratories not classified as Group H	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
Laundry rooms over 100 square feet	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
In Group I-2, laundry rooms over 100 square feet	1 hour
Group I-3 cells and Group I-2 patient rooms equipped with padded
surfaces
	1 hour
In Group I-2, physical plant maintenance shops	1 hour
In ambulatory care facilities or Group I-2 occupancies, waste and linen collection
rooms with containers that have an aggregate volume of 10 cubic feet or greater
	1 hour
In other than ambulatory care facilities and Group I-2 occupancies,
waste and linen collection rooms over 100 square feet
	1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler system
In ambulatory care facilities or Group I-2 occupancies, storage rooms
greater than 100 square feet
	1 hour
Stationary storage battery systems having an energy capacity greater than the
threshold quantity specified in the Florida Fire Prevention Code
	1 hour in Group B, F, M, S and U occupancies; 2 hours in
Group A, E, I and R occupancies.

Electrical installations and transformers	See Sections 110.26 through 110.34 and Sections 450.8
through 450.48 of NFPA 70 for protection and separation
requirements.

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square inch (psi) = 6.9 kPa, 1 British thermal unit (Btu) per hour = 0.293 watts,

1 horsepower = 746 watts, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3.

509.2 Occupancy classification.

Incidental uses shall not be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Incidental uses shall be included in the building occupancies within which they are located.

509.3 Area limitations.

Incidental uses shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the building area of the story in which they are located.

509.4 Separation and protection.

The incidental uses listed in Table 509.1 shall be separated from the remainder of the building or equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, or both, in accordance with the provisions of that table.

509.4.1 Separation.

Where Table 509.1 specifies a fire-resistance-rated separation, the incidental uses shall be separated from the remainder of the building by a fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Construction supporting 1-hour fire barriers or horizontal assemblies used for incidental use separations in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction is not required to be fire-resistance rated unless required by other sections of this code.

509.4.2 Protection.

Where Table 509.1 permits an automatic sprinkler system without a fire barrier, the incidental uses shall be separated from the remainder of the building by construction capable of resisting the passage of smoke. The walls shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor assembly below to the underside of the ceiling that is a component of a fire-resistance-rated floor assembly or roof assembly above or to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above. Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing upon detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4. Doors shall not have air transfer openings and shall not be undercut in excess of the clearance permitted in accordance with NFPA 80. Walls surrounding the incidental use shall not have air transfer openings unless provided with smoke dampers in accordance with Section 710.8.

509.4.2.1 Protection limitation.

Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided in accordance with Table 509.1, only the space occupied by the incidental use need be equipped with such a system.

SECTION 510
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
510.1 General.

The provisions in Sections 510.2 through 510.9 shall permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable building heights and areas of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in this section for such condition and other applicable requirements of this code. The provisions of Sections 510.2 through 510.8 are to be considered independent and separate from each other.

510.2 Horizontal building separation allowance.

A building shall be considered as separate and distinct buildings for the purpose of determining area limitations, continuity of fire walls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours.

2.	The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type IA construction.

3.	Shaft, stairway, ramp and escalator enclosures through the horizontal assembly shall have not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with Section 716.

Exception: Where the enclosure walls below the horizontal assembly have not less than a 3-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with Section 716, the enclosure walls extending above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, provided:

1.	The building above the horizontal assembly is not required to be of Type I construction;

2.	The enclosure connects fewer than four stories; and

3.	The enclosure opening protectives above the horizontal assembly have a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour.

4.	The building or buildings above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have multiple Group A occupancy uses, each with an occupant load of less than 300, or Group B, M, R or S occupancies.

5.	The building below the horizontal assembly shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and shall be permitted to be any occupancy allowed by this code except Group H.

6.	The maximum building height in feet (mm) shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 504.3 for the building having the smaller allowable height as measured from the grade plane.

510.3 Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with Group S-2 open parking garage above.

A Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with not more than one story above grade plane and located below a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be classified as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of determining the type of construction where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The allowable area of the building shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual area divided by the allowable area for each separate occupancy shall not exceed 1.

2.	The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is of Type I or II construction and is at least equal to the fire-resistance requirements of the Group S-2 open parking garage.

3.	The height and the number of tiers of the Group S-2 open parking garage shall be limited as specified in Table 406.5.4.

4.	The floor assembly separating the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage shall be protected as required for the floor assembly of the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage. Openings between the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage, except exit openings, shall not be required to be protected.

5.	The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is used exclusively for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles, but shall be permitted to contain an office, waiting room and toilet room having a total area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) and mechanical equipment rooms associated with the operation of the building.

510.4 Parking beneath Group R.

Where a maximum one-story above grade plane Group S-2 parking garage, enclosed or open, or combination thereof, of Type I construction or open of Type IV construction, with grade entrance, is provided under a building of Group R, the number of stories to be used in determining the minimum type of construction shall be measured from the floor above such a parking area. The number of stories to be used in determining the height in stories in accordance with Section 903.2.11.3 shall include the parking garage as a story. The floor assembly between the parking garage and the Group R above shall comply with the type of construction required for the parking garage and shall also provide a fire-resistance rating not less than the mixed occupancy separation required in Section 508.4.

510.5 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIIA construction.

For buildings of Type IIIA construction in Groups R-1 and R-2, the maximum allowable height in Table 504.3 shall be increased by 10 feet and the maximum allowable number of stories in Table 504.4 shall be increased by one where the first floor assembly above the basement has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours and the floor area is subdivided by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire walls into areas of not more than 3,000 square feet (279 m2).

510.6 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIA construction.

The height limitation for buildings of Type IIA construction in Groups R-1 and R-2 shall be increased to nine stories and 100 feet (30 480 mm) where the building is separated by not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from any other building on the lot and from lot lines, the exits are segregated in an area enclosed by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire wall and the first floor assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 11/2 hours.

510.7 Open parking garage beneath Groups A, I, B, M and R.

Open parking garages constructed under Groups A, I, B, M and R shall not exceed the height and area limitations permitted under Section 406.5. The height and area of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall not exceed the limitations in Section 503 for the upper occupancy. The height, in both feet and stories, of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and shall include both the open parking garage and the portion of the building above the parking garage.

510.7.1 Fire separation.

Fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 between the parking occupancy and the upper occupancy shall correspond to the required fire-resistance rating prescribed in Table 508.4 for the uses involved. The type of construction shall apply to each occupancy individually, except that structural members, including main bracing within the open parking structure, which is necessary to support the upper occupancy, shall be protected with the more restrictive fire-resistance-rated assemblies of the groups involved as shown in Table 601. Means of egress for the upper occupancy shall conform to Chapter 10 and shall be separated from the parking occupancy by fire barriers having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 707 with self-closing doors complying with Section 716 or horizontal assemblies having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 711, with self-closing doors complying with Section 716. Means of egress from the open parking garage shall comply with Section 406.5.

510.8 Group B or M buildings with Group S-2 open parking garage above.

Group B or M occupancies located below a Group S-2 open parking garage of a lesser type of construction shall be considered as a separate and distinct building from the Group S-2 open parking garage for the purpose of determining the type of construction where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

2.	The occupancies in the building below the horizontal assembly are limited to Groups B and M.

3.	The occupancy above the horizontal assembly is limited to a Group S-2 open parking garage.

4.	The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type IA construction.

Exception: The building below the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to be of Type IB or II construction, but not less than the type of construction required for the Group S-2 open parking garage above, where the building below is not greater than one story in height above grade plane.

5.	The height and area of the building below the horizontal assembly does not exceed the limits set forth in Section 503.

6.	The height and area of the Group S-2 open parking garage does not exceed the limits set forth in Section 406.5. The height, in both feet and stories, of the Group S-2 open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and shall include the building below the horizontal assembly.

7.	Exits serving the Group S-2 open parking garage shall discharge at grade with direct and unobstructed access to a street or public way and are separated from the building below the horizontal assembly by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

510.9 Multiple buildings above a horizontal assembly.

Where two or more buildings are provided above the horizontal assembly separating a Group S-2 parking garage or building below from the buildings above in accordance with the special provisions in Section 510.2, 510.3 or 510.8, the buildings above the horizontal assembly shall be regarded as separate and distinct buildings from each other and shall comply with all other provisions of this code as applicable to each separate and distinct building.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-6]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 6
TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION
SECTION 601
GENERAL

TABLE 601 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING ELEMENTS (HOURS)

BUILDING ELEMENT	TYPE I	TYPE II	TYPE III	TYPE IV	TYPE V
A	B	A	B	A	B	HT	A	B
Primary structural framef (see Section 202)	3a, b	2a, b, c	1b, c	0c	1b, c	0	HT	1	0
Bearing walls									
 Exteriore, f	3	2	1	0	2	2	2	1	0
 Interior	3a	2a	1	0	1	0	1/HT	1	0
Nonbearing walls and partitions
 Exterior
	See Table 705.5
Nonbearing walls and partitions
 Interiord
	0	0	0	0	0	0	See
Section 2304.11.2
	0	0
Floor construction and associated secondary members
 (see Section 202)
	2	2	1	0	1	0	HT	1	0
Roof construction and associated secondary members
 (see Section 202)
	11/2b	1b,c	1b,c	0c	1b,c	0	HT	1b,c	0

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Roof supports: Fire-resistance ratings of primary structural frame and bearing walls are permitted to be reduced by 1 hour where supporting a roof only.

b.	Where every part of the roof construction is 20 feet or more above the floor or mezzanine immediately below, fire protection of structural members in roof construction shall not be required, including protection of primary structural frame members, roof framing and decking, except where any of the following conditions apply.

1.	In Group F-1, H, M and S-1 occupancies.

2.	Where the roof is an occupiable space.

Fire-retardant-treated wood members shall be allowed to be used for such unprotected members.

c.	In all occupancies, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11 shall be allowed for roof construction, including primary structural frame members, wherea 1-hour or less fire-resistance rating is required.

d.	Not less than the fire-resistance rating required by other sections of this code.

e.	Not less than the fire-resistance rating based on fire separation distance (see Table 705.5).

f.	Not less than the fire-resistance rating as referenced in Section 704.10.

601.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the classification of buildings as to type of construction.

SECTION 602
CONSTRUCTION CLASSIFICATION
602.1 General.

Buildings and structures erected or to be erected, altered or extended in height or area shall be classified in one of the five construction types defined in Sections 602.2 through 602.5. The building elements shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than that specified in Table 601 and exterior walls shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than that specified in Table 705.5. Where required to have a fire-resistance rating by Table 601, building elements shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 703.2. The protection of openings, ducts and air transfer openings in building elements shall not be required unless required by other provisions of this code.

602.1.1 Minimum requirements.

A building or portion thereof shall not be required to conform to the details of a type of construction higher than that type which meets the minimum requirements based on occupancy even though certain features of such a building actually conform to a higher type of construction.

602.2 Types I and II.

Types I and II construction are those types of construction in which the building elements listed in Table 601 are of noncombustible materials, except as permitted in Section 603 and elsewhere in this code.

602.3 Type III.

Type III construction is that type of construction in which the exterior walls are of noncombustible materials and the interior building elements are of any material permitted by this code. Fire-retardant-treated wood framing complying with Section 2303.2 shall be permitted within exterior wall assemblies of a 2-hour rating or less.

602.4 Type IV.

Type IV construction is that type of construction in which the exterior walls are of noncombustible materials and the interior building elements are of solid wood, laminated wood, heavy timber (HT) or structural composite lumber (SCL) without concealed spaces. The minimum dimensions for permitted materials including solid timber, glued-laminated timber, structural composite lumber (SCL) and cross-laminated timber and details of Type IV construction shall comply with the provisions of this section and Section 2304.11. Exterior walls complying with Section 602.4.1 or 602.4.2 shall be permitted. Interior walls and partitions not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rating or heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11.2.2 shall be permitted.

602.4.1 Fire-retardant-treated wood in exterior walls.

Fire-retardant-treated wood framing and sheathing complying with Section 2303.2 shall be permitted within exterior wall assemblies with a 2-hour rating or less.

602.4.2 Cross-laminated timber in exterior walls.

Cross-laminated timber not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness complying with Section 2303.1.4 shall be permitted within exterior wall assemblies with a 2-hour rating or less. Heavy timber structural members appurtenant to the CLT exterior wall shall meet the requirements of Table 2304.11 and be fire-resistance rated as required for the exterior wall. The exterior surface of the cross-laminated timber and heavy timber elements shall be is protected by one the following:

1.	Fire-retardant-treated wood sheathing complying with Section 2303.2 and not less than 15/32 inch (12 mm) thick;

2.	Gypsum board not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick; or

3.	A noncombustible material.

602.4.3 Exterior structural members.

Where a horizontal separation of 20 feet (6096 mm) or more is provided, wood columns and arches conforming to heavy timber sizes complying with Section 2304.11 shall be permitted to be used externally.

602.5 Type V.

Type V construction is that type of construction in which the structural elements, exterior walls and interior walls are of any materials permitted by this code.

SECTION 603
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL IN
TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION
603.1 Allowable materials.

Combustible materials shall be permitted in buildings of Type I or II construction in the following applications and in accordance with Sections 603.1.1 through 603.1.3:

1.	Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted in:

1.1.	Nonbearing partitions where the required fire-resistance rating is 2 hours or less.

1.2.	Nonbearing exterior walls where fire-resistance-rated construction is not required.

1.3.	Roof construction, including girders, trusses, framing and decking.

Exception: In buildings of Type IA construction exceeding two stories above grade plane, fire-retardant-treated wood is not permitted in roof construction where the vertical distance from the upper floor to the roof is less than 20 feet (6096 mm).

2.	Thermal and acoustical insulation, other than foam plastics, having a flame spread index of not more than 25.

Exceptions:

1.	Insulation placed between two layers of noncombustible materials without an intervening airspace shall be allowed to have a flame spread index of not more than 100.

2.	Insulation installed between a finished floor and solid decking without intervening airspace shall be allowed to have a flame spread index of not more than 200.

3.	Foam plastics in accordance with Chapter 26.

4.	Roof coverings that have an A, B or C classification.

5.	Interior floor finish and floor covering materials installed in accordance with Section 804.

6.	Millwork such as doors, door frames, window sashes and frames.

7.	Interior wall and ceiling finishes installed in accordance with Sections 801 and 803.

8.	Trim installed in accordance with Section 806.

9.	Where not installed greater than 15 feet (4572 mm) above grade, show windows, nailing or furring strips and wooden bulkheads below show windows, including their frames, aprons and show cases.

10.	Finish flooring installed in accordance with Section 805.

11.	Partitions dividing portions of stores, offices or similar places occupied by one tenant only and that do not establish a corridor serving an occupant load of 30 or more shall be permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood, 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or of wood panels or similar light construction up to 6 feet (1829 mm) in height.

12.	Stages and platforms constructed in accordance with Sections 410.3 and 410.4, respectively.

13.	Combustible exterior wall coverings, balconies and similar projections and bay or oriel windows in accordance with Chapter 14.

14.	Blocking such as for handrails, millwork, cabinets and window and door frames.

15.	Light-transmitting plastics as permitted by Chapter 26.

16.	Mastics and caulking materials applied to provide flexible seals between components of exterior wall construction.

17.	Exterior plastic veneer installed in accordance with Section 2605.2.

18.	Nailing or furring strips as permitted by Section 803.13.

19.	Heavy timber as permitted by Note c to Table 601 and Sections 602.4.3 and 1406.3.

20.	Aggregates, component materials and admixtures as permitted by Section 703.2.1.2.

21.	Sprayed fire-resistive materials and intumescent fire-resistive materials, determined on the basis of fire resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

22.	Materials used to protect penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies in accordance with Section 714.

23.	Materials used to protect joints in fire-resistance-rated assemblies in accordance with Section 715.

24.	Materials allowed in the concealed spaces of buildings of Types I and II construction in accordance with Section 718.5.

25.	Materials exposed within plenums complying with Section 602 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

26.	Wall construction of freezers and coolers of less than 1,000 square feet (92.9 m2), in size, lined on both sides with noncombustible materials and the building is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

603.1.1 Ducts.

The use of nonmetallic ducts shall be permitted where installed in accordance with the limitations of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

603.1.2 Piping.

The use of combustible piping materials shall be permitted where installed in accordance with the limitations of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

603.1.3 Electrical.

The use of electrical wiring methods with combustible insulation, tubing, raceways and related components shall be permitted where installed in accordance with the limitations of this code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-7]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 7
FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES
SECTION 701
GENERAL
701.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, systems and assemblies used for structural fire resistance and fire-resistance-rated construction separation of adjacent spaces to safeguard against the spread of fire and smoke within a building and the spread of fire to or from buildings.

701.2 Multiple use fire assemblies.

Fire assemblies that serve multiple purposes in a building shall comply with all of the requirements that are applicable for each of the individual fire assemblies.

SECTION 702
DEFINITIONS
702.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

ANNULAR SPACE.

BUILDING ELEMENT.

CEILING RADIATION DAMPER.

COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER.

CORRIDOR DAMPER.

DAMPER.

DRAFTSTOP

F RATING.

FIRE BARRIER.

FIRE DAMPER.

FIRE DOOR.

FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY.

FIRE PARTITION.

FIRE PROTECTION RATING.

FIRE-RATED GLAZING.

FIRE RESISTANCE.

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING.

FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM.

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE.

FIRE WALL.

FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY.

FIREBLOCKING.

FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY.

HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY.

JOINT.

L RATING.

MEMBRANE PENETRATION.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM.

MINERAL FIBER.

MINERAL WOOL.

PENETRATION FIRESTOP.

SELF-CLOSING.

SHAFT.

SHAFT ENCLOSURE.

SMOKE BARRIER.

SMOKE COMPARTMENT.

SMOKE DAMPER.

SPLICE.

T RATING.

THROUGH PENETRATION.

THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM.

SECTION 703
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS AND FIRE TESTS
703.1 Scope.

Materials prescribed herein for fire resistance shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.

703.2 Fire-resistance ratings.

The fire-resistance of building elements, components or assemblies shall be determined in accordance with Sections 703.2.1 or 703.2.2 without the use of automatic sprinklers or any other fire suppression system being incorporated, or in accordance with Section 703.2.3.

703.2.1 Tested assemblies.

A fire-resistance rating of building elements, components or assemblies shall be determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E119 or UL 263. The fire-resistance rating of penetrations and fire-resistant joint systems shall be determined in accordance Sections 714 and 715, respectively.

703.2.1.1 Nonsymmetrical wall construction.

Interior walls and partitions of nonsymmetrical construction shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Where evidence is furnished to show that the wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side exposed to the furnace, subject to acceptance of the building official, the wall need not be subjected to tests from the opposite side (see Section 705.5 for exterior walls).

703.2.1.2 Combustible components.

Combustible aggregates are permitted in gypsum and Portland cement concrete mixtures for fire-resistance-rated construction. Any component material or admixture is permitted in assemblies if the resulting tested assembly meets the fire-resistance test requirements of this code.

703.2.1.3 Restrained classification.

Fire-resistance-rated assemblies tested under ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not be considered to be restrained unless evidence satisfactory to the building official is furnished by the registered design professional showing that the construction qualifies for a restrained classification in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Restrained construction shall be identified on the construction documents.

703.2.1.4 Supplemental features.

Where materials, systems or devices that have not been tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly are incorporated into the building element, component or assembly, sufficient data shall be made available to the building official to show that the required fire-resistance rating is not reduced.

703.2.1.5 Exterior bearing walls.

In determining the fire-resistance rating of exterior bearing walls, compliance with the ASTM E119 or UL 263 criteria for unexposed surface temperature rise and ignition of cotton waste due to passage of flame or gases is required only for a period of time corresponding to the required fire-resistance rating of an exterior nonbearing wall with the same fire separation distance, and in a building of the same group. Where the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with this exception exceeds the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263, the fire exposure time period, water pressure and application duration criteria for the hose stream test of ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall be based on the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with this section.

703.2.2 Analytical methods.

The fire resistance of building elements, components or assemblies established by an analytical method shall be by any of the methods listed in this section based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria specified in ASTM E119 or UL 263.

1.	Fire-resistance designs documented in approved sources.

2.	Prescriptive designs of fire-resistance-rated building elements, components or assemblies as prescribed in Section 721.

3.	Calculations in accordance with Section 722.

4.	Engineering analysis based on a comparison of building element, component or assemblies designs having fire-resistance ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E119 or UL 263.

5.	Fire-resistance designs certified by an approved agency.

703.2.3 Approved alternative method.

The fire resistance of building elements, components or assemblies not complying with Sections 703.2.1 or 703.2.2 shall be permitted to be established by an alternative protection method in accordance with Section 104.11.

703.3

Reserved.

703.4

Reserved.

703.5 Noncombustibility tests.

The tests indicated in Section 703.5.1 shall serve as criteria for acceptance of building materials as set forth in Sections 602.2, 602.3 and 602.4 in Type I, II, III and IV construction. The term “noncombustible” does not apply to the flame spread characteristics of interior finish or trim materials. A material shall not be classified as a noncombustible building construction material if it is subject to an increase in combustibility or flame spread beyond the limitations herein established through the effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions.

703.5.1 Noncombustible materials.

Materials required to be noncombustible shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E136. Alternately, materials required to be noncombustible shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E2652 using the acceptance criteria prescribed by ASTM E136.

Exception: Materials having a structural base of noncombustible material as determined in accordance with ASTM E136, or with ASTM E2652 using the acceptance criteria prescribed by ASTM E136, with a surfacing of not more than 0.125 inch (3.18 mm) in thickness having a flame spread index not greater than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be acceptable as noncombustible.

703.6 Fire-resistance-rated glazing.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing, when tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 and complying with the requirements of Section 707, shall be permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall bear a label marked in accordance with Table 716.3 issued by an agency and shall be permanently identified on the glazing.

703.7 Marking and identification.

Where there is an accessible concealed floor, floor-ceiling or attic space, fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions or any other wall required to have protected openings or penetrations shall be effectively and permanently identified with signs or stenciling in the concealed space. Such identification shall:

1.	Be located within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the end of each wall and at intervals not exceeding 30 feet (9144 mm) measured horizontally along the wall or partition.

2.	Include lettering not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in height with a minimum 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) stroke in a contrasting color incorporating the suggested wording, “FIRE AND/OR SMOKE BARRIER—PROTECT ALL OPENINGS,” or other wording.

SECTION 704
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF
STRUCTURAL MEMBERS
704.1 Requirements.

The fire-resistance ratings of structural members and assemblies shall comply with this section and the requirements for the type of construction as specified in Table 601. The fire-resistance ratings shall be not less than the ratings required for the fire-resistance-rated assemblies supported by the structural members.

Exception: Fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and horizontal assemblies as provided in Sections 707.5, 708.4, 709.4 and 711.2, respectively.

704.2 Column protection.

Where columns are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating, the entire column shall be provided individual encasement protection by protecting it on all sides for the full column height, including connections to other structural members, with materials having the required fire-resistance rating. Where the column extends through a ceiling, the encasement protection shall be continuous from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below through the ceiling space to the top of the column.

704.3 Protection of the primary structural frame other than columns.

Members of the primary structural frame other than columns that are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating and support more than two floors or one floor and roof, or support a load-bearing wall or a nonload-bearing wall more than two stories high, shall be provided individual encasement protection by protecting them on all sides for the full length, including connections to other structural members, with materials having the required fire-resistance rating.

Exception: Individual encasement protection on all sides shall be permitted on all exposed sides provided the extent of protection is in accordance with the required fire-resistance rating, as determined in Section 703.

704.4 Protection of secondary members.

Secondary members that are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating shall be protected by individual encasement protection.

704.4.1 Light-frame construction.

Studs and boundary elements that are integral elements in load-bearing walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to have required fire-resistance ratings provided by the membrane protection provided for the load-bearing wall.

704.4.2 Horizontal assemblies.

Horizontal assemblies are permitted to be protected with a membrane or ceiling where the membrane or ceiling provides the required fire-resistance rating and is installed in accordance with Section 711.

704.5 Truss protection.

The required thickness and construction of fire-resistance-rated assemblies enclosing trusses shall be based on the results of full-scale tests or combinations of tests on truss components or on approved calculations based on such tests that satisfactorily demonstrate that the assembly has the required fire resistance.

704.6 Attachments to structural members.

The edges of lugs, brackets, rivets and bolt heads attached to structural members shall be permitted to extend to within 1 inch (25 mm) of the surface of the fire protection.

704.6.1 Secondary attachments to structural members.

Where primary and secondary structural steel members require fire protection, any additional structural steel members having direct connection to the primary structural frame or secondary structural members shall be protected with the same fire-resistive material and thickness as required for the structural member. The protection shall extend away from the structural member a distance of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), or shall be applied to the entire length where the attachment is less than 12 inches (305 mm) long. Where an attachment is hollow and the ends are open, the fire-resistive material and thickness shall be applied to both exterior and interior of the hollow steel attachment.

704.7 Reinforcing.

Thickness of protection for concrete or masonry reinforcement shall be measured to the outside of the reinforcement except that stirrups and spiral reinforcement ties are permitted to project not more than 0.5-inch (12.7 mm) into the protection.

704.8 Embedments and enclosures.

Pipes, wires, conduits, ducts or other service facilities shall not be embedded in the required fire protective covering of a structural member that is required to be individually encased.

704.9 Impact protection.

Where the fire protective covering of a structural member is subject to impact damage from moving vehicles, the handling of merchandise or other activity, the fire protective covering shall be protected by corner guards or by a substantial jacket of metal or other noncombustible material to a height adequate to provide full protection, but not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the finished floor.

Exception: Corner protection is not required on concrete columns in open or enclosed parking garages.

704.10 Exterior structural members.

Load-bearing structural members located within the exterior walls or on the outside of a building or structure shall be provided with the highest fire-resistance rating as determined in accordance with the following:

1.	As required by Table 601 for the type of building element based on the type of construction of the building;

2.	As required by Table 601 for exterior bearing walls based on the type of construction; and

3.	As required by Table 705.5 for exterior walls based on the fire separation distance.

704.11 Bottom flange protection.

Fire protection is not required at the bottom flange of lintels, shelf angles and plates, spanning not more than 6 feet 4 inches (1931 mm) whether part of the primary structural frame or not, and from the bottom flange of lintels, shelf angles and plates not part of the structural frame, regardless of span.

704.12 Seismic isolation systems.

Reserved.

704.13 Sprayed fire-resistive materials (SFRM).

Sprayed fire-resistive materials (SFRM) shall comply with Sections 704.13.1 through 704.13.5.

704.13.1 Fire-resistance rating.

The application of SFRM shall be consistent with the fire-resistance rating and the listing, including, but not limited to, minimum thickness and dry density of the applied SFRM, method of application, substrate surface conditions and the use of bonding adhesives, sealants, reinforcing or other materials.

704.13.2 Manufacturer’s installation instructions.

The application of SFRM shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. The instructions shall include, but are not limited to, substrate temperatures and surface conditions and SFRM handling, storage, mixing, conveyance, method of application, curing and ventilation.

704.13.3 Substrate condition.

The SFRM shall be applied to a substrate in compliance with Sections 704.13.3.1 through 704.13.3.2.

704.13.3.1 Surface conditions.

Substrates to receive SFRM shall be free of dirt, oil, grease, release agents, loose scale and any other condition that prevents adhesion. The substrates shall be free of primers, paints and encapsulants other than those fire tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing agency. Primed, painted or encapsulated steel shall be allowed, provided that testing has demonstrated that required adhesion is maintained.

704.13.3.2 Primers, paints and encapsulants.

Where the SFRM is to be applied over primers, paints or encapsulants other than those specified in the listing, the material shall be field tested in accordance with ASTM E736. Where testing of the SFRM with primers, paints or encapsulants demonstrates that required adhesion is maintained, SFRM shall be permitted to be applied to primed, painted or encapsulated wide flange steel shapes in accordance with the following conditions:

1.	The beam flange width does not exceed 12 inches (305 mm); or

2.	The column flange width does not exceed 16 inches (400 mm); or

3.	The beam or column web depth does not exceed 16 inches (400 mm).

4.	The average and minimum bond strength values shall be determined based on a minimum of five bond tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E736. Bond tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E736 shall indicate an average bond strength of not less than 80 percent and an individual bond strength of not less than 50 percent, when compared to the bond strength of the SFRM as applied to clean uncoated 1/8-inch-thick (3.2 mm) steel plate.

704.13.4 Temperature.

A minimum ambient and substrate temperature of 40°F (4.44°C) shall be maintained during and for not fewer than 24 hours after the application of the SFRM, unless the manufacturer’s instructions allow otherwise.

704.13.5 Finished condition.

The finished condition of SFRM applied to structural members or assemblies shall not, upon complete drying or curing, exhibit cracks, voids, spalls, delamination or any exposure of the substrate. Surface irregularities of SFRM shall be deemed acceptable.

SECTION 705
EXTERIOR WALLS
705.1 General.

Exterior walls shall comply with this section.

705.2 Projections.

Cornices, eave overhangs, exterior balconies and similar projections extending beyond the exterior wall shall conform to the requirements of this section and Section 1406. Exterior egress balconies and exterior exit stairways and ramps shall comply with Sections 1021 and 1027, respectively. Projections shall not extend any closer to the line used to determine the fire separation distance than shown in Table 705.2.

Exception: Buildings on the same lot and considered as portions of one building in accordance with Section 705.3 are not required to comply with this section for projections between the buildings.

TABLE 705.2

MINIMUM DISTANCE OF PROJECTION

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
(FSD) (feet)
	MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM LINE
USED TO DETERMINE FSD

0 to less than 2	Projections not permitted
2 to less than 3	24 inches
3 to less than 5	Two-thirds the FSD
5 or greater	40 inches

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

705.2.1 Type I and II construction.

Projections from walls of Type I or II construction shall be of noncombustible materials or combustible materials as allowed by Sections 1406.3 and 1406.4.

705.2.2 Type III, IV or V construction.

Projections from walls of Type III, IV or V construction shall be of any approved material.

705.2.3 Projection Protection.

Projections extending to within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the line used to determine the fire separation distance shall be one of the following:

1.	Noncombustible materials.

2.	Combustible materials of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

3.	Heavy timber construction complying with Section 2304.11.

4.	Fire-retardant-treated wood.

5.	As permitted by Section 1406.3.

Exception: Type VB construction shall be allowed for combustible projections in Group R-3 and U occupancies with a fire separation distance greater than or equal to 5 feet (1524 mm).

705.3 Buildings on the same lot.

For the purposes of determining the required wall and opening protection, projections and roof-covering requirements, buildings on the same lot shall be assumed to have an imaginary line between them.

Where a new building is to be erected on the same lot as an existing building, the location of the assumed imaginary line with relation to the existing building shall be such that the exterior wall and opening protection of the existing building meet the criteria as set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8.

Exceptions:

1.	Two or more buildings on the same lot shall be either regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as portions of one building if the aggregate area of such buildings is within the limits specified in Chapter 5 for a single building. Where the buildings contain different occupancy groups or are of different types of construction, the area shall be that allowed for the most restrictive occupancy or construction.

2.	Where an S-2 parking garage of Construction Type I or IIA is erected on the same lot as a Group R-2 building, and there is no fire separation distance between these buildings, then the adjoining exterior walls between the buildings are permitted to have occupant use openings in accordance with Section 706.8. However, opening protectives in such openings shall only be required in the exterior wall of the S-2 parking garage, not in the exterior wall openings in the R-2 building, and these opening protectives in the exterior wall of the S-2 parking garage shall be not less than 11/2-hour fire protection rating.

705.4 Materials.

Exterior walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

705.5 Fire-resistance ratings.

Exterior walls shall be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 601 based on the type of construction and Table 705.5 based on the fire separation distance. The required fire-resistance rating of exterior walls with a fire separation distance of greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) shall be rated for exposure to fire from the inside. The required fire-resistance rating of exterior walls with a fire separation distance of less than or equal to 10 feet (3048 mm) shall be rated for exposure to fire from both sides.

TABLE 705.5

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTERIOR WALLS BASED ON FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCEa, d, g

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE =
X (feet)
	TYPE OF
CONSTRUCTION
	OCCUPANCY
GROUP He
	OCCUPANCY
GROUP F-1, M, S-1f
	OCCUPANCY
GROUP A, B, E, F-2, I, R, S-2, Uh

X < 5b	All	3	2	1
5 ≤ X < 10	IA
Others
	3
2
	2
1
	1
1

10 ≤ X < 30	IA, IB
IIB, VB
Others	2
1
1	1
0
1	1c
0
1c
X ≥ 30	All	0	0	0

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a. Load-bearing exterior walls shall also comply with the fire-resistance rating requirements of Table 601.

b. See Section 706.1.1 for party walls.

c. Open parking garages complying with Section 406 shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.

d. The fire-resistance rating of an exterior wall is determined based upon the fire separation distance of the exterior wall and the story in which the wall is located.

e. For special requirements for Group H occupancies, see Section 415.6.

f. For special requirements for Group S aircraft hangars, see Section 412.4.1.

g. Where Table 705.8 permits nonbearing exterior walls with unlimited area of unprotected openings, the required fire-resistance rating for the exterior walls is 0 hours.

h. For a building containing only a Group U occupancy private garage or carport, the exterior wall shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where the fire separation distance is 5 feet (1523 mm) or greater.

705.6 Structural stability.

Exterior walls shall extend to the height required by Section 705.11. Interior structural elements that brace the exterior wall but that are not located within the plane of the exterior wall shall have the minimum fire-resistance rating required in Table 601 for that structural element. Structural elements that brace the exterior wall but are located outside of the exterior wall or within the plane of the exterior wall shall have the minimum fire-resistance rating required in Tables 601 and 705.5 for the exterior wall.

705.7 Unexposed surface temperature.

Where protected openings are not limited by Section 705.8, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior walls as required by ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not apply. Where protected openings are limited by Section 705.8, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior walls as required by ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not apply provided that a correction is made for radiation from the unexposed exterior wall surface in accordance with the following formula:

(Equation 7-1)

where:

Ae = Equivalent area of protected openings.

A = Actual area of protected openings.

Af = Area of exterior wall surface in the story under consideration exclusive of openings, on which the temperature limitations of ASTM E119 or UL 263 for walls are exceeded.

Feo = An “equivalent opening factor” derived from Figure 705.7 based on the average temperature of the unexposed wall surface and the fire-resistance rating of the wall.

For SI: °C = [(°F) - 32] / 1.8.

FIGURE 705.7

EQUIVALENT OPENING FACTOR

705.8 Openings.

Openings in exterior walls shall comply with Sections 705.8.1 through 705.8.6.

TABLE 705.8

MAXIMUM AREA OF EXTERIOR WALL OPENINGS BASED ON FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE AND DEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTION

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE (feet)	DEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTION	ALLOWABLE AREAa
0 to less than 3b, c, k	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	Not Permittedk
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	Not Permittedk
Protected (P)	Not Permittedk
3 to less than 5d, e	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	Not Permitted
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	15%
Protected (P)	15%
5 to less than 10e, f, j	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	10%h
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	25%
Protected (P)	25%
10 to less than 15e, f, g, j	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	15%h
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	45%
Protected (P)	45%
15 to less than 20f, g, j	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	25%
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	75%
Protected (P)	75%
20 to less than 25f, g, j	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	45%
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	No Limit
Protected (P)	No Limit
25 to less than 30f, g, j	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	70%
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	No Limit
Protected (P)	No Limit
30 or greater	Unprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)	No Limit
Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)i	No Limit
Protected (P)	No Limit

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

UP, NS = Unprotected openings in buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

UP, S = Unprotected openings in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

P = Openings protected with an opening protective assembly in accordance with Section 705.8.2.

a.	Values indicated are the percentage of the area of the exterior wall, per story.

b.	For the requirements for fire walls of buildings with differing heights, see Section 706.6.1.

c.	For openings in a fire wall for buildings on the same lot, see Section 706.8.

d.	The maximum percentage of unprotected and protected openings shall be 25 percent for Group R-3 occupancies.

e.	Unprotected openings shall not be permitted for openings with a fire separation distance of less than 15 feet for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

f.	The area of unprotected and protected openings shall not be limited for Group R-3 occupancies, with a fire separation distance of 5 feet or greater.

g.	The area of openings in an open parking structure with a fire separation distance of 10 feet or greater shall not be limited.

h.	Includes buildings accessory to Group R-3.

i.	Not applicable to Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

j.	The area of openings in a building containing only a Group U occupancy private garage or carport with a fire separation distance of 5 feet (1523 mm) or greater shall not be limited.

k.	For openings between S-2 parking garage and Group R-2 building, see Section 705.3, Exception 2.

705.8.1 Allowable area of openings.

The maximum area of unprotected and protected openings permitted in an exterior wall in any story of a building shall not exceed the percentages specified in Table 705.8.

Exceptions:

1.	In other than Group H occupancies, unlimited unprotected openings are permitted in the first story above grade plane either:

1.1.	Where the wall faces a street and has a fire separation distance of more than 15 feet (4572 mm); or

1.2.	Where the wall faces an unoccupied space. The unoccupied space shall be on the same lot or dedicated for public use, shall be not less than 30 feet (9144 mm) in width and shall have access from a street by a posted fire lane in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

2.	Buildings whose exterior bearing walls, exterior nonbearing walls and exterior primary structural frame are not required to be fire-resistance rated shall be permitted to have unlimited unprotected openings.

705.8.2 Protected openings.

Where openings are required to be protected, opening protectives shall comply with Section 716.

Exception: Opening protectives are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the exterior openings are protected by a water curtain using automatic sprinklers approved for that use.

705.8.3 Unprotected openings.

Where unprotected openings are permitted, windows and doors shall be constructed of any approved materials. Glazing shall conform to the requirements of Chapters 24 and 26.

705.8.4 Mixed openings.

Where both unprotected and protected openings are located in the exterior wall in any story of a building, the total area of openings shall be determined in accordance with the following:

(Equation 7-2)

where:

Ap = Actual area of protected openings, or the equivalent area of protected openings, Ae (see Section 705.7).

ap = Allowable area of protected openings.

Au = Actual area of unprotected openings.

au = Allowable area of unprotected openings.

705.8.5 Vertical separation of openings.

Openings in exterior walls in adjacent stories shall be separated vertically to protect against fire spread on the exterior of the buildings where the openings are within 5 feet (1524 mm) of each other horizontally and the opening in the lower story is not a protected opening with a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Such openings shall be separated vertically not less than 3 feet (914 mm) by spandrel girders, exterior walls or other similar assemblies that have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour, rated for exposure to fire from both sides, or by flame barriers that extend horizontally not less than 30 inches (762 mm) beyond the exterior wall. Flame barriers shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. The unexposed surface temperature limitations specified in ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not apply to the flame barriers unless otherwise required by the provisions of this code.

Exceptions:

1.	This section shall not apply to buildings that are three stories or less above grade plane.

2.	This section shall not apply to buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

3.	Open parking garages.

705.8.6 Vertical exposure.

For buildings on the same lot, opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour shall be provided in every opening that is less than 15 feet (4572 mm) vertically above the roof of an adjacent building or structure based on assuming an imaginary line between them. The opening protectives are required where the fire separation distance between the imaginary line and the adjacent building or structure is less than 15 feet (4572 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Opening protectives are not required where the roof assembly of the adjacent building or structure has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour for a minimum distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) from the exterior wall facing the imaginary line and the entire length and span of the supporting elements for the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.	Buildings on the same lot and considered as portions of one building in accordance with Section 705.3 are not required to comply with Section 705.8.6.

705.9 Joints.

Joints made in or between exterior walls required by this section to have a fire-resistance rating shall comply with Section 715.

Exception: Joints in exterior walls that are permitted to have unprotected openings.

705.9.1 Voids.

The void created at the intersection of a floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assembly shall be protected in accordance with Section 715.4.

705.10 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations by air ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistance-rated exterior walls required to have protected openings shall comply with Section 717.

Exception: Foundation vents installed in accordance with this code are permitted.

705.11 Parapets.

Parapets shall be provided on exterior walls of buildings.

Exceptions: A parapet need not be provided on an exterior wall where any of the following conditions exist:

1.	The wall is not required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 705.5 because of fire separation distance.

2.	The building has an area of not more than 1,000 square feet (93 m2) on any floor.

3.	Walls that terminate at roofs of not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or where the roof, including the deck or slab and supporting construction, is constructed entirely of noncombustible materials.

4.	One-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior walls that terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab, provided:

4.1.	Where the roof/ceiling framing elements are parallel to the walls, such framing and elements supporting such framing shall not be of less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a width of 4 feet (1220 mm) for Groups R and U and 10 feet (3048 mm) for other occupancies, measured from the interior side of the wall.

4.2.	Where roof/ceiling framing elements are not parallel to the wall, the entire span of such framing and elements supporting such framing shall not be of less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

4.3.	Openings in the roof shall not be located within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the 1-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior wall for Groups R and U and 10 feet (3048 mm) for other occupancies, measured from the interior side of the wall.

4.4.	The entire building shall be provided with not less than a Class B roof covering.

5.	In Groups R-2 and R-3 where the entire building is provided with a Class C roof covering, the exterior wall shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing or deck in Type III, IV and V construction, provided one or both of the following criteria is met:

5.1.	The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of approved noncombustible materials or of fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4 feet (1220 mm).

5.2.	The roof is protected with 0.625-inch (16 mm) Type X gypsum board directly beneath the underside of the roof sheathing or deck, supported by not less than nominal 2-inch (51 mm) ledgers attached to the sides of the roof framing members for a minimum distance of 4 feet (1220 mm).

6.	Where the wall is permitted to have not less than 25 percent of the exterior wall areas containing unprotected openings based on fire separation distance as determined in accordance with Section 705.8.

705.11.1 Parapet construction.

Parapets shall have the same fire-resistance rating as that required for the supporting wall, and on any side adjacent to a roof surface, shall have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 18 inches (457 mm), including counterflashing and coping materials. The height of the parapet shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the point where the roof surface and the wall intersect. Where the roof slopes toward a parapet at a slope greater than two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.7-percent slope), the parapet shall extend to the same height as any portion of the roof within a fire separation distance where protection of wall openings is required, but in no case shall the height be less than 30 inches (762 mm).

SECTION 706
FIRE WALLS
706.1 General.

Each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls that comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered a separate building. The extent and location of such fire walls shall provide a complete separation. Where a fire wall separates occupancies that are required to be separated by a fire barrier wall, the most restrictive requirements of each separation shall apply.

706.1.1 Party walls.

Any wall located on a lot line between adjacent buildings, which is used or adapted for joint service between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall in accordance with Section 706. Party walls shall be constructed without openings and shall create separate buildings.

Exception: Openings in a party wall separating an anchor building and a mall shall be in accordance with Section 402.4.2.2.1.

706.2 Structural stability.

Fire walls shall be designed and constructed to allow collapse of the structure on either side without collapse of the wall under fire conditions. Fire walls designed and constructed in accordance with NFPA 221 shall be deemed to comply with this section.

706.3 Materials.

Fire walls shall be of any approved noncombustible materials.

Exception: Buildings of Type V construction.

706.4 Fire-resistance rating.

Fire walls shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Table 706.4.

TABLE 706.4

FIRE WALL FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS

GROUP	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
A, B, E, H-4, I, R-1, R-2, U	3a
F-1, H-3b, H-5, M, S-1	3
H-1, H-2	4b
F-2, S-2, R-3, R-4	2

a.	In Type II or V construction, walls shall be permitted to have a 2-hour fire-resistance rating.

b.	For Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 buildings, also see Sections 415.7 and 415.8.

706.4.1 Townhouse fire separation.
706.4.1.1

Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated from adjoining townhouses by a party wall complying with Section 706.1.1 or by the use of separate exterior walls meeting the requirements of Tables 601 and 705.5 for zero clearance from property lines as required for the type of construction. Separate exterior walls shall include one of the following:

1.	A parapet not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the roof line.

2.	Roof sheathing of noncombustible material or fire retardant treated wood, for not less than a 4 foot (1219 mm) width on each side of the exterior dividing wall.

3.	One layer of 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board attached to the underside of roof decking, for not less than a 4 foot (1219 mm) width on each side of the exterior dividing wall.

706.4.1.2

When not more than three stories in height, townhouses may be separated by a single wall meeting the following requirements:

1.	Such wall shall provide not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating. Plumbing, piping, ducts, electrical or other building services shall not be installed within or through the 2-hour wall, unless such materials and methods of penetration have been tested in accordance with Section 703.

2.	Such wall shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing or shall have a parapet extending not less than 18 inches (457 mm) and no less than a 4-foot (1219 mm) width on each side of the wall shall be of noncombustible material, or fire-retardant-treated wood, or one layer of 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum wallboard attached to the underside of the roof decking.

3.	Each dwelling unit sharing such wall shall be designed and constructed to maintain its structural integrity independent of the unit on the opposite side of the wall.

Exception: Said wall may be penetrated by roof and floor structural members provided that the fire-resistance rating and the structural integrity of the wall is maintained.

706.5 Horizontal continuity.

Fire walls shall be continuous from exterior wall to exterior wall and shall extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) beyond the exterior surface of exterior walls.

Exceptions:

1.	Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of combustible exterior sheathing or siding provided the exterior wall has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour for a horizontal distance of not less than 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

2.	Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing, exterior siding or other noncombustible exterior finishes provided the sheathing, siding or other exterior noncombustible finish extends a horizontal distance of not less than 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall.

3.	Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing where the building on each side of the fire wall is protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

706.5.1 Exterior walls.

Where the fire wall intersects exterior walls, the fire-resistance rating and opening protection of the exterior walls shall comply with one of the following:

1.	The exterior walls on both sides of the fire wall shall have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating with 3/4-hour protection where opening protection is required by Section 705.8. The fire-resistance rating of the exterior wall shall extend not less than 4 feet (1220 mm) on each side of the intersection of the fire wall to exterior wall. Exterior wall intersections at fire walls that form an angle equal to or greater than 180 degrees (3.14 rad) do not need exterior wall protection.

2.	Buildings or spaces on both sides of the intersecting fire wall shall assume to have an imaginary lot line at the fire wall and extending beyond the exterior of the fire wall. The location of the assumed line in relation to the exterior walls and the fire wall shall be such that the exterior wall and opening protection meet the requirements set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8. Such protection is not required for exterior walls terminating at fire walls that form an angle equal to or greater than 180 degrees (3.14 rad).

706.5.2 Horizontal projecting elements.

Fire walls shall extend to the outer edge of horizontal projecting elements such as balconies, roof overhangs, canopies, marquees and similar projections that are within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall.

Exceptions:

1.	Horizontal projecting elements without concealed spaces, provided the exterior wall behind and below the projecting element has not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance not less than the depth of the projecting element on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

2.	Noncombustible horizontal projecting elements with concealed spaces, provided a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall extends through the concealed space. The projecting element shall be separated from the building by not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance on each side of the fire wall equal to the depth of the projecting element. The wall is not required to extend under the projecting element where the building exterior wall is not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rated for a distance on each side of the fire wall equal to the depth of the projecting element. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

3.	For combustible horizontal projecting elements with concealed spaces, the fire wall need only extend through the concealed space to the outer edges of the projecting elements. The exterior wall behind and below the projecting element shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance not less than the depth of the projecting elements on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire-protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

706.6 Vertical continuity.

Fire walls shall extend from the foundation to a termination point not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above both adjacent roofs.

Exceptions:

1.	Stepped buildings in accordance with Section 706.6.1.

2.	Two-hour fire-resistance-rated walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab, provided:

2.1.	The lower roof assembly within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the wall has not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating and the entire length and span of supporting elements for the rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.2.	Openings in the roof shall not be located within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall.

2.3.	Each building shall be provided with not less than a Class B roof covering.

3.	Walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of noncombustible roof sheathing, deck or slabs where both buildings are provided with not less than a Class B roof covering. Openings in the roof shall not be located within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall.

4.	In buildings of Type III, IV and V construction, walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of combustible roof sheathing or decks, provided:

4.1.	There are no openings in the roof within 4 feet (1220 mm) of the fire wall,

4.2.	The roof is covered with a minimum Class B roof covering, and

4.3.	The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the wall or the roof is protected with 5/8- inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board directly beneath the underside of the roof sheathing or deck, supported by not less than 2-inch (51 mm) nominal ledgers attached to the sides of the roof framing members for a distance of not less than 4 feet (1220 mm) on both sides of the fire wall.

5.	In buildings designed in accordance with Section 510.2, fire walls located above the 3-hour horizontal assembly required by Section 510.2, Item 1 shall be permitted to extend from the top of this horizontal assembly.

6.	Buildings with sloped roofs in accordance with Section 706.6.2.

706.6.1 Stepped buildings.

Where a fire wall serves as an exterior wall for a building and separates buildings having different roof levels, such wall shall terminate at a point not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof level, provided the exterior wall for a height of 15 feet (4572 mm) above the lower roof is not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction from both sides with openings protected by fire assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

Exception: Where the fire wall terminates at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab of the lower roof, provided:

1.	The lower roof assembly within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the wall has not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating and the entire length and span of supporting elements for the rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.	Openings in the lower roof shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the fire wall.

706.6.2 Buildings with sloped roofs.

Where a fire wall serves as an interior wall for a building, and the roof on one side or both sides of the fire wall slopes toward the fire wall at a slope greater than two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12), the fire wall shall extend to a height equal to the height of the roof located 4 feet (1219 mm) from the fire wall plus 30 inches (762 mm). In no case shall the extension of the fire wall be less than 30 inches (762 mm).

706.7 Combustible framing in fire walls.

Adjacent combustible members entering into a concrete or masonry fire wall from opposite sides shall not have less than a 4-inch (102 mm) distance between embedded ends. Where combustible members frame into hollow walls or walls of hollow units, hollow spaces shall be solidly filled for the full thickness of the wall and for a distance not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above, below and between the structural members, with noncombustible materials approved for fireblocking.

706.8 Openings.

Each opening through a fire wall shall be protected in accordance with Section 716 and shall not exceed 156 square feet (15 m2). The aggregate width of openings at any floor level shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the wall.

Exceptions:

1.	Openings are not permitted in party walls constructed in accordance with Section 706.1.1.

2.	Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15 m2) where both buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

706.9 Penetrations.

Penetrations of fire walls shall comply with Section 714.

706.10 Joints.

Joints made in or between fire walls shall comply with Section 715.

706.11 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Ducts and air transfer openings shall not penetrate fire walls.

Exception: Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings of fire walls that are not on a lot line shall be allowed provided the penetrations comply with Section 717. The size and aggregate width of all openings shall not exceed the limitations of Section 706.8.

SECTION 707
FIRE BARRIERS
707.1 General.

Fire barriers installed as required elsewhere in this code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall comply with this section.

707.2 Materials.

Fire barriers shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

707.3 Fire-resistance rating.

The fire-resistance rating of fire barriers shall comply with this section.

707.3.1 Shaft enclosures.

The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from a shaft shall comply with Section 713.4.

707.3.2 Interior exit stairway and ramp construction.

The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an interior exit stairway or ramp shall comply with Section 1023.1.

707.3.3 Enclosures for exit access stairways.

The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an exit access stairway or ramp shall comply with Section 713.4.

707.3.4 Exit passageway.

The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an exit passageway shall comply with Section 1024.3.

707.3.5 Horizontal exit.

The fire-resistance rating of the separation between building areas connected by a horizontal exit shall comply with Section 1026.1.

707.3.6 Atriums.

The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating atriums shall comply with Section 404.6.

707.3.7 Incidental uses.

The fire barrier separating incidental uses from other spaces in the building shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 509.1.

707.3.8 Control areas.

Fire barriers separating control areas shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required in Section 414.2.4.

707.3.9 Separated occupancies.

Where the provisions of Section 508.4 are applicable, the fire barrier separating mixed occupancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 508.4 based on the occupancies being separated.

707.3.10 Fire areas.

The fire barriers or horizontal assemblies, or both, separating a single occupancy into different fire areas shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 707.3.10. The fire barriers or horizontal assemblies, or both, separating fire areas of mixed occupancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than the highest value indicated in Table 707.3.10 for the occupancies under consideration.

TABLE 707.3.10

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE BARRIER ASSEMBLIES OR HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES BETWEEN FIRE AREAS

OCCUPANCY GROUP	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
H-1, H-2	4
F-1, H-3, S-1	3
A, B, E, F-2, H-4, H-5, I, M, R, S-2	2
U	1
707.4 Exterior walls.

Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required fire-resistance-rated shaft or separation or enclosure for a stairway, ramp or exit passageway, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls and the fire-resistance-rated enclosure or separation requirements shall not apply.

Exceptions:

1.	Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021 for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7 for interior exit stairways and ramps, Section 1024.9 for exit passageways and Section 1027.6 for exterior exit stairways and ramp.

2.	Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code for enclosure of energy storage systems.

707.5 Continuity.

Fire barriers shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above and shall be securely attached thereto. Such fire barriers shall be continuous through concealed space, such as the space above a suspended ceiling. Joints and voids at intersections shall comply with Sections 707.8 and 707.9.

Exceptions:

1.	Shaft enclosures shall be permitted to terminate at a top enclosure complying with Section 713.12.

2.	Interior exit stairway and ramp enclosures required by Section 1023 and exit access stairway and ramp enclosures required by Section 1019 shall be permitted to terminate at a top enclosure complying with Section 713.12.

3.	An exit passageway enclosure required by Section 1024.3 that does not extend to the underside of the roof sheathing, slab or deck above shall be enclosed at the top with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as required for the exit passageway.

707.5.1 Supporting construction.

The supporting construction for a fire barrier shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier supported. Hollow vertical spaces within a fire barrier shall be fireblocked in accordance with Section 718.2 at every floor level.

Exceptions:

1.	The maximum required fire-resistance rating for assemblies supporting fire barriers separating tank storage as provided for in Section 415.9.1.2 shall be 2 hours, but not less than required by Table 601 for the building construction type.

2.	Supporting construction for 1-hour fire barriers required by Table 509.1 in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction is not required to be fire-resistance rated unless required by other sections of this code.

707.6 Openings.

Openings in a fire barrier shall be protected in accordance with Section 716. Openings shall be limited to a maximum aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall, and the maximum area of any single opening shall not exceed 156 square feet (15 m2). Openings in enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall also comply with Sections 1019, 1023.4 and 1024.5, respectively.

Exceptions:

1.	Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15 m2) where adjoining floor areas are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15 m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door serving enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, and interior exit stairways and ramps.

3.	Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15 m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective has been tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 and has a minimum fire-resistance rating not less than the fire-resistance rating of the wall.

4.	Fire window assemblies permitted in atrium separation walls shall not be limited to a maximum aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall.

5.	Openings shall not be limited to 156 square feet (15 m2) or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door assembly in a fire barrier separating an enclosure for exit access stairways and ramps, and interior exit stairways and ramps from an exit passageway in accordance with Section 1023.3.1.

707.7 Penetrations.

Penetrations of fire barriers shall comply with Section 714.

707.7.1 Prohibited penetrations.

Penetrations into enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, interior exit stairways and ramps, and exit passageways shall be allowed only where permitted by Sections 1019, 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively.

707.8 Joints.

Joints made in or between fire barriers, and joints made at the intersection of fire barriers with the under-side of a fire-resistance-rated floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above or with other fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies, shall comply with Section 715.

707.9 Voids at intersections.

The voids created at the intersection of a fire barrier and a nonfire-resistance-rated roof assembly or a nonfire-resistance-rated exterior wall assembly shall be filled. An approved material or system shall be used to fill the void, and shall be securely installed in or on the intersection for its entire length so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to accommodate expected building movements and to retard the passage of fire and hot gases.

707.10 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations in a fire barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

SECTION 708
FIRE PARTITIONS
708.1 General.

The following wall assemblies shall comply with this section.

1.	Separation walls as required by Section 420.2 for Groups I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3.

2.	Walls separating tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings as required by Section 402.4.2.1.

3.	Corridor walls as required by Section 1020.2.

4.	Elevator lobby separation as required by Section 3006.2.

5.	Egress balconies as required by Section 1019.2.

6.	Walls separating ambulatory care facilities from adjacent spaces, corridors or tenants as required by Section 422.2.

7.	Walls separating dwelling and sleeping units in Groups R-1 and R-2 in accordance with Sections 907.2.8.1 and 907.2.9.1.

8.	Vestibules in accordance with Section 1028.2.

708.2 Materials.

The walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

708.3 Fire-resistance rating.

Fire partitions shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

Exceptions:

1.	Corridor walls permitted to have a 1/2-hour fire-resistance rating by Table 1020.2.

2.	Dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction shall have fire-resistance ratings of not less than 1/2 hour in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

708.4 Continuity.

Fire partitions shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above or to the fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly above, and shall be securely attached thereto. In combustible construction where the fire partitions are not required to be continuous to the sheathing, deck or slab, the space between the ceiling and the sheathing, deck or slab above shall be fireblocked or draftstopped in accordance with Sections 718.2 and 718.3 at the partition line. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the wall supported, except in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction for walls separating tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings, walls separating dwelling units, walls separating sleeping units, corridor walls, fire partitions separating dwelling and sleeping units from Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies and fire partitions separating vestibules from the level of exit discharge.

Exceptions:

1.	The wall need not be extended into the crawl space below where the floor above the crawl space has a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

2.	Where the room-side fire-resistance-rated membrane of the corridor is carried through to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab of a fire-resistance-rated floor or roof above, the ceiling of the corridor shall be permitted to be protected by the use of ceiling materials as required for a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated floor or roof system.

3.	Where the corridor ceiling is constructed as required for the corridor walls, the walls shall be permitted to terminate at the upper membrane of such ceiling assembly.

4.	The fire partitions separating tenant spaces in a covered or open mall building, complying with Section 402.4.2.1, are not required to extend beyond the underside of a ceiling that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. A wall is not required in attic or ceiling spaces above tenant separation walls.

5.	Attic fireblocking or draftstopping is not required at the partition line in Group R-2 buildings that do not exceed four stories above grade plane, provided the attic space is subdivided by draftstopping into areas not exceeding 3,000 square feet (279 m2) or above every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller.

6.	Fireblocking or draftstopping is not required at the partition line in buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, provided that automatic sprinklers are installed in combustible floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling spaces.

708.5 Exterior walls.

Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required fire-resistance-rated separation, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls, and the fire-resistance-rated separation requirements shall not apply.

Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021.2 for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7 for interior exit stairways and ramps and Section 1027.6 for exterior exit stairways and ramps.

708.6 Openings.

Openings in a fire partition shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

708.7 Penetrations.

Penetrations of fire partitions shall comply with Section 714.

708.8 Joints.

Joints made in or between fire partitions shall comply with Section 715.

708.9 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations in a fire partition by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

SECTION 709
SMOKE BARRIERS
709.1 General.

Vertical and horizontal smoke barriers shall comply with this section.

709.2 Materials.

Smoke barriers shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

709.3 Fire-resistance rating.

A 1-hour fire-resistance rating is required for smoke barriers.

Exception: Smoke barriers constructed of minimum 0.10-inch-thick (2.5 mm) steel in Group I-3 buildings.

709.4 Continuity.

Smoke barriers shall form an effective membrane continuous from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above, including continuity through concealed spaces, such as those found above suspended ceilings, and interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the wall or floor supported in buildings of other than Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction. Smoke barrier walls used to separate smoke compartments shall comply with Section 709.4.1. Smoke-barrier walls used to enclose areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1009 or to enclose elevator lobbies in accordance with Section 405.4.3, 3007.6.2, or 3008.6.2 shall comply with Section 709.4.2.

Exception: Smoke-barrier walls are not required in interstitial spaces where such spaces are designed and constructed with ceilings or exterior walls that provide resistance to the passage of fire and smoke equivalent to that provided by the smoke-barrier walls.

709.4.1 Smoke-barrier assemblies separating smoke compartments.

Smoke-barrier assemblies used to separate smoke compartments shall form an effective membrane enclosure that is continuous from an outside wall or smoke barrier wall to an outside wall or another smoke barrier wall and horizontal assemblies.

709.4.2 Smoke-barrier walls enclosing areas of refuge or elevator lobbies.

Smoke-barrier walls used to enclose areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1009, or to enclose elevator lobbies in accordance with Section 405.4.3, 3007.6.2, or 3008.6.2, shall form an effective membrane enclosure that terminates at a fire barrier wall having a level of fire protection rating not less than 1 hour, another smoke barrier wall or an outside wall. A smoke and draft control door assembly as specified in Section 716.5.3.1 shall not be required at each elevator hoistway door opening or at each exit doorway between an area of refuge and the exit enclosure.

709.5 Openings.

Openings in a smoke barrier shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where a pair of opposite-swinging doors are installed across a corridor in accordance with Section 709.5.1, the doors shall not be required to be protected in accordance with Section 716. The doors shall be close fitting within operational tolerances, and shall not have a center mullion or undercuts in excess of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm), louvers or grilles. The doors shall have head and jamb stops, and astragals or rabbets at meeting edges. Where permitted by the door manufacturer’s listing, positive-latching devices are not required. Factory applied or field applied protective plates are not required to be labeled.

2.	In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors installed in accordance with Section 1010.3.3 and protected in accordance with Section 716.

709.5.1 Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities.

In Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where doors are installed across a corridor, the doors shall be automaticclosing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4 and shall have a vision panel with fire-protection-rated glazing materials in fire-protection-rated frames, the area of which shall not exceed that tested.

709.6 Penetrations.

Penetrations of smoke barriers shall comply with Section 714.

709.7 Joints.

Joints made in or between smoke barriers shall comply with Section 715.

709.8 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations in a smoke barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

SECTION 710
SMOKE PARTITIONS
710.1 General.

Smoke partitions installed as required elsewhere in the code shall comply with this section.

710.2 Materials.

The walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

710.3 Fire-resistance rating.

Unless required elsewhere in the code, smoke partitions are not required to have a fire-resistance rating.

710.4 Continuity.

Smoke partitions shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above or to the underside of the ceiling above where the ceiling membrane is constructed to limit the transfer of smoke.

710.5 Openings.

Openings in smoke partitions shall comply with Sections 710.5.1 through 710.5.3.

710.5.1 Windows.

Windows in smoke partitions shall be sealed to resist the free passage of smoke or be automatic-closing upon detection of smoke.

710.5.2 Doors.

Doors in smoke partitions shall comply with Sections 710.5.2.1 through 710.5.2.3.

710.5.2.1 Louvers.

Doors in smoke partitions shall not include louvers.

710.5.2.2 Smoke and draft control doors.

Where required elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall meet the requirements for a smoke and draft control door assembly tested in accordance with UL 1784. The air leakage rate of the door assembly shall not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per minute per square foot [0.015424 m3/(s ∙ m2)] of door opening at 0.10 inch (24.9 Pa) of water for both the ambient temperature test and the elevated temperature exposure test. Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with NFPA 105.

710.5.2.2.1 Smoke and draft control door labeling.

Smoke and draft control doors complying only with UL 1784 shall be permitted to show the letter “S” on the manufacturer’s labeling.

710.5.2.3 Self- or automatic-closing doors.

Where required elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall be self- or automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

710.5.3 Pass-through openings in Group I-2, Condition 2.

Where pass-through openings are provided in smoke partitions in Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies, such openings shall comply with the following:

1.	The smoke compartment in which the pass through openings occur does not contain a patient care suite or sleeping room.

2.	Pass-through openings are installed in a wall, door or vision panel that is not required to have a fire resistance rating.

3.	The top of the pass-through opening is located a maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) above the floor.

4.	The aggregate area of all such pass-through openings within a single room shall not exceed 80 square inches (0.05 m2).

710.6 Penetrations.

The space around penetrating items shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke.

710.7 Joints.

Joints shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke.

710.8 Ducts and air transfer openings.

The space around a duct penetrating a smoke partition shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke. Air transfer openings in smoke partitions shall be provided with a smoke damper complying with Section 717.3.2.2.

Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized.

SECTION 711
FLOOR AND ROOF ASSEMBLIES
711.1 General.

Horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 711.2. Nonfire-resistance-rated floor and roof assemblies shall comply with Section 711.3.

711.2 Horizontal assemblies.

Horizontal assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.2.1 through 711.2.6.

711.2.1 Materials.

Assemblies shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

711.2.2 Continuity.

Assemblies shall be continuous without vertical openings, except as permitted by this section and Section 712.

711.2.3 Supporting construction.

The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly supported.

Exception: In buildings of Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction, the construction supporting the horizontal assembly is not required to be fire-resistance rated at the following:

1.	Horizontal assemblies at the separations of incidental uses as specified by Table 509.1 provided the required fire-resistance rating does not exceed 1 hour.

2.	Horizontal assemblies at the separations of dwelling units and sleeping units as required by Section 420.3.

3.	Horizontal assemblies at smoke barriers constructed in accordance with Section 709.

711.2.4 Fire-resistance rating.

The fire-resistance rating of horizontal assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.2.4.1 through 711.2.4.6 but shall be not less than that required by the building type of construction.

711.2.4.1 Separating mixed occupancies.

Where the horizontal assembly separates mixed occupancies, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 508.4 based on the occupancies being separated.

711.2.4.2 Separating fire areas.

Where the horizontal assembly separates a single occupancy into different fire areas, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 707.3.10.

711.2.4.3 Dwelling units and sleeping units.

Horizontal assemblies serving as dwelling or sleeping unit separations in accordance with Section 420.3 shall be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exception: Horizontal assemblies separating dwelling units and sleeping units shall be not less than 1/2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction in a building of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction, where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

711.2.4.4 Separating smoke compartments.

Where the horizontal assembly is required to be a smoke barrier, the assembly shall comply with Section 709.

711.2.4.5 Separating incidental uses.

Where the horizontal assembly separates incidental uses from the remainder of the building, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 509.

711.2.4.6 Other separations.

Where a horizontal assembly is required by other sections of this code, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by that section.

711.2.5 Ceiling panels.

Where the weight of lay-in ceiling panels, used as part of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, is not adequate to resist an upward force of 1 pound per square foot (48 Pa), wire or other approved devices shall be installed above the panels to prevent vertical displacement under such upward force.

711.2.6 Unusable space.

In 1-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies, the ceiling membrane is not required to be installed over unusable crawl spaces. In 1-hour fire-resistance-rated roof assemblies, the floor membrane is not required to be installed where unusable attic space occurs above.

711.3 Nonfire-resistance-rated floor and roof assemblies.

Nonfire-resistance-rated floor, floor/ceiling, roof and roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.3.1 and 711.3.2.

711.3.1 Materials.

Assemblies shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

711.3.2 Continuity.

Assemblies shall be continuous without vertical openings, except as permitted by Section 712.

SECTION 712
VERTICAL OPENINGS
712.1 General.

Each vertical opening shall comply in accordance with one of the protection methods in Sections 712.1.1 through 712.1.16.

712.1.1 Shaft enclosures.

Vertical openings contained entirely within a shaft enclosure complying with Section 713 shall be permitted.

712.1.2 Individual dwelling unit.

Unconcealed vertical openings totally within an individual residential dwelling unit and connecting four stories or less shall be permitted.

712.1.3 Escalator openings.

Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, vertical openings for escalators shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 712.1.3.1 or 712.1.3.2.

712.1.3.1 Opening size.

Protection by a draft curtain and closely spaced sprinklers in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be permitted where the area of the vertical opening between stories does not exceed twice the horizontal projected area of the escalator. In other than Groups B and M, this application is limited to openings that do not connect more than four stories.

712.1.3.2 Automatic shutters.

Protection of the vertical opening by approved shutters at every penetrated floor shall be permitted in accordance with this section. The shutters shall be of noncombustible construction and have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5 hours. The shutter shall be so constructed as to close immediately upon the actuation of a smoke detector installed in accordance with Section 907.3.1 and shall completely shut off the well opening. Escalators shall cease operation when the shutter begins to close. The shutter shall operate at a speed of not more than 30 feet per minute (152.4 mm/s) and shall be equipped with a sensitive leading edge to arrest its progress where in contact with any obstacle, and to continue its progress on release there from.

712.1.4 Penetrations.

Penetrations, concealed and unconcealed, shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 714.

712.1.5 Joints.

Joints shall be permitted where complying with Section 712.1.5.1 or 712.1.5.2, as applicable.

712.1.5.1 Joints in or between horizontal assemblies.

Joints made in or between horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 715. The void created at the intersection of a floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assembly shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 715.4.

712.1.5.2 Joints in or between nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies.

Joints in or between floor assemblies without a required fire-resistance rating shall be permitted where they comply with one of the following:

1.	The joint shall be concealed within the cavity of a wall.

2.	The joint shall be located above a ceiling.

3.	The joint shall be sealed, treated or covered with an approved material or system to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

Exception: Joints meeting one of the exceptions listed in Section 715.3.

712.1.6 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected in accordance with Section 717. Grease ducts shall be protected in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

712.1.7 Atriums.

Atriums complying with Section 404 that connect two or more stories in Group I-2 or I-3 Occupancies or three or more stories in other occupancies shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.	Atriums shall not be permitted within Group H Occupancies.

2.	Balconies or stories within Groups A-1, A-4 and A-5 and mezzanines that comply with Section 505 shall not be considered a story as it applies to this section.

712.1.8 Masonry chimney.

Approved vertical openings for masonry chimneys shall be permitted where the annular space is fireblocked at each floor level in accordance with Section 718.2.5.

712.1.9 Two-story openings.

In other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a vertical opening that is not used as one of the applications listed in this section shall be permitted if the opening complies with all of the items below:

1.	Does not connect more than two stories.

2.	Does not penetrate a horizontal assembly that separates fire areas or smoke barriers that separate smoke compartments.

3.	Is not concealed within the construction of a wall or a floor/ceiling assembly.

4.	Is not open to a corridor in Group I and R occupancies.

5.	Is not open to a corridor on nonsprinklered floors.

6.	Is separated from floor openings and air transfer openings serving other floors by construction conforming to required shaft enclosures.

712.1.10 Parking garages.

Vertical openings in parking garages for automobile ramps, elevators and duct systems shall comply with Section 712.1.10.1, 712.1.10.2 or 712.1.10.3, as applicable.

712.1.10.1 Automobile ramps.

Vertical openings for automobile ramps in parking garages shall be permitted where constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6.

712.1.10.2 Elevators.

Vertical openings for elevator hoistways in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall be permitted.

712.1.10.3 Duct systems.

Vertical openings for mechanical exhaust or supply duct systems in open or enclosed parking garages complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall be permitted to be unenclosed where such duct system is contained within and serves only the parking garage.

712.1.11 Mezzanine.

Vertical openings between a mezzanine complying with Section 505 and the floor below shall be permitted.

712.1.12 Exit access stairways and ramps.

Vertical openings containing exit access stairways or ramps in accordance with Section 1019 shall be permitted.

712.1.13 Openings.

Vertical openings for floor fire doors and access doors shall be permitted where protected by Section 712.1.13.1 or 712.1.13.2.

712.1.13.1 Horizontal fire door assemblies.

Horizontal fire door assemblies used to protect openings in fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 288, and shall achieve a fire-resistance rating not less than the assembly being penetrated. Horizontal fire door assemblies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The label shall be permanently affixed and shall specify the manufacturer, the test standard and the fire-resistance rating.

712.1.13.2 Access doors.

Access doors shall be permitted in ceilings of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies, provided such doors are tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as horizontal assemblies and labeled by an approved agency for such purpose.

712.1.14 Group I-3.

In Group I-3 occupancies, vertical openings shall be permitted in accordance with Section 408.5.

712.1.15 Skylights.

Skylights and other penetrations through a fire-resistance-rated roof deck or slab are permitted to be unprotected, provided that the structural integrity of the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly is maintained. Unprotected skylights shall not be permitted in roof assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 705.8.6. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly supported.

712.1.16 Openings otherwise permitted.

Vertical openings shall be permitted where allowed by other sections of this code.

SECTION 713
SHAFT ENCLOSURES
713.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall apply to shafts required to protect openings and penetrations through floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies. Interior exit stairways and ramps shall be enclosed in accordance with Section 1023.

713.2 Construction.

Shaft enclosures shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711, or both.

713.3 Materials.

The shaft enclosure shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

713.4 Fire-resistance rating.

Shaft enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours where connecting four stories or more, and not less than 1 hour where connecting less than four stories. The number of stories connected by the shaft enclosure shall include any basements but not any mezzanines. Shaft enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than the floor assembly penetrated, but need not exceed 2 hours. Shaft enclosures shall meet the requirements of Section 703.2.1.1.

713.5 Continuity.

Shaft enclosures shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, and shall have continuity in accordance with Section 707.5 for fire barriers or Section 711.2.2 for horizontal assemblies, as applicable.

713.6 Exterior walls.

Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required shaft enclosure, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls and the fire-resistance-rated enclosure requirements shall not apply.

Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021.2 for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7 for interior exit stairways and ramps and Section 1027.6 for exterior exit stairways and ramps.

713.7 Openings.

Openings in a shaft enclosure shall be protected in accordance with Section 716 as required for fire barriers. Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

713.7.1 Prohibited openings.

Openings other than those necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be permitted in shaft enclosures.

713.8 Penetrations.

Penetrations in a shaft enclosure shall be protected in accordance with Section 714 as required for fire barriers. Structural elements, such as beams or joists, where protected in accordance with Section 714 shall be permitted to penetrate a shaft enclosure.

713.8.1 Prohibited penetrations.

Penetrations other than those necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be permitted in shaft enclosures.

713.8.2 Membrane penetrations.

Membrane penetrations shall be permitted on the outside of shaft enclosures. Such penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.2.

713.9 Joints.

Joints in a shaft enclosure shall comply with Section 715.

713.10 Duct and air transfer openings.

Penetrations of a shaft enclosure by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

713.11 Enclosure at the bottom.

Shafts that do not extend to the bottom of the building or structure shall comply with one of the following:

1.	They shall be enclosed at the lowest level with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as the lowest floor through which the shaft passes, but not less than the rating required for the shaft enclosure.

2.	They shall terminate in a room having a use related to the purpose of the shaft. The room shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating and opening protectives shall be not less than the protection required for the shaft enclosure.

3.	They shall be protected by approved fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing at the lowest floor level within the shaft enclosure.

Exceptions:

1.	The fire-resistance-rated room separation is not required, provided there are no openings in or penetrations of the shaft enclosure to the interior of the building except at the bottom. The bottom of the shaft shall be closed off around the penetrating items with materials permitted by Section 718.3.1 for draftstopping, or the room shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

2.	A shaft enclosure containing a waste or linen chute shall not be used for any other purpose and shall discharge in a room protected in accordance with Section 713.13.4.

3.	The fire-resistance-rated room separation and the protection at the bottom of the shaft are not required provided there are no combustibles in the shaft and there are no openings or other penetrations through the shaft enclosure to the interior of the building.

713.12 Enclosure at top.

The top of shaft enclosures shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Extend to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab and the roof assembly shall comply with the requirements for the type of construction as specified in Table 601.

2.	Terminate below the roof assembly and be enclosed at the top with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as the topmost floor penetrated by the shaft, but not less than the fire-resistance rating required for the shaft enclosure.

3.	Extend past the roof assembly and comply with the requirements of Section 1510.

713.12.1 Penthouse mechanical rooms.

A fire/smoke damper shall not be required at the penetration of the roof-top structure where shaft enclosures extend up through the roof assembly into a rooftop structure conforming to Section 1510. All ductwork in the shaft shall be connected directly to HVAC equipment.

713.13 Waste and linen chutes and incinerator rooms.

Waste and linen chutes shall comply with the provisions of NFPA 82, Chapter 6 and shall meet the requirements of Sections 712 and 713.13.1 through 713.13.6. Incinerator rooms shall meet the provisions of Sections 713.13.4 through 713.13.5.

Exception: Chutes serving and contained within a single dwelling unit.

713.13.1 Waste and linen.

A shaft enclosure containing a recycling, or waste or linen chute shall not be used for any other purpose and shall be enclosed in accordance with Section 713.4. A shaft enclosure shall be permitted to contain recycling and waste chutes. Openings into the shaft, from access rooms and discharge rooms, shall be protected in accordance with this section and Section 716. Openings into chutes shall not be located in corridors. Doors into chutes shall be self-closing. Discharge doors shall be self-or automatic-closing upon the actuation of a smoke detector in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4, except that heat-activated closing devices shall be permitted between the shaft and the discharge room.

713.13.2 Materials.

A shaft enclosure containing a waste, recycling, or linen chute shall be constructed of materials as permitted by the building type of construction.

713.13.3 Chute access rooms.

Access openings for waste or linen chutes shall be located in rooms or compartments enclosed by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Openings into the access rooms shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

713.13.4 Chute discharge room.

Waste or linen chutes shall discharge into an enclosed room separated by fire barriers with a fire-resistance rating not less than the required fire rating of the shaft enclosure and constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Openings into the discharge room from the remainder of the building shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating equal to the protection required for the shaft enclosure. Doors shall be self- or automatic-closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4. Waste chutes shall not terminate in an incinerator room. Waste and linen rooms that are not provided with chutes need only comply with Table 509.1.

713.13.5 Incinerator room.

Incinerator rooms shall comply with Table 509.1.

713.13.6 Automatic sprinkler system.

An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.2.11.2.

713.14 Elevator, dumbwaiter and other hoistways.

Elevator, dumbwaiter and other hoistway enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 712 and 713 and Chapter 30.

SECTION 714
PENETRATIONS
714.1 Scope.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials and methods of construction used to protect through penetrations and membrane penetrations of horizontal assemblies and fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies.

714.1.1 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls by ducts that are not protected with dampers shall comply with Sections 714.3 through 714.4.3. Penetrations of horizontal assemblies not protected with a shaft as permitted by Section 717.6, and not required to be protected with fire dampers by other sections of this code, shall comply with Sections 714.5 through 714.6.2. Ducts and air transfer openings that are protected with dampers shall comply with Section 717.

714.2 Installation.

A listed penetration firestop system shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and the listing criteria.

714.3 Installation details.

Where sleeves are used, they shall be securely fastened to the assembly penetrated. The space between the item contained in the sleeve and the sleeve itself and any space between the sleeve and the assembly penetrated shall be protected in accordance with this section. Insulation and coverings on or in the penetrating item shall not penetrate the assembly unless the specific material used has been tested as part of the assembly in accordance with this section.

714.4 Fire-resistance-rated walls.

Penetrations into or through fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barrier walls and fire partitions shall comply with Sections 714.4.1 through 714.4.3. Penetrations in smoke barrier walls shall also comply with Section 714.5.4.

714.4.1 Through penetrations.

Through penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls shall comply with Section 714.4.1.1 or 714.4.1.2.

Exception: Where the penetrating items are steel, ferrous or copper pipes, tubes or conduits, the annular space between the penetrating item and the fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted to be protected by either of the following measures:

1.	In concrete or masonry walls where the penetrating item is a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) nominal diameter and the area of the opening through the wall does not exceed 144 square inches (0.0929 m2), concrete, grout or mortar is permitted where installed the full thickness of the wall or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating.

2.	The material used to fill the annular space shall prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to ASTM E119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated.

714.4.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

Through penetrations shall be protected using systems installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly.

714.4.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system.

Through penetrations shall be protected by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water and shall have an F rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall penetrated.

714.4.2 Membrane penetrations.

Membrane penetrations shall comply with Section 714.4.1. Where walls or partitions are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed such that the required fire resistance will not be reduced.

Exceptions:

1.	Membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 16 square inches (0.0103 m2) in area, provided the aggregate area of the openings through the membrane does not exceed 100 square inches (0.0645 m2) in any 100 square feet (9.29 m2) of wall area. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm). Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall or partition shall be separated by one of the following:

1.1.	By a horizontal distance of not less than 24 inches (610 mm) where the wall or partition is constructed with individual noncommunicating stud cavities;

1.2.	By a horizontal distance of not less than the depth of the wall cavity where the wall cavity is filled with cellulose loose-fill, rockwool or slag mineral wool insulation;

1.3.	By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section 718.2.1;

1.4.	By protecting both outlet boxes with listed putty pads; or

1.5.	By other listed materials and methods.

2.	Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided such boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) unless listed otherwise. Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall or partition shall be separated by one of the following:

2.1.	By the horizontal distance specified in the listing of the electrical boxes;

2.2.	By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section 718.2.1;

2.3.	By protecting both boxes with listed putty pads; or

2.4.	By other listed materials and methods.

3.	Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of any size or type, that have been listed as part of a wall opening protective material system for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

4.	Membrane penetrations by boxes other than electrical boxes, provided such penetrating items and the annular space between the wall membrane and the box, are protected by an approved membrane penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water, and shall have an F and T rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall penetrated and be installed in accordance with their listing.

5.	The annular space created by the penetration of an automatic sprinkler, provided it is covered by a metal escutcheon plate.

6.	Membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour fire resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel electrical boxes that exceed 16 square inches (0.0103 m2) in area, or steel electrical boxes of any size having an aggregate area through the membrane exceeding 100 square inches (0.0645 m2) in any 100 square feet (9.29 m2) of wall area, provided such penetrating items are protected by listed putty pads or other listed materials and methods, and installed in accordance with the listing.

714.4.3 Dissimilar materials.

Noncombustible penetrating items shall not connect to combustible items beyond the point of firestopping unless it can be demonstrated that the fire-resistance integrity of the wall is maintained.

714.5 Horizontal assemblies.

Penetrations of a fire-resistance-rated floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the ceiling membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly not required to be enclosed in a shaft by Section 712.1 shall be protected in accordance with Sections 714.5.1 through 714.5.4.

714.5.1 Through penetrations.

Through penetrations of horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Penetrations by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents or concrete or masonry items through a single fire-resistance-rated floor assembly where the annular space is protected with materials that prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to ASTM E119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated. Penetrating items with a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) nominal diameter shall not be limited to the penetration of a single fire-resistance-rated floor assembly, provided the aggregate area of the openings through the assembly does not exceed 144 square inches (92 900 mm2) in any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area.

2.	Penetrations in a single concrete floor by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents with a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) nominal diameter, provided the concrete, grout or mortar is installed the full thickness of the floor or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating. The penetrating items shall not be limited to the penetration of a single concrete floor, provided the area of the opening through each floor does not exceed 144 square inches (92 900 mm2).

3.	Penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided such boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

714.5.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

Through penetrations shall be protected using systems installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly.

714.5.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system.

Through penetrations shall be protected by an approved through-penetration firestop system installed and tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch of water (2.49 Pa). The system shall have an F rating/T rating of not less than 1 hour but not less than the required rating of the floor penetrated.

Exceptions:

1.	Floor penetrations contained and located within the cavity of a wall above the floor or below the floor do not require a T rating.

2.	Floor penetrations by floor drains, tub drains or shower drains contained and located within the concealed space of a horizontal assembly do not require a T rating.

3.	Floor penetrations of maximum 4-inch (102 mm) nominal diameter metal conduit or tubing penetrating directly into metal-enclosed electrical power switchgear do not require a T rating.

714.5.2 Membrane penetrations.

Penetrations of membranes that are part of a horizontal assembly shall comply with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2. Where floor/ceiling assemblies are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed such that the required fire resistance will not be reduced.

Exceptions:

1.	Membrane penetrations by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents, or concrete or masonry items where the annular space is protected either in accordance with Section 714.4.1 or to prevent the free passage of flame and the products of combustion. The aggregate area of the openings through the membrane shall not exceed 100 square inches (64 500 mm2) in any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of ceiling area in assemblies tested without penetrations.

2.	Ceiling membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour horizontal assemblies by steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 16 square inches (10 323 mm2) in area, provided the aggregate area of such penetrations does not exceed 100 square inches (44 500 mm2) in any 100 square feet (9.29 m2) of ceiling area, and the annular space between the ceiling membrane and the box does not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

3.	Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of any size or type, that have been listed as part of an opening protective material system for use in horizontal assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

4.	Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided such boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. The annular space between the ceiling membrane and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) unless listed otherwise.

5.	The annular space created by the penetration of a fire sprinkler, provided it is covered by a metal escutcheon plate.

6.	Noncombustible items that are cast into concrete building elements and that do not penetrate both top and bottom surfaces of the element.

7.	The ceiling membrane of a maximum 2-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies is permitted to be interrupted with the double wood top plate of a wall assembly that is sheathed with Type X gypsum wallboard, provided that all penetrating items through the double top plates are protected in accordance with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2 and the ceiling membrane is tight to the top plates.

8.	Ceiling membrane penetrations by listed luminaires (light fixtures) or by luminaires protected with listed materials, which have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

714.5.3 Dissimilar materials.

Noncombustible penetrating items shall not connect to combustible materials beyond the point of firestopping unless it can be demonstrated that the fire-resistance integrity of the horizontal assembly is maintained.

714.5.4 Penetrations in smoke barriers.

Penetrations in smoke barriers shall be protected by an approved through-penetration firestop system installed and tested in accordance with the requirements of UL 1479 for air leakage. The L rating of the system measured at 0.30 inch (7.47 Pa) of water in both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests shall not exceed:

1.	5.0 cfm per square foot (0.025 m3/s · m2) of penetration opening for each through-penetration firestop system; or

2.	A total cumulative leakage of 50 cfm (0.024 m3/s) for any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of wall area, or floor area.

714.6 Nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies.

Penetrations of nonfire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies or the ceiling membrane of a nonfire-resistance-rated roof/ceiling assembly shall meet the requirements of Section 713 or shall comply with Section 714.6.1 or 714.6.2.

714.6.1 Noncombustible penetrating items.

Noncombustible penetrating items that connect not more than five stories are permitted, provided that the annular space is filled to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion with an approved noncombustible material or with a fill, void or cavity material that is tested and classified for use in through-penetration firestop systems.

714.6.2 Penetrating items.

Penetrating items that connect not more than two stories are permitted, provided that the annular space is filled with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

SECTION 715
JOINTS AND VOIDS
715.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials and methods of construction used to protect joints and voids in or between horizontal and vertical assemblies.

715.2 Installation.

Systems or materials protecting joints and voids shall be securely installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions in or on the joint or void for its entire length so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to accommodate expected building movements and to resist the passage of fire and hot gases. Fire-resistant joint systems or systems used to protect voids at exterior curtain walls and fire-resistance-rated floor intersections shall also be installed in accordance with the listing criteria.

715.3 Fire-resistance-rated assembly intersections.

Joints installed in or between fire-resistance-rated walls, floor or floor/ceiling assemblies and roofs or roof/ceiling assemblies shall be protected by an approved fire-resistant joint system designed to resist the passage of fire for a time period not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall, floor or roof in or between which the system is installed.

Exception: Fire-resistant joint systems shall not be required for joints in all of the following locations:

1.	Floors within a single dwelling unit.

2.	Floors where the joint is protected by a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

3.	Floors within atriums where the space adjacent to the atrium is included in the volume of the atrium for smoke control purposes.

4.	Floors within malls.

5.	Floors and ramps within open and enclosed parking garages or structures constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively.

6.	Mezzanine floors.

7.	Walls that are permitted to have unprotected openings.

8.	Roofs where openings are permitted.

9.	Control joints not exceeding a maximum width of 0.625 inch (15.9 mm) and tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

10.	The intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and the roof slab or roof deck.

715.3.1 Fire test criteria.

Fire-resistant joint systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of either ASTM E1966 or UL 2079. Nonsymmetrical wall joint systems shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests. Where evidence is furnished to show that the wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side exposed to the furnace, subject to acceptance of the building official, the wall need not be subjected to tests from the opposite side.

Exception: For exterior walls with a horizontal fire separation distance greater than 10 feet (3048 mm), the joint system shall be required to be tested for interior fire exposure only.

715.4 Exterior curtain wall/floor intersection.

Where fire resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies are required, voids created at the intersection of the exterior curtain wall assemblies and such floor assemblies shall be sealed with an approved system to prevent the interior spread of fire. Such systems shall be securely installed and tested in accordance with ASTM E2307 to provide an F rating for a time period not less than the fire-resistance rating of the floor assembly.

Exception: Voids created at the intersection of the exterior curtain wall assemblies and such floor assemblies where the vision glass extends to the finished floor level shall be permitted to be sealed with an approved material to prevent the interior spread of fire. Such material shall be securely installed and capable of preventing the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E119 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (0.254 mm) of water column (2.5 Pa) for the time period not less than the fire-resistance rating of the floor assembly.

715.5 Exterior curtain wall/nonfire-resistance-rated floor assembly intersections.

Voids created at the intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and nonfire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies shall be sealed with an approved material or system to retard the interior spread of fire and hot gases between stories.

715.6 Exterior curtain wall/vertical fire barrier intersections.

Voids created at the intersection of nonfire-resistance-rated exterior curtain wall assemblies and vertical fire barriers shall be filled with an approved material or system to retard the interior spread of fire and hot gases.

715.7 Curtain wall spandrels.

Height and fire-resistance requirements for curtain wall spandrels shall comply with Section 705.8.5. Where Section 705.8.5 does not require a fire-resistance-rated spandrel wall, the requirements of Sections 715.4 and 715.5 shall still apply to the intersection between the spandrel wall and the floor.

715.8 Joints and voids in smoke barriers.

Fire-resistant joint systems protecting joints in smoke barriers, and systems protecting voids at the intersection of a horizontal smoke barrier and an exterior curtain wall, shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of UL 2079 for air leakage. The L rating of the joint system shall not exceed 5 cfm per linear foot (0.00775 m3/s m) of joint at 0.30 inch (74.7 Pa) of water for both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests.

SECTION 716
OPENING PROTECTIVES
716.1 General.

Opening protectives required by other sections of this code shall comply with the provisions of this section and shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

716.2 Fire-resistance-rated glazing.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated wall or floor/ceiling assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 and labeled in accordance with Section 703.6 shall not otherwise be required to comply with this section where used as part of a wall or floor/ceiling assembly. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall be permitted in fire door and fire window assemblies where tested and installed in accordance with their listings and where in compliance with the requirements of this section.

716.3 Marking fire-rated glazing assemblies.

Fire-rated glazing assemblies shall be marked in accordance with Tables 716.3, 716.5 and 716.6.

TABLE 716.3

MARKING FIRE-RATED GLAZING ASSEMBLIES

FIRE TEST STANDARD	MARKING	DEFINITION OF MARKING
ASTM E119 or UL 263	W	Meets wall assembly criteria.
ASTM E119 or UL 263	FC	Meets floor/ceiling criteria.a
NFPA 257 or UL 9	OH	Meets fire window assembly criteria including the hose stream test.
NFPA 252 or UL 10B or UL 10C	D	Meets fire door assembly criteria.
H	Meets fire door assembly hose stream test.
T	Meets 450°F temperature rise criteria for 30 minutes.
	XXX	The time in minutes of the fire resistance or fire protection rating of the glazing assembly.

For SI: ºC = [(ºF) - 32]/1.8.

a.	See Section 2409.1.

716.3.1 Fire-rated glazing identification.

For fire-rated glazing, the label shall bear the identification required in Tables 716.3 and 716.5. “D” indicates that the glazing is permitted to be used in fire door assemblies and that the glazing meets the fire protection requirements of NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C. “H” shall indicate that the glazing meets the hose stream requirements of NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C. “T” shall indicate that the glazing meets the temperature requirements of Section 716.5.5.1. The placeholder “XXX” represents the fire-rating period, in minutes.

716.3.2 Fire-protection-rated glazing identification.

For fire-protection-rated glazing, the label shall bear the following identification required in Tables 716.3 and 716.6: “OH – XXX.” “OH” indicates that the glazing meets both the fire protection and the hose-stream requirements of NFPA 257 or UL 9 and is permitted to be used in fire window openings. The placeholder “XXX” represents the fire-rating period, in minutes.

716.3.3 Fire-rated glazing that exceeds the code requirements.

Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked as complying with hose stream requirements (H) shall be permitted in applications that do not require compliance with hose stream requirements. Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked as complying with temperature rise requirements (T) shall be permitted in applications that do not require compliance with temperature rise requirements. Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked with ratings (XXX) that exceed the ratings required by this code shall be permitted.

716.4 Alternative methods for determining fire protection ratings.

The application of any of the alternative methods listed in this section shall be based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria specified in NFPA 252, NFPA 257 or UL 9. The required fire resistance of an opening protective shall be permitted to be established by any of the following methods or procedures:

1.	Designs documented in approved sources.

2.	Calculations performed in an approved manner.

3.	Engineering analysis based on a comparison of opening protective designs having fire protection ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in NFPA 252, NFPA 257 or UL 9.

4.	Alternative protection methods as allowed by Section 104.11.

716.5 Fire door and shutter assemblies.

Approved fire door and fire shutter assemblies shall be constructed of any material or assembly of component materials that conforms to the test requirements of Section 716.5.1, 716.5.2 or 716.5.3 and the fire protection rating indicated in Table 716.5. Fire door frames with transom lights, sidelights or both shall be permitted in accordance with Section 716.5.6.

Exceptions:

1.	Labeled protective assemblies that conform to the requirements of this section or UL 10A, UL 14B and UL 14C for tin-clad fire door assemblies.

2.	Floor fire door assemblies in accordance with Section 712.1.13.1.

TABLE 716.5 OPENING FIRE PROTECTION ASSEMBLIES, RATINGS AND MARKINGS

TYPE OF
ASSEMBLY
	REQUIRED WALL
ASSEMBLY RATING
(hours)	MINIMUM FIRE
DOOR AND
FIRE SHUTTER
ASSEMBLY
RATING (hours)	DOOR
VISION
PANEL
SIZEa
	FIRE-RATED
GLAZING
MARKING
DOOR VISION
PANELc, e	MINIMUM SIDELIGHT/
TRANSOM ASSEMBLY
RATING (hours)	FIRE-RATED GLAZING
MARKING SIDELIGHT/
TRANSOM PANEL
Fire
protection
	Fire
resistance
	Fire
protection
	Fire
resistance

Fire walls and
fire barriers
having a required
fire-resistance
rating greater
than 1 hour
	4	3	
See
Note b	D-H-W-240	Not Permitted	4	Not Permitted	W-240
3	3a	
See
Note b	D-H-W-180	Not Permitted	3	Not Permitted	W-180
2	11/2	100 sq. in.	≤100 sq. in. =D-H-90
>100 sq.
in.=D-H-W-90	Not Permitted	2	Not Permitted	W-120
11/2	11/2	100 sq. in.	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-90
>100 sq. in.=
D-H-W-90	Not Permitted	11/2	Not Permitted	W-90
Double fire walls
constructed in
accordance with
NFPA 221
	Single-wall
assembly
rating
(hours)f
	Each wall
of the
double-wall
assembly
(hours)g	—
4	3	3	See Note b	D-H-W-180	Not Permitted	3	Not Permitted	W-180
3	2	11/2	100 sq. in.	≤ 100 sq. in. =
D-H-90
>100 sq. in.=
D-H-W-90
	Not Permitted	2	Not Permitted	W-120
2	1	1	100 sq. in.	≤ 100 sq. in. =
D-H-60
> 100 sq. in. =
D-H-W-60
	Not Permitted	1	NotPermitted	W-60
Enclosures for
shafts, interior
exit stairways
and interior exit
ramps.	2	11/2	100 sq. in.b	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-90
> 100 sq. in.=
D-H-T-W-90	Not Permitted	2	Not Permitted	W-120
Horizontal exits in fire
wallsd
	4	3	100 sq. in.	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-180
> 100 sq. in.=
D-H-W-240	Not Permitted	4	Not Permitted	W-240
3	3a	100 sq. in.	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-180
> 100 sq. in.=
D-H-W-180	Not Permitted	3	Not Permitted	W-180
Fire barriers
having a required
fire-resistance
rating of 1 hour:
Enclosures for
shafts, exit access
stairways, exit
access ramps,
interior exit
stairways and
interior exit
ramps; and exit
passageway walls	1	1	100 sq. in.	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-60
>100 sq. in.=
D-H-T-W-60	Not Permitted	1	Not Permitted	W-60
	Fire protection	
Other fire barriers	1	3/4	Maximum
size tested
	D-H	3/4h	D-Hh
Fire partitions:
Corridor walls
	1	1/3b	Maximum
size tested
	D-20	3/4b	D-H-OH-45
0.5	1/3b	Maximum
size tested
	D-20	1/3	D-H-OH-20
Other fire partitions	1	3/4e	Maximum
size tested
	D-H-45	3/4	D-H-45
0.5	1/3	Maximum
size tested
	D-H-20	1/3	D-H-20
Exterior walls	3	11/2	100 sq. in.b	≤100 sq. in. = D-H-90
>100 sq. in = D-H-W-90
	Not Permitted	3	Not Permitted	W-180
2	11/2	Maximum
size tested
	D-H-90 or
D-H-W-90
	11/2h	2	D-H-OH-90h	W-120
	Fire protection	
1	3/4	Maximum
size tested
	D-H-45	3/4h	D-H-45h
Smoke barriers		Fire protection	
1	1/3	Maximum
size tested
	D-20	3/4	D-H-OH-45

For SI: 1 square inch = 645.2 mm.

a.	Two doors, each with a fire protection rating of 11/2 hours, installed on opposite sides of the same opening in a fire wall, shall be deemed equivalent in fire protection rating to one 3-hour fire door.

b.	Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested to ASTM E119 in accordance with Section 716.2 shall be permitted, in the maximum size tested.

c.	Under the column heading “Fire-rated glazing marking door vision panel,” W refers to the fire-resistance rating of the glazing, not the frame.

d.	See Section 716.5.8.1.2.1.

e.	See Section 716.3.1 and Table 716.3 for additional permitted markings.

f.	As required in Section 706.4.

g.	As allowed in NFPA 221 Section 4.6.

h.	Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for fire barriers required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code to enclose energy storage systems. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.2, shall be permitted.

716.5.1 Side-hinged or pivoted swinging doors.

Fire door assemblies with side-hinged and pivoted swinging doors shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C. After 5 minutes into the NFPA 252 test, the neutral pressure level in the furnace shall be established at 40 inches (1016 mm) or less above the sill.

716.5.2 Other types of assemblies.

Fire door assemblies with other types of doors, including swinging elevator doors, horizontal sliding fire doors, rolling steel fire doors, fire shutters, bottom and side-hinged chute intake doors, and top-hinged chute discharge doors, shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10B. The pressure in the furnace shall be maintained as nearly equal to the atmospheric pressure as possible. Once established, the pressure shall be maintained during the entire test period.

716.5.3 Door assemblies in corridors and smoke barriers.

Fire door assemblies required to have a minimum fire protection rating of 20 minutes where located in corridor walls or smoke barrier walls having a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Table 716.5 shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C without the hose stream test.

Exceptions:

1.	Viewports that require a hole not larger than 1 inch (25 mm) in diameter through the door, have not less than a 0.25-inch-thick (6.4 mm) glass disc and the holder is of metal that will not melt out where subject to temperatures of 1,700°F (927°C).

2.	Corridor door assemblies in occupancies of Group I-2 shall be in accordance with Section 407.3.1.

3.	Unprotected openings shall be permitted for corridors in multitheater complexes where each motion picture auditorium has not fewer than one-half of its required exit or exit access doorways opening directly to the exterior or into an exit passageway.

4.	Horizontal sliding doors in smoke barriers that comply with Sections 408.6 and 408.8.4 in occupancies in Group I-3.

716.5.3.1 Smoke and draft control.

Fire door assemblies shall meet the requirements for a smoke and draft control door assembly tested in accordance with UL 1784. The air leakage rate of the door assembly shall not exceed 3.0 cubic feet per minute per square foot (0.01524 m3/s • m2) of door opening at 0.10 inch (24.9 Pa) of water for both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests. Louvers shall be prohibited. Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with NFPA 105. Terminated stops shall be prohibited on doors required by Section 405.4.3 to comply with Section 716.5.3 and prohibited on doors required by Sections 3006.3 Item 3, 3007.6.3, or 3008.6.3 to comply with Section 716.5.3.1.

Exception: Elevator hoistway door openings protected in accordance with Section 3006.3

716.5.3.2 Glazing in door assemblies.

In a 20-minute fire door assembly, the glazing material in the door itself shall have a minimum fire-protection-rated glazing of 20 minutes and shall be exempt from the hose stream test. Glazing material in any other part of the door assembly, including transom lights and sidelights, shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 257 or UL 9, including the hose stream test, in accordance with Section 716.6.

716.5.4 Door assemblies in other fire partitions.

Fire door assemblies required to have a minimum fire protection rating of 20 minutes where located in other fire partitions having a fire-resistance rating of 0.5 hour in accordance with Table 716.5 shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C with the hose stream test.

716.5.5 Doors in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways.

Fire door assemblies in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall have a maximum transmitted temperature rise of not more than 450°F (250°C) above ambient at the end of 30 minutes of standard fire test exposure.

Exception: The maximum transmitted temperature rise is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

716.5.5.1 Glazing in doors.

Fire-protection-rated glazing in excess of 100 square inches (0.065 m2) is not permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing in excess of 100 square inches (0.065 m2) shall be permitted in fire doors. Listed fire-resistance-rated glazing in a fire door shall have a maximum transmitted temperature rise in accordance with Section 716.5.5 when the fire door is tested in accordance with NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C.

716.5.6 Fire door frames with transom lights and sidelights.

Door frames with transom lights, sidelights or both, shall be permitted where a 3/4-hour fire protection rating or less is required in accordance with Table 716.5. Fire door frames with transom lights, sidelights, or both, installed with fire-resistance-rated glazing tested as an assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall be permitted where a fire protection rating exceeding 3/4 hour is required in accordance with Table 716.5.

716.5.6.1 Energy storage system separation.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall not be permitted in fire door frames with transom lights and sidelights in fire barriers required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code to enclose energy storage systems.

716.5.7 Labeled protective assemblies.

Fire door assemblies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The labels shall comply with NFPA 80, and shall be permanently affixed to the door or frame.

716.5.7.1 Fire door labeling requirements.

Fire doors shall be labeled showing the name of the manufacturer or other identification readily traceable back to the manufacturer, the name or trademark of the thirdparty inspection agency, the fire protection rating and, where required for fire doors in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways by Section 716.5.5, the maximum transmitted temperature end point. Smoke and draft control doors complying with UL 1784 shall be labeled as such and shall comply with Section 716.5.7.3. Labels shall be approved and permanently affixed. The label shall be applied at the factory or location where fabrication and assembly are performed.

716.5.7.1.1 Light kits, louvers and components.

Listed light kits and louvers and their required preparations shall be considered as part of the labeled door where such installations are done under the listing program of the third-party agency. Fire doors and door assemblies shall be permitted to consist of components, including glazing, vision light kits and hardware that are listed or classified and labeled for such use by different third-party agencies.

716.5.7.2 Oversized doors.

Oversized fire doors shall bear an oversized fire door label by an approved agency or shall be provided with a certificate of inspection furnished by an approved testing agency. Where a certificate of inspection is furnished by an approved testing agency, the certificate shall state that the door conforms to the requirements of design, materials and construction, but has not been subjected to the fire test.

716.5.7.3 Smoke and draft control door labeling requirements.

Smoke and draft control doors complying with UL 1784 shall be labeled in accordance with Section 716.5.7.1 and shall show the letter “S” on the fire-rating label of the door. This marking shall indicate that the door and frame assembly are in compliance where listed or labeled gasketing is installed.

716.5.7.4 Fire door frame labeling requirements.

Fire door frames shall be labeled showing the names of the manufacturer and the third-party inspection agency.

716.5.7.5 Fire door operator labeling requirements.

Fire door operators for horizontal sliding doors shall be labeled and listed for use with the assembly.

716.5.8 Glazing material.

Fire-rated glazing and fire-resistance-rated glazing conforming to the opening protection requirements in Section 716.5 shall be permitted in fire door assemblies.

716.5.8.1 Size limitations.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall comply with the size limitations in Section 716.5.8.1.1. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall comply with the size limitations of NFPA 80, and as provided in Section 716.5.8.1.2.

716.5.8.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated glazing in door assemblies in fire walls and fire barriers rated greater than 1 hour.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263 and NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C shall be permitted in fire door assemblies located in fire walls and in fire barriers in accordance with Table 716.5 to the maximum size tested and in accordance with their listings.

716.5.8.1.2 Fire-protection-rated glazing in door assemblies in fire walls and fire barriers rated greater than 1 hour.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be prohibited in fire walls and fire barriers except as provided in Sections 716.5.8.1.2.1 and 716.5.8.1.2.2.

716.5.8.1.2.1 Horizontal exits.

Fire-protectionrated glazing shall be permitted as vision panels in self-closing swinging fire door assemblies serving as horizontal exits in fire walls where limited to 100 square inches (0.065 m2).

716.5.8.1.2.2 Fire barriers.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted in fire doors having a 11/2-hour fire protection rating intended for installation in fire barriers, where limited to 100 square inches (0.065 m2).

716.5.8.2 Elevator, stairway and ramp protectives.

Approved fire-protection-rated glazing used in fire door assemblies in elevator, stairway and ramp enclosures shall be so located as to furnish clear vision of the passageway or approach to the elevator, stairway or ramp.

716.5.8.3 Labeling.

Fire-rated glazing shall bear a label or other identification showing the name of the manufacturer, the test standard and information required in Table 716.3 that shall be issued by an approved agency and shall be permanently identified on the glazing.

716.5.8.4 Safety glazing.

Fire-protection-rated glazing and fire-resistance-rated glazing installed in fire door assemblies shall comply with the safety glazing requirements of Chapter 24 where applicable.

716.5.9 Door closing.

Fire doors shall be latching and self- or automatic-closing in accordance with this section.

Exceptions:

1.	Fire doors located in common walls separating sleeping units in Group R-1 shall be permitted without automatic- or self-closing devices.

2.	The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway enclosure doors at the floor level designated for recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be permitted to remain open during Phase I emergency recall operation.

716.5.9.1 Latch required.

Unless otherwise specifically permitted, single side-hinged swinging fire doors and both leaves of pairs of side-hinged swinging fire doors shall be provided with an active latch bolt that will secure the door when it is closed.

716.5.9.1.1 Chute intake door latching.

Chute intake doors shall be positive latching, remaining latched and closed in the event of latch spring failure during a fire emergency.

716.5.9.2 Automatic-closing fire door assemblies.

Automatic-closing fire door assemblies shall be self-closing in accordance with NFPA 80.

716.5.9.3 Delayed action closers.

Doors required to be self-closing and not required to be automatic closing shall be permitted to be equipped with delayed action closers.

716.5.9.4 Smoke-activated doors.

Automatic-closing doors installed in the following locations shall be permitted to have hold-open devices. Doors shall automatically close by the actuation of smoke detectors installed in accordance with Section 907.3 or by loss of power to the smoke detector or hold-open device. Doors that are automatic-closing by smoke detection shall not have more than a 10-second delay before the door starts to close after the smoke detector is actuated. Automatic-closing doors that protect openings installed in the following locations shall comply with this section:

1.	In walls that separate incidental uses in accordance with Section 509.4.

2.	In fire walls in accordance with Section 706.8.

3.	In fire barriers in accordance with Section 707.6.

4.	In fire partitions in accordance with Section 708.6.

5.	In smoke barriers in accordance with Section 709.5.

6.	In smoke partitions in accordance with Section 710.5.2.3.

7.	In shaft enclosures in accordance with Section 713.7.

8.	In waste and linen chutes, discharge openings and access and discharge rooms in accordance with Section 713.13. Loading doors installed in waste and linen chutes shall meet the requirements of Sections 716.5.9 and 716.5.9.1.1.

716.5.9.5 Doors in pedestrian ways.

Vertical sliding fire doors or rolling steel fire doors in openings through which pedestrians travel shall be heat activated or activated by smoke detectors with alarm verification.

716.5.10 Swinging fire shutters.

Where fire shutters of the swinging type are installed in exterior openings, not less than one row in every three vertical rows shall be arranged to be readily opened from the outside, and shall be identified by distinguishing marks or letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high.

716.5.11 Rolling fire shutters.

Where fire shutters of the rolling type are installed, such shutters shall include approved automatic-closing devices.

716.6 Fire-protection-rated glazing.

Glazing in fire window assemblies shall be fire protection rated in accordance with this section and Table 716.6. Glazing in fire door assemblies shall comply with Section 716.5.8. Fire-protection-rated glazing in fire window assemblies shall be tested in accordance with and shall meet the acceptance criteria of NFPA 257 or UL 9. Openings in nonfire-resistance-rated exterior wall assemblies that require protection in accordance with Section 705.3, 705.8, 705.8.5 or 705.8.6 shall have a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Fire-protection-rated glazing in 0.5-hour fire-resistance-rated partitions is permitted to have an 0.33-hour fire protection rating.

TABLE 716.6

FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY FIRE PROTECTION RATINGS

TYPE OF WALL
ASSEMBLY
	REQUIRED WALL
ASSEMBLY RATING
(hours)	MINIMUM FIRE
WINDOW ASSEMBLY
RATING (hours)
	FIRE-RATED
GLAZING MARKING

Interior walls			
 Fire walls	All	NPa	W-XXXb
 Fire barriers	>1	NPa	W-XXXb
1	NPa	W-XXXb
 Incidental use areas (Section 707.3.7),c	1	3/4	OH-45 or W-60
 Mixed occupancy separations (Section 707.3.9)			
 Fire partitions	1	3/4	OH-45 or W-60
0.5	1/3	OH-20 or W-30
 Smoke barriers	1	3/4	OH-45 or W-60
Exterior walls	>1	11/2	OH-90 or W-XXXb
1	3/4	OH-45 or W-60
0.5	1/3	OH-20 or W-30
Party wall	All	NP	Not Applicable

NP = Not Permitted.

a.	Not permitted except fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.2.

b.	XXX = The fire rating duration period in minutes, which shall be equal to the fire-resistance rating required for the wall assembly.

c.	Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for fire barriers required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code to enclose energy storage systems. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.2, shall be permitted.

716.6.1 Testing under positive pressure.

NFPA 257 or UL 9 shall evaluate fire-protection-rated glazing under positive pressure. Within the first 10 minutes of a test, the pressure in the furnace shall be adjusted so not less than two-thirds of the test specimen is above the neutral pressure plane, and the neutral pressure plane shall be maintained at that height for the balance of the test.

716.6.2 Nonsymmetrical glazing systems.

Nonsymmetrical fire-protection-rated glazing systems in fire partitions, in fire barriers or in exterior walls with a fire separation distance of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less pursuant to Section 705 shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire protection rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance with NFPA 257 or UL 9.

716.6.3 Safety glazing.

Fire-protection-rated glazing and fire-resistance-rated glazing installed in fire window assemblies shall comply with the safety glazing requirements of Chapter 24 where applicable.

716.6.4 Glass and glazing.

Glazing in fire window assemblies shall be fire-protection-rated glazing installed in accordance with and complying with the size limitations set forth in NFPA 80.

716.6.5 Installation.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be in the fixed position or be automatic-closing and shall be installed in approved frames.

716.6.6 Window mullions.

Metal mullions that exceed a nominal height of 12 feet (3658 mm) shall be protected with materials to afford the same fire-resistance rating as required for the wall construction in which the protective is located.

716.6.7 Interior fire window assemblies.

Fire-protection-rated glazing used in fire window assemblies located in fire partitions and fire barriers shall be limited to use in assemblies with a maximum fire-resistance rating of 1 hour in accordance with this section.

716.6.7.1 Where 3/4-hour fire protection window assemblies permitted.

Fire-protection-rated glazing requiring 45-minute opening protection in accordance with Table 716.6 shall be limited to fire partitions designed in accordance with Section 708 and fire barriers utilized in the applications set forth in Sections 707.3.6, 707.3.7 and 707.3.9 where the fire-resistance rating does not exceed 1 hour. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not be subject to the limitations of this section.

716.6.7.1.1 Energy storage system separation.

Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for use in fire window assemblies in fire barriers required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code to enclose energy storage systems.

716.6.7.2 Area limitations.

The total area of the glazing in fire-protection-rated window assemblies shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of a common wall with any room.

716.6.7.3 Where 1/3-hour fire-protection window assemblies permitted.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted in window assemblies tested to NFPA 257 or UL 9 in smoke barriers and fire partitions requiring 1/3-hour opening protection in accordance with Table 716.6.

716.6.8 Labeling requirements.

Fire-protection-rated glazing shall bear a label or other identification showing the name of the manufacturer, the test standard and information required in Section 716.3.2 and Table 716.6 that shall be issued by an approved agency and permanently identified on the glazing.

SECTION 717
DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS
717.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the protection of duct penetrations and air transfer openings in assemblies required to be protected and duct penetrations in nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies.

717.1.1 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Ducts transitioning horizontally between shafts shall not require a shaft enclosure provided that the duct penetration into each associated shaft is protected with dampers complying with this section.

717.1.2 Ducts that penetrate fire-resistance-rated assemblies without dampers.

Ducts that penetrate fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are not required by this section to have dampers shall comply with the requirements of Sections 714.3 through 714.4.3. Ducts that penetrate horizontal assemblies not required to be contained within a shaft and not required by this section to have dampers shall comply with the requirements of Sections 714.5 through 714.6.2.

717.1.2.1 Ducts that penetrate nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies.

The space around a duct penetrating a nonfire-resistance-rated floor assembly shall comply with Section 717.6.3.

717.2 Installation.

Fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and ceiling radiation dampers located within air distribution and smoke control systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the dampers’ listing and Sections 717.2.1 through 717.2.3.

717.2.1 Smoke control system.

Where the installation of a fire damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized. Where mechanical systems including ducts and dampers utilized for normal building ventilation serve as part of the smoke control system, the expected performance of these systems in smoke control mode shall be addressed in the rational analysis required by Section 909.4.

717.2.2 Hazardous exhaust ducts.

Fire dampers for hazardous exhaust duct systems shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

717.2.3 Static dampers.

Fire dampers and ceiling radiation dampers that are listed for use in static systems shall only be installed in heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems that are automatically shut down in the event of a fire.

717.3 Damper testing, ratings and actuation.

Damper testing, ratings and actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.1 through 717.3.3.

717.3.1 Damper testing.

Dampers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with the standards in this section.

1.	Fire dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555.

2.	Smoke dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555S.

3.	Combination fire/smoke dampers shall comply with the requirements of both UL 555 and UL 555S.

4.	Ceiling radiation dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555C or shall be tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

5.	Corridor dampers shall comply with requirements of both UL 555 and UL 555S. Corridor dampers shall demonstrate acceptable closure performance when subjected to 150 feet per minute (0.76 mps) velocity across the face of the damper during the UL 555 fire exposure test.

717.3.2 Damper rating.

Damper ratings shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.2.1 through 717.3.2.4.

717.3.2.1 Fire damper ratings.

Fire dampers shall have the minimum fire protection rating specified in Table 717.3.2.1 for the type of penetration.

TABLE 717.3.2.1

FIRE DAMPER RATING

TYPE OF
PENETRATION
	MINIMUM
DAMPER
RATING (hours)
Less than 3-hour fire-resistance-rated assemblies	1.5
3-hour or greater fire-resistance-rated assemblies	3
717.3.2.2 Smoke damper ratings.

Smoke damper leakage ratings shall be Class I or II. Elevated temperature ratings shall be not less than 250°F (121°C).

717.3.2.3 Combination fire/smoke damper ratings.

Combination fire/smoke dampers shall have the minimum fire protection rating specified for fire dampers in Table 717.3.2.1 for the type of penetration and shall have a minimum smoke damper rating as specified in Section 717.3.2.2.

717.3.2.4 Corridor damper ratings.

Corridor dampers shall have the following minimum ratings:

1.	One hour fire-resistance rating.

2.	Class I or II leakage rating as specified in Section 717.3.2.2.

717.3.3 Damper actuation.

Damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 through 717.3.3.5 as applicable.

717.3.3.1 Fire damper actuation.

Primary heat responsive devices used to actuate fire shall meet one of the following requirements:

1.	The operating temperature shall be approximately 50°F (10°C) above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not less than 160°F (71°C).

2.	The operating temperature shall be not more than 350°F (177°C) where located in a smoke control system complying with Section 909.

717.3.3.2 Smoke damper actuation.

The smoke damper shall close upon actuation of a listed smoke detector or detectors installed in accordance with Section 907.3 and one of the following methods, as applicable:

1.	Where a smoke damper is installed within a duct, a smoke detector shall be installed inside the duct or outside the duct with sampling tubes protruding into the duct. The detector or tubes within the duct shall be within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the damper. Air outlets and inlets shall not be located between the detector or tubes and the damper. The detector shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity anticipated at the point where it is installed. Other than in mechanical smoke control systems, dampers shall be closed upon fan shutdown where local smoke detectors require a minimum velocity to operate.

2.	Where a smoke damper is installed above smoke barrier doors in a smoke barrier, a spot-type detector shall be installed on either side of the smoke barrier door opening. The detector shall be listed for releasing service if used for direct interface with the damper.

3.	Where a smoke damper is installed within an air transfer opening in a wall, a spot-type detector shall be installed within 5 feet (1524 mm) horizontally of the damper. The detector shall be listed for releasing service if used for direct interface with the damper.

4.	Where a smoke damper is installed in a corridor wall or ceiling, the damper shall be permitted to be controlled by a smoke detection system installed in the corridor.

5.	Where a smoke detection system is installed in all areas served by the duct in which the damper will be located, the smoke dampers shall be permitted to be controlled by the smoke detection system.

717.3.3.3 Combination fire/smoke damper actuation.

Combination fire/smoke damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 and 717.3.3.2. Combination fire/smoke dampers installed in smoke control system shaft penetrations shall not be activated by local area smoke detection unless it is secondary to the smoke management system controls.

717.3.3.4 Ceiling radiation damper actuation.

The operating temperature of a ceiling radiation damper actuation device shall be 50°F (27.8°C) above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not less than 160°F (71°C).

717.3.3.5 Corridor damper actuation.

Corridor damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 and 717.3.3.2.

717.4 Access and identification.

Access and identification of fire and smoke dampers shall comply with Sections 717.4.1 through 717.4.2.

717.4.1 Access.

Fire and smoke dampers shall be provided with an approved means of access that is large enough to permit inspection and maintenance of the damper and its operating parts. Dampers equipped with fusible links, internal operators or both shall be provided with an access door that is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) square or provided with a removable duct section.

717.4.1.1 Access openings.

The access shall not affect the integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The access openings shall not reduce the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. Access doors in ducts shall be tight fitting and suitable for the required duct construction.

717.4.1.2 Restricted access.

Where space constraints or physical barriers restrict access to a damper for periodic inspection and testing, the damper shall be a single- or multi-blade type damper and shall comply with the remote inspection requirements of NFPA 80 or NFPA 105.

717.4.2 Identification.

Access points shall be permanently identified on the exterior by a label having letters not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in height reading: FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER, SMOKE DAMPER or FIRE DAMPER.

717.5 Where required.

Fire, dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers, ceiling radiation dampers and corridor dampers shall be provided at the locations prescribed in Sections 717.5.1 through 717.5.7 and 717.6. Where an assembly is required to have both fire dampers and smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers or a fire damper and a smoke damper shall be provided.

717.5.1 Fire walls.

Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 706.11 shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

717.5.1.1 Horizontal exits.

A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a fire wall that serves as a horizontal exit.

717.5.2 Fire barriers.

Ducts and air transfer openings of fire barriers shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. Ducts and air transfer openings shall not penetrate enclosures for interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways, except as permitted by Sections 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively.

Exception: Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of fire barriers where any of the following apply:

1.	Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.

2.	Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system in accordance with Section 909 and where the use of a fire damper would interfere with the operation of a smoke control system.

3.	Such walls are penetrated by fully ducted HVAC systems, have a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, are in areas of other than Group H and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of this exception, a fully ducted HVAC system shall be a duct system for conveying supply, return or exhaust air as part of the structure’s HVAC system. Such a duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than No. 26 gage thickness and shall be continuous from the airhandling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals. Flexible air connectors shall be permitted in the following locations:

3.1.	Nonmetal flex connections shall be permitted at the duct connection to the air handling unit or equipment located within the mechanical room in accordance with Section 603.9 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

3.1.	Nonmetal flex connections shall be permitted from an overhead metal duct to a ceiling diffuser within the same room in accordance with Section 603.6.2 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

717.5.2.1 Horizontal exits.

A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a fire barrier that serves as a horizontal exit.

717.5.3 Shaft enclosures.

Shaft enclosures that are permitted to be penetrated by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected with listed fire and smoke dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

Exceptions:

1.	Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where any of the following criteria are met:

1.1.	Steel exhaust subducts having a wall thickness of not less than 0.0187 inch (0.4712 mm) are extended not less than 22 inches (559 mm) vertically in exhaust shafts, and an exhaust fan is installed at the upper terminus of the shaft that is powered continuously in accordance with Section 909.11, so as to maintain a continuous upward airflow to the outdoors.

1.2.	Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.

1.3.	Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system designed and installed in accordance with Section 909 and where the fire damper will interfere with the operation of the smoke control system.

1.4.	The penetrations are in parking garage exhaust or supply shafts that are separated from other building shafts by not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

2.	In Group B and R occupancies equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, smoke dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where all of the following criteria are met:

2.1.	Kitchen, clothes dryer, bathroom and toilet room exhaust openings are installed with steel exhaust subducts, having a wall thickness of not less than 0.0187-inch (0.4712 mm).

2.2.	The subducts extend not less than 22 inches (559 mm) vertically.

2.3.	An exhaust fan is installed at the upper terminus of the shaft that is powered continuously in accordance with the provisions of Section 909.11, so as to maintain a continuous upward airflow to the outdoors.

3.	Smoke dampers are not required at penetration of exhaust or supply shafts in parking garages that are separated from other building shafts by not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

4.	Smoke dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where ducts are used as part of an approved mechanical smoke control system designed in accordance with Section 909 and where the smoke damper will interfere with the operation of the smoke control system.

5.	Fire dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers are not required in kitchen and clothes dryer exhaust systems where installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

717.5.3.1 Continuous upward airflow.

Fire dampers and smoke dampers shall not be installed in shafts that are required to maintain a continuous upward airflow path where closure of the damper would result in the loss of the airflow.

717.5.4 Fire partitions.

Ducts and air transfer openings that penetrate fire partitions shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

Exceptions: In occupancies other than Group H, fire dampers are not required where any of the following apply:

1.	Corridor walls in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the duct is protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714.

2.	Tenant partitions in covered and open mall buildings where the walls are not required by provisions elsewhere in the code to extend to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above.

3.	The duct system is constructed of approved materials in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the duct penetrating the wall complies with all of the following requirements:

3.1.	The duct shall not exceed 100 square inches (0.06 m2).

3.2.	The duct shall be constructed of steel not less than 0.0217 inch (0.55 mm) in thickness.

3.3.	The duct shall not have openings that communicate the corridor with adjacent spaces or rooms.

3.4.	The duct shall be installed above a ceiling.

3.5.	The duct shall not terminate at a wall register in the fire-resistance-rated wall.

3.6.	A minimum 12-inch-long (305 mm) by 0.060-inch-thick (1.52 mm) steel sleeve shall be centered in each duct opening. The sleeve shall be secured to both sides of the wall and all four sides of the sleeve with minimum 11/2-inch by 11/2-inch by 0.060-inch (38 mm by 38 mm by 1.52 mm) steel retaining angles. The retaining angles shall be secured to the sleeve and the wall with No. 10 (M5) screws. The annular space between the steel sleeve and the wall opening shall be filled with mineral wool batting on all sides.

4.	Such walls are penetrated by ducted HVAC systems, have a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of this exception, a ducted HVAC system shall be a duct system for conveying supply, return or exhaust air as part of the structure’s HVAC system. Such a duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than No. 26 gage thickness and shall be continuous from the air-handling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals.

717.5.4.1 Corridors.

Duct and air transfer openings that penetrate corridors shall be protected with dampers as follows:

1.	A corridor damper shall be provided where corridor ceilings, constructed as required for the corridor walls as permitted in Section 708.4, Exception 3, are penetrated.

2.	A ceiling radiation damper shall be provided where the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling or roof-ceiling assembly, constructed as permitted in Section 708.4, Exception 2, is penetrated.

3.	A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a corridor enclosure required to have smoke and draft control doors in accordance with Section 716.5.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Smoke dampers are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an approved smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, and smoke dampers are not necessary for the operation and control of the system.

2.	Smoke dampers are not required in corridor penetrations where the duct is constructed of steel not less than 0.019 inch (0.48 mm) in thickness and there are no openings serving the corridor.

717.5.5 Smoke barriers.

A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a smoke barrier. Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall comply with Section 717.3.3.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Smoke dampers are not required where the openings in ducts are limited to a single smoke compartment and the ducts are constructed of steel.

2.	Smoke dampers are not required in smoke barriers required by Section 407.5 for Group I-2, Condition 2—where the HVAC system is fully ducted in accordance with Section 603 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and where buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and equipped with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

717.5.6 Exterior walls.

Ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistance-rated exterior walls required to have protected openings in accordance with Section 705.10 shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

717.5.7 Smoke partitions.

A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point that an air transfer opening penetrates a smoke partition. Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall comply with Section 717.3.3.2.

Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized.

717.6 Horizontal assemblies.

Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings of a floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the ceiling membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected by a shaft enclosure that complies with Section 713 or shall comply with Sections 717.6.1 through 717.6.3.

717.6.1 Through penetrations.

In occupancies other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a duct constructed of approved materials in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical that penetrates a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assembly that connects not more than two stories is permitted without shaft enclosure protection, provided a listed fire damper is installed at the floor line or the duct is protected in accordance with Section 714.5. For air transfer openings, see Section 712.1.9.

Exception: A duct is permitted to penetrate three floors or less without a fire damper at each floor, provided such duct meets all of the following requirements:

1.	The duct shall be contained and located within the cavity of a wall and shall be constructed of steel having a minimum wall thickness of 0.0187 inches (0.4712 mm) (No. 26 gage).

2.	The duct shall open into only one dwelling or sleeping unit and the duct system shall be continuous from the unit to the exterior of the building.

3.	The duct shall not exceed 4-inch (102 mm) nominal diameter and the total area of such ducts shall not exceed 100 square inches (0.065 m2) in any 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area.

4.	The annular space around the duct is protected with materials that prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E119 or UL 263 time-temperature conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 0.01 inch (2.49 Pa) of water at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated.

5.	Grille openings located in a ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected with a listed ceiling radiation damper installed in accordance with Section 717.6.2.1.

717.6.2 Membrane penetrations.

Ducts and air transfer openings constructed of approved materials in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical that penetrate the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected with one of the following:

1.	A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

2.	A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceiling line where a duct penetrates the ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly.

3.	A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceiling line where a diffuser with no duct attached penetrates the ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly.

717.6.2.1 Ceiling radiation dampers.

Ceiling radiation dampers shall be tested in accordance with Section 717.3.1. Ceiling radiation dampers shall be installed in accordance with the details listed in the fire-resistance-rated assembly and the manufacturer’s instructions and the listing. Ceiling radiation dampers are not required where one of the following applies:

1.	Tests in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 have shown that ceiling radiation dampers are not necessary in order to maintain the fire-resistance rating of the assembly.

2.	Where exhaust duct penetrations are protected in accordance with Section 714.5.2, are located within the cavity of a wall and do not pass through another dwelling unit or tenant space.

3.	Where duct and air transfer openings are protected with a duct outlet protection system tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

717.6.3 Nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies.

Duct systems constructed of approved materials in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical that penetrate nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies shall be protected by any of the following methods:

1.	A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

2.	The duct connects not more than two stories, and the annular space around the penetrating duct is protected with an approved noncombustible material that resists the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

3.	In floor assemblies composed of noncombustible materials, a shaft shall not be required where the duct connects not more than three stories, the annular space around the penetrating duct is protected with an approved noncombustible material that resists the free passage of flame and the products of combustion and a fire damper is installed at each floor line.

Exception: Fire dampers are not required in ducts within individual residential dwelling units.

717.7 Flexible ducts and air connectors.

Flexible ducts and air connectors shall not pass through any fire-resistance-rated assembly. Flexible air connectors shall not pass through any wall, floor or ceiling.

SECTION 718
CONCEALED SPACES
718.1 General.

Fireblocking and draftstopping shall be installed in combustible concealed locations in accordance with this section. Fireblocking shall comply with Section 718.2. Draftstopping in floor/ceiling spaces and attic spaces shall comply with Sections 718.3 and 718.4, respectively. The permitted use of combustible materials in concealed spaces of buildings of Type I or II construction shall be limited to the applications indicated in Section 718.5.

718.2 Fireblocking.

In combustible construction, fireblocking shall be installed to cut off concealed draft openings (both vertical and horizontal) and shall form an effective barrier between floors, between a top story and a roof or attic space. Fireblocking shall be installed in the locations specified in Sections 718.2.2 through 718.2.7.

718.2.1 Fireblocking materials.

Fireblocking shall consist of the following materials:

1.	Two-inch (51 mm) nominal lumber.

2.	Two thicknesses of 1-inch (25 mm) nominal lumber with broken lap joints.

3.	One thickness of 0.719-inch (18.3 mm) wood structural panels with joints backed by 0.719-inch (18.3 mm) wood structural panels.

4.	One thickness of 0.75-inch (19.1 mm) particleboard with joints backed by 0.75-inch (19 mm) particleboard.

5.	One-half-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.

6.	One-fourth-inch (6.4 mm) cement-based millboard.

7.	Batts or blankets of mineral wool, mineral fiber or other approved materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in place.

8.	Cellulose insulation installed as tested for the specific application.

9.	Mass timber complying with Section 2304.11.

718.2.1.1 Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber.

Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber or other approved nonrigid materials shall be permitted for compliance with the 10-foot (3048 mm) horizontal fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.

718.2.1.2 Unfaced fiberglass.

Unfaced fiberglass batt insulation used as fireblocking shall fill the entire cross section of the wall cavity to a minimum height of 16 inches (406 mm) measured vertically. Where piping, conduit or similar obstructions are encountered, the insulation shall be packed tightly around the obstruction.

718.2.1.3 Loose-fill insulation material.

Loose-fill insulation material, insulating foam sealants and caulk materials shall not be used as a fireblock unless specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and to retard the spread of fire and hot gases.

718.2.1.4 Fireblocking integrity.

The integrity of fireblocks shall be maintained.

718.2.1.5 Double stud walls.

Batts or blankets of mineral or glass fiber or other approved nonrigid materials shall be allowed as fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.

718.2.2 Concealed wall spaces.

Fireblocking shall be provided in concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred spaces, and parallel rows of studs or staggered studs, as follows:

1.	Vertically at the ceiling and floor levels.

2.	Horizontally at intervals not exceeding 10 feet (3048 mm).

718.2.3 Connections between horizontal and vertical spaces.

Fireblocking shall be provided at interconnections between concealed vertical stud wall or partition spaces and concealed horizontal spaces created by an assembly of floor joists or trusses, and between concealed vertical and horizontal spaces such as occur at soffits, drop ceilings, cove ceilings and similar locations.

718.2.4 Stairways.

Fireblocking shall be provided in concealed spaces between stair stringers at the top and bottom of the run. Enclosed spaces under stairways shall comply with Section 1011.7.3.

718.2.5 Ceiling and floor openings.

Where required by Section 712.1.8, Exception 1 of Section 714.5.1.2 or Section 714.6, fireblocking of the annular space around vents, pipes, ducts, chimneys and fireplaces at ceilings and floor levels shall be installed with a material specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

718.2.5.1 Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces.

Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces shall be fireblocked in accordance with UL 103 and UL 127.

718.2.6 Exterior wall coverings.

Fireblocking shall be installed within concealed spaces of exterior wall coverings and other exterior architectural elements where permitted to be of combustible construction as specified in Section 1406 or where erected with combustible frames. Fireblocking shall be installed at maximum intervals of 20 feet (6096 mm) in either dimension so that there will be no concealed space exceeding 100 square feet (9.3 m2) between fireblocking. Where wood furring strips are used, they shall be of approved wood of natural decay resistance or preservative-treated wood. If noncontinuous, such elements shall have closed ends, with not less than 4 inches (102 mm) of separation between sections.

Exceptions:

1.	Fireblocking of cornices is not required in single-family dwellings. Fireblocking of cornices of a two-family dwelling is required only at the line of dwelling unit separation.

2.	Fireblocking shall not be required where the exterior wall covering is installed on noncombustible framing and the face of the exterior wall covering exposed to the concealed space is covered by one of the following materials:

2.1.	Aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.019 inch (0.5 mm).

2.2.	Corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness not less than 0.016 inch (0.4 mm) at any point.

2.3.	Other approved noncombustible materials.

3.	Fireblocking shall not be required where the exterior wall covering has been tested in accordance with, and complies with the acceptance criteria of, NFPA 285. The exterior wall covering shall be installed as tested in accordance with NFPA 285.

718.2.7 Concealed sleeper spaces.

Where wood sleepers are used for laying wood flooring on masonry or concrete fire-resistance-rated floors, the space between the floor slab and the underside of the wood flooring shall be filled with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and products of combustion or fireblocked in such a manner that there will be no open spaces under the flooring that will exceed 100 square feet (9.3 m2) in area and such space shall be filled solidly under permanent partitions so that there is no communication under the flooring between adjoining rooms.

Exceptions:

1.	Fireblocking is not required for slab-on-grade floors in gymnasiums.

2.	Fireblocking is required only at the juncture of each alternate lane and at the ends of each lane in a bowling facility.

718.3 Draftstopping in floors.

In combustible construction, draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide floor/ceiling assemblies in the locations prescribed in Sections 718.3.2 through 718.3.3.

718.3.1 Draftstopping materials.

Draftstopping materials shall be not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board, 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) wood structural panel, 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) particleboard, 1-inch (25-mm) nominal lumber, cement fiberboard, batts or blankets of mineral wool or glass fiber, or other approved materials adequately supported. The integrity of draftstops shall be maintained.

718.3.2 Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4.

Draftstopping shall be provided in floor/ceiling spaces in Group R-1 buildings, in Group R-2 buildings with three or more dwelling units, in Group R-3 buildings with two dwelling units and in Group R-4 buildings. Draftstopping shall be located above and in line with the dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations.

Exceptions:

1.	Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, provided that automatic sprinklers are installed in the combustible concealed spaces where the draftstopping is being omitted.

718.3.3 Other groups.

In other groups, draftstopping shall be installed so that horizontal floor areas do not exceed 1,000 square feet (93 m2).

Exception: Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

718.4 Draftstopping in attics.

In combustible construction, draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide attic spaces and concealed roof spaces in the locations prescribed in Sections 718.4.2 and 718.4.3. Ventilation of concealed roof spaces shall be maintained in accordance with Section 1203.2.

718.4.1 Draftstopping materials.

Materials utilized for draftstopping of attic spaces shall comply with Section 718.3.1.

718.4.1.1 Openings.

Openings in the partitions shall be protected by self-closing doors with automatic latches constructed as required for the partitions.

718.4.2 Groups R-1 and R-2.

Draftstopping shall be provided in attics, mansards, overhangs or other concealed roof spaces of Group R-2 buildings with three or more dwelling units and in all Group R-1 buildings. Draftstopping shall be installed above, and in line with, sleeping unit and dwelling unit separation walls that do not extend to the underside of the roof sheathing above.

Exceptions:

1.	Where corridor walls provide a sleeping unit or dwelling unit separation, draftstopping shall only be required above one of the corridor walls.

2.	Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3.	In occupancies in Group R-2 that do not exceed four stories above grade plane, the attic space shall be subdivided by draftstops into areas not exceeding 3,000 square feet (279 m2) or above every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller.

4.	Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, provided that automatic sprinklers are installed in the combustible concealed space where the draftstopping is being omitted.

718.4.3 Other groups.

Draftstopping shall be installed in attics and concealed roof spaces, such that any horizontal area does not exceed 3,000 square feet (279 m2).

Exception: Draftstopping is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

718.5 Combustible materials in concealed spaces in Type I or II construction.

Combustible materials shall not be permitted in concealed spaces of buildings of Type I or II construction.

Exceptions:

1.	Combustible materials in accordance with Section 603.

2.	Combustible materials exposed within plenums complying with Section 602 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

3.	Class A interior finish materials classified in accordance with Section 803.

4.	Combustible piping within partitions or shaft enclosures installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

5.	Combustible piping within concealed ceiling spaces installed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

6.	Combustible insulation and covering on pipe and tubing, installed in concealed spaces other than plenums, complying with Section 720.7.

SECTION 719
FIRE-RESISTANCE
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLASTER
719.1 Thickness of plaster.

The minimum thickness of gypsum plaster or Portland cement plaster used in a fire-resistance-rated system shall be determined by the prescribed fire tests. The plaster thickness shall be measured from the face of the lath where applied to gypsum lath or metal lath.

719.2 Plaster equivalents.

For fire-resistance purposes, 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of unsanded gypsum plaster shall be deemed equivalent to 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) of one-to-three gypsum sand plaster or 1 inch (25 mm) of Portland cement sand plaster.

719.3 Noncombustible furring.

In buildings of Type I and II construction, plaster shall be applied directly on concrete or masonry or on approved noncombustible plastering base and furring.

719.4 Double reinforcement.

Plaster protection more than 1 inch (25 mm) in thickness shall be reinforced with an additional layer of approved lath embedded not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) from the outer surface and fixed securely in place.

Exception: Solid plaster partitions or where otherwise determined by fire tests.

719.5 Plaster alternatives for concrete.

In reinforced concrete construction, gypsum plaster or Portland cement plaster is permitted to be substituted for 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the required poured concrete protection, except that a minimum thickness of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of poured concrete shall be provided in reinforced concrete floors and 1 inch (25 mm) in reinforced concrete columns in addition to the plaster finish. The concrete base shall be prepared in accordance with Section 2510.7.

SECTION 720
THERMAL- AND SOUND-INSULATING MATERIALS
720.1 General.

Insulating materials, including facings such as vapor retarders and vapor-permeable membranes, similar coverings and all layers of single and multilayer reflective foil insulations, shall comply with the requirements of this section. Where a flame spread index or a smoke-developed index is specified in this section, such index shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Any material that is subject to an increase in flame spread index or smoke-developed index beyond the limits herein established through the effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions shall not be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.	Fiberboard insulation shall comply with Chapter 23.

2.	Foam plastic insulation shall comply with Chapter 26.

3.	Duct and pipe insulation and duct and pipe coverings and linings in plenums shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

4.	All layers of single and multilayer reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with Section 2613.

720.2 Concealed installation.

Insulating materials, where concealed as installed in buildings of any type of construction, shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation complying with the requirements of Section 720.6 shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement but shall be required to meet a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

720.2.1 Facings.

Where such materials are installed in concealed spaces in buildings of Type III, IV or V construction, the flame spread and smoke-developed limitations do not apply to facings, coverings, and layers of reflective foil insulation that are installed behind and in substantial contact with the unexposed surface of the ceiling, wall or floor finish.

Exception: All layers of single and multilayer reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with Section 2613.

720.3 Exposed installation.

Insulating materials, where exposed as installed in buildings of any type of construction, shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation complying with the requirements of Section 720.6 shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement but shall be required to meet a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

720.3.1 Attic floors.

Exposed insulation materials installed on attic floors shall have a critical radiant flux of not less than 0.12 watt per square centimeter when tested in accordance with ASTM E970.

720.4 Loose-fill insulation.

Loose-fill insulation materials that cannot be mounted in the ASTM E84 or UL 723 apparatus without a screen or artificial supports shall comply with the flame spread and smoke-developed limits of Sections 720.2 and 720.3 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2, provided such insulation has a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 and complies with the requirements of Section 720.6.

720.5 Roof insulation.

The use of combustible roof insulation not complying with Sections 720.2 and 720.3 shall be permitted in any type of construction provided that insulation is covered with approved roof coverings directly applied thereto.

720.6 Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation and self-supported spray-applied cellulosic insulation.

Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation and self-supported spray-applied cellulosic insulation shall comply with CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1209 and 1404. Each package of such insulating material shall be clearly labeled in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1209 and 1404.

720.7 Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing.

Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing installed in plenums shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

SECTION 721
PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE
721.1 General.

The provisions of this section contain prescriptive details of fire-resistance-rated building elements, components or assemblies. The materials of construction listed in Tables 721.1(1), 721.1(2), and 721.1(3) shall be assumed to have the fire-resistance ratings prescribed therein. Where materials that change the capacity for heat dissipation are incorporated into a fire-resistance-rated assembly, fire test results or other substantiating data shall be made available to the building official to show that the required fire-resistance-rating time period is not reduced.

TABLE 721.1(1)

MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS FOR VARIOUS NONCOMBUSTIBLE INSULATING MATERIALSm

STRUCTURAL
PARTS TO BE
PROTECTED	ITEM
NUMBER
	INSULATING MATERIAL USED	MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
INSULATING MATERIAL
FOR THE FOLLOWING
FIRE-RESISTANCE
PERIODS (inches)
4
hours
	3
hours
	2
hours
	1
hour

1. Steel columns
and all of primary
trusses
	1-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 6" × 6" or
greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
	21/2	2	11/2	1
1-1.2	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 8" × 8" or
greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
	2	11/2	1	1
1-1.3	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members
12" × 12" or greater (not including sandstone, granite and siliceous gravel).a
	11/2	1	1	1
1-1.4	Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members 6" × 6" or
greater.a
	3	2	11/2	1
1-1.5	Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members 8" × 8" or
greater.a
	21/2	2	1	1
1-1.6	Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1-1.1, members
12" × 12" or greater.a
	2	1	1	1
1-2.1	Clay or shale brick with brick and mortar fill.a	33/4	—	—	21/4
1-3.1	4" hollow clay tile in two 2" layers; 1/2" mortar between tile and column; 3/8" metal mesh
0.046" wire diameter in horizontal joints; tile fill.a
	4	—	—	—
1-3.2	2" hollow clay tile; 3/4" mortar between tile and column; 3/8" metal mesh 0.046" wire
diameter in horizontal joints; limestone concrete filla; plastered with 3/4" gypsum plaster.
	3	—	—	—
1-3.3	2" hollow clay tile with outside wire ties 0.08" diameter at each course of tile or 3/8"
metal mesh 0.046" diameter wire in horizontal joints; limestone or trap-rock concrete
filla extending 1" outside column on all sides.
	—	—	3	—
1-3.4	2" hollow clay tile with outside wire ties 0.08" diameter at each course of tile with or
without concrete fill; 3/4" mortar between tile and column.
	—	—	—	2
1-4.1	Cement plaster over metal lath wire tied to 3/4" cold-rolled vertical channels with 0.049"
(No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 3" to 6" on center. Plaster mixed
1:2 1/2 by volume, cement to sand.
	—	—	21/2b	7/8
1-5.1	Vermiculite concrete, 1:4 mix by volume over paperbacked wire fabric lath wrapped
directly around column with additional 2" × 2" 0.065"/0.065" (No. 16/16 B.W. gage)
wire fabric placed 3/4" from outer concrete surface. Wire fabric tied with 0.049" (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire spaced 6" on center for inner layer and 2" on center for outer layer.
	2	—	—	—
1-6.1	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over metal lath wrapped around column and
furred 11/4" from column flanges. Sheets lapped at ends and tied at 6" intervals with
0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) tie wire. Plaster pushed through to flanges.
	11/2	1	—	—
1-6.2	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over self-furring metal lath wrapped directly
around column, lapped 1" and tied at 6" intervals with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire.
	13/4	13/8	1	—
1-6.3	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath applied to 3/4" cold-rolled channels
spaced 24" apart vertically and wrapped flatwise around column.
	11/2	—	—	—
1-6.4	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over two layers of 1/2" plain full-length gypsum
lath applied tight to column flanges. Lath wrapped with 1" hexagonal mesh of No. 20
gage wire and tied with doubled 0.035" diameter (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties spaced
23" on center. For three-coat work, the plaster mix for the second coat shall not exceed
100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate for the 3-hour system.
	21/2	2	—	—
1-6.5	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster over one layer of 1/2" plain full-length gypsum
lath applied tight to column flanges. Lath tied with doubled 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage)
wire ties spaced 23" on center and scratch coat wrapped with 1" hexagonal mesh 0.035"
(No. 20 B.W. gage) wire fabric. For three-coat work, the plaster mix for the second coat
shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate.
	—	2	—	—
1-7.1	Multiple layers of 1/2" gypsum wallboardc adhesivelyd secured to column flanges and
successive layers. Wallboard applied without horizontal joints. Corner edges of each
layer staggered. Wallboard layer below outer layer secured to column with doubled
0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel wire ties spaced 15" on center. Exposed corners taped
and treated.
	—	—	2	1
1-7.2	Three layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard.c First and second layer held in place by
1/8" diameter by 13/8" long ring shank nails with 5/16" diameter heads spaced 24" on center
at corners. Middle layer also secured with metal straps at mid-height and 18" from
each end, and by metal corner bead at each corner held by the metal straps. Third layer
attached to corner bead with 1" long gypsum wallboard screws spaced 12" on center.
	—	—	17/8	—
1-7.3	Three layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard,c each layer screw attached to 15/8" steel
studs 0.018" thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) at each corner of column. Middle
layer also secured with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) double-strand steel wire ties, 24" on
center. Screws are No. 6 by 1" spaced 24" on center for inner layer, No. 6 by 15/8"
spaced 12" on center for middle layer and No. 8 by 21/4" spaced 12" on center for outer
layer.
	—	17/8	—	—
1-8.1	Wood-fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight gypsum-to-sand aggregate applied
over metal lath. Lath lapped 1" and tied 6" on center at all end, edges and spacers with
0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel tie wires. Lath applied over 1/2" spacers made of 3/4"
furring channel with 2" legs bent around each corner. Spacers located 1" from top and
bottom of member and a maximum of 40" on center and wire tied with a single strand
of 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) steel tie wires. Corner bead tied to the lath at 6" on center
along each corner to provide plaster thickness.
	—	—	15/8	—
1-9.1	Minimum W8x35 wide flange steel column (w/d ≥ 0.75) with each web cavity filled
even with the flange tip with normal weight carbonate or siliceous aggregate concrete
(3,000 psi minimum compressive strength with 145 pcf ± 3 pcf unit weight). Reinforce
the concrete in each web cavity with a minimum No. 4 deformed reinforcing bar
installed vertically and centered in the cavity, and secured to the column web with a
minimum No. 2 horizontal deformed reinforcing bar welded to the web every 18" on
center vertically. As an alternative to the No. 4 rebar, 3/4" diameter by 3" long headed
studs, spaced at 12" on center vertically, shall be welded on each side of the web mid-
way between the column flanges.
	—	—	—	See Note n
2. Webs or
flanges of steel
beams and girders
	2-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete (not including sand-
stone, granite and siliceous gravel) with 3" or finer metal mesh placed 1" from the fin-
ished surface anchored to the top flange and providing not less than 0.025 square inch
of steel area per foot in each direction.
	2	11/2	1	1
2-1.2	Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 2-1.1 with 3" or finer metal
mesh placed 1" from the finished surface anchored to the top flange and providing not
less than 0.025 square inch of steel area per foot in each direction.
	21/2	2	11/2	1
2-2.1	Cement plaster on metal lath attached to 3/4" cold-rolled channels with 0.04" (No. 18
B.W. gage) wire ties spaced 3" to 6" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 1/2 by volume, cement
to sand.
	—	—	21/2b	7/8
2-3.1	Vermiculite gypsum plaster on a metal lath cage, wire tied to 0.165" diameter (No. 8
B.W. gage) steel wire hangers wrapped around beam and spaced 16" on center. Metal
lath ties spaced approximately 5" on center at cage sides and bottom.
	—	7/8	—	—
2-4.1	Two layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboardc are attached to U-shaped brackets spaced
24" on center. 0.018" thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) 15/8" deep by 1" galvanized
steel runner channels are first installed parallel to and on each side of the top beam
flange to provide a 1/2" clearance to the flange. The channel runners are attached to steel
deck or concrete floor construction with approved fasteners spaced 12" on center. U-
shaped brackets are formed from members identical to the channel runners. At the bent
portion of the U-shaped bracket, the flanges of the channel are cut out so that 15/8" deep
corner channels can be inserted without attachment parallel to each side of the lower
flange.
As an alternative, 0.021" thick (No. 24 carbon sheet steel gage) 1" × 2" runner and corner
angles shall be used in lieu of channels, and the web cutouts in the U-shaped brackets
shall not be required. Each angle is attached to the bracket with 1/2"-long No. 8 self-
drilling screws. The vertical legs of the U-shaped bracket are attached to the runners
with one
1/2" long No. 8 self-drilling screw. The completed steel framing provides a 21/8" and 11/2"
space between the inner layer of wallboard and the sides and bottom of the steel beam,
respectively. The inner layer of wallboard is attached to the top runners and bottom corner
channels or corner angles with 11/4"-long No. 6 self-drilling screws spaced 16" on
center. The outer layer of wallboard is applied with 13/4"-long No. 6 self-drilling screws
spaced 8" on center. The bottom corners are reinforced with metal corner beads.
	—	—	11/4	—
2-4.2	Three layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboardc attached to a steel suspension system as
described immediately above utilizing the 0.018" thick (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage)
1" × 2" lower corner angles. The framing is located so that a 21/8" and 2" space is
provided between the inner layer of wallboard and the sides and bottom of the beam,
respectively. The first two layers of wallboard are attached as described immediately
above. A layer of 0.035" thick (No. 20 B.W. gage) 1" hexagonal galvanized wire mesh is
applied under the soffit of the middle layer and up the sides approximately 2". The mesh
is held in position with the No. 6 15/8"-long screws installed in the vertical leg of the bottom
corner angles. The outer layer of wallboard is attached with No. 6 21/4"-long screws
spaced 8" on center. One screw is also installed at the mid-depth of the bracket in each
layer. Bottom corners are finished as described above.	—	17/8	—	—
3. Bonded pre-
tensioned rein-
forcement in
prestressed
concretee
	3-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceousf aggregate concrete
Beams or girders
	4g	3g	21/2	11/2
Solid h		2	11/2	1
4. Bonded or
unbonded post-
tensioned ten-
dons in pre-
stressed
concretee, i
	4-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceousf aggregate concrete				
Unrestrained members:				
 Solid slabsh	—	2	11/2	—
 Beams and girdersj				
  8" wide		41/2	21/2	13/4
  greater than 12" wide	3	21/2	2	11/2
4-1.2	Carbonate, lightweight, sand-lightweight and siliceous aggregate				
Restrained members:k				
 Solid slabsh	11/4	1	3/4	—
 Beams and girdersj				
  8" wide	21/2	2	13/4	—
  greater than 12" wide	2	13/4	11/2	—
5. Reinforcing
steel in rein-
forced concrete
columns, beams
girders and
trusses
	5-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete, members 12" or
larger, square or round. (Size limit does not apply to beams and girders monolithic
with floors.)
	11/2	11/2	11/2	11/2
Siliceous aggregate concrete, members 12" or larger, square or round. (Size limit does
not apply to beams and girders monolithic with floors.)
	2	11/2	11/2	11/2
6. Reinforcing
steel in rein-
forced concrete
joists1
	6-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete	11/4	11/4	1	3/4
6-1.2	Siliceous aggregate concrete	13/4	11/2	1	3/4
7. Reinforcing
and tie rods in
floor and roof
slabs1
	7-1.1	Carbonate, lightweight and sand-lightweight aggregate concrete	1	1	3/4	3/4
7-1.2	Siliceous aggregate concrete	11/4	1	1	3/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.2 mm2, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.

a.	Reentrant parts of protected members to be filled solidly.

b.	Two layers of equal thickness with a 3/4-inch airspace between.

c.	For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in Table 721.1(1), gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be permitted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard and the joints on the face layer are reinforced, and the entire surface is covered with not less than 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.

d.	An approved adhesive qualified under ASTM E119 or UL 263.

e.	Where lightweight or sand-lightweight concrete having an oven-dry weight of 110 pounds per cubic foot or less is used, the tabulated minimum cover shall be permitted to be reduced 25 percent, except that in no case shall the cover be less than 3/4 inch in slabs or 11/2 inches in beams or girders.

f.	For solid slabs of siliceous aggregate concrete, increase tendon cover 20 percent.

g.	Adequate provisions against spalling shall be provided by U-shaped or hooped stirrups spaced not to exceed the depth of the member with a clear cover of 1 inch.

h.	Prestressed slabs shall have a thickness not less than that required in Table 721.1(3) for the respective fire-resistance time period.

i.	Fire coverage and end anchorages shall be as follows: Cover to the prestressing steel at the anchor shall be 1/2 inch greater than that required away from the anchor. Minimum cover to steel-bearing plate shall be 1 inch in beams and 3/4 inch in slabs.

j.	For beam widths between 8 inches and 12 inches, cover thickness shall be permitted to be determined by interpolation.

k.	Interior spans of continuous slabs, beams and girders shall be permitted to be considered restrained.

l.	For use with concrete slabs having a comparable fire endurance where members are framed into the structure in such a manner as to provide equivalent performance to that of monolithic concrete construction.

m.	Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY∗ in the listing) in GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.

n.	No additional insulating material is required on the exposed outside face of the column flange to achieve a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

TABLE 721.1(2)

RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONSa, o, p

MATERIAL	ITEM
NUMBER
	CONSTRUCTION	MINIMUM FINISHED
THICKNESS FACE-TO-
FACEb (inches)

4
hours
	3
hours
	2
hours
	1
hour

1. Brick of clay
or shale
	1-1.1	Solid brick of clay or shale.c	6	4.9	3.8	2.7
1-1.2	Hollow brick, not filled.	5.0	4.3	3.4	2.3
1-1.3	Hollow brick unit wall, grout or filled with perlite vermiculite or expanded shale aggregate.	6.6	5.5	4.4	3.0
1-2.1	4" nominal thick units not less than 75 percent solid backed with a hat-shaped metal furring
channel 3/4" thick formed from 0.021" sheet metal attached to the brick wall on 24"
centers with approved fasteners, and 1/2" Type X gypsum wallboard attached to the metal
furring strips with 1"-long Type S screws spaced 8" on center.
	—	—	5d	—
2. Combination
of clay brick and
load-bearing hollow
clay tile	2-1.1	4" solid brick and 4" tile (not less than 40 percent solid).	—	8	—	—
2-1.2	4" solid brick and 8" tile (not less than 40 percent solid).	12	—	—	—
3. Concrete
masonry units
	3-1.1f, g	Expanded slag or pumice.	4.7	4.0	3.2	2.1
3-1.2f, g	Expanded clay, shale or slate.	5.1	4.4	3.6	2.6
3-1.3f	Limestone, cinders or air-cooled slag.	5.9	5.0	4.0	2.7
3-1.4f, g	Calcareous or siliceous gravel.	6.2	5.3	4.2	2.8
4. Solid
concreteh, i
	4-1.1	Siliceous aggregate concrete.	7.0	6.2	5.0	3.5
Carbonate aggregate concrete.	6.6	5.7	4.6	3.2
Sand-lightweight concrete.	5.4	4.6	3.8	2.7
Lightweight concrete.	5.1	4.4	3.6	2.5
5. Glazed or
unglazed facing
tile, nonload-
bearing
	5-1.1	One 2" unit cored 15 percent maximum and one 4" unit cored 25 percent maximum with
3/4" mortar-filled collar joint. Unit positions reversed in alternate courses.
	—	63/8	—	—
5-1.2	One 2" unit cored 15 percent maximum and one 4" unit cored 40 percent maximum with
3/4" mortar-filled collar joint. Unit positions side with 3/4" gypsum plaster. Two wythes
tied together every fourth course with No. 22 gage corrugated metal ties.
	—	63/4	—	—
5-1.3	One unit with three cells in wall thickness, cored 29 percent maximum.	—	—	6	—
5-1.4	One 2" unit cored 22 percent maximum and one 4" unit cored 41 percent maximum with
1/4" mortar-filled collar joint. Two wythes tied together every third course with 0.030"
(No. 22 galvanized sheet steel gage) corrugated metal ties.
	—	—	6	—
5-1.5	One 4" unit cored 25 percent maximum with 3/4" gypsum plaster on one side.	—	—	43/4	—
5-1.6	One 4" unit with two cells in wall thickness, cored 22 percent maximum.	—	—	—	4
5-1.7	One 4" unit cored 30 percent maximum with 3/4" vermiculite gypsum plaster on one side.	—	—	41/2	—
5-1.8	One 4" unit cored 39 percent maximum with 3/4" gypsum plaster on one side.	—	—	—	41/2
6. Solid gypsum
plaster
	6-1.1	3/4" by 0.055" (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) vertical cold-rolled channels, 16" on center
with 2.6-pound flat metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W.
gage) wire at 6" spacing. Gypsum plaster each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to
sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	2d
6-1.2	3/4" by 0.05" (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) cold-rolled channels 16" on center with
metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire at 6" spacing.
Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster each side. For three-coat work, the plaster mix
for the second coat shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate
for the 1-hour system.
	—	—	21/2d	2d
6-1.3	3/4" by 0.055" (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) vertical cold-rolled channels, 16" on center
with 3/8" gypsum lath applied to one face and attached with sheet metal clips. Gypsum
plaster each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	2d
6-2.1	Studless with 1/2" full-length plain gypsum lath and gypsum plaster each side. Plaster
mixed 1:1 for scratch coat and 1:2 for brown coat, by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	2d
6-2.2	Studless with 1/2" full-length plain gypsum lath and perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster
each side.
	—	—	21/2d	2d
6-2.3	Studless partition with 3/8" rib metal lath installed vertically adjacent edges tied 6" on
center with No. 18 gage wire ties, gypsum plaster each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum
to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	2d
7. Solid perlite
and Portland
cement
	7-1.1	Perlite mixed in the ratio of 3 cubic feet to 100 pounds of Portland cement and machine
applied to stud side of 11/2" mesh by 0.058-inch (No. 17 B.W. gage) paper-backed
woven wire fabric lath wire-tied to 4"-deep steel trussed wirej studs 16" on center. Wire
ties of 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) galvanized steel wire 6" on center vertically.
	—	—	31/8d	—
8. Solid neat
wood fibered
gypsum plaster
	8-1.1	3/4" by 0.055-inch (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) cold-rolled channels, 12" on center
with 2.5-pound flat metal lath applied to one face and tied with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W.
gage) wire at 6" spacing. Neat gypsum plaster applied each side.
	—	—	2d	—
9. Solid wall-
board partition
	9-1.1	One full-length layer 1/2" Type X gypsum wallboarde laminated to each side of 1" full-
length V-edge gypsum coreboard with approved laminating compound. Vertical joints
of face layer and coreboard staggered not less than 3".
	—	—	2d	—
10. Hollow (stud-
less) gypsum
wallboard partition
	10-1.1	One full-length layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde attached to both sides of wood
or metal top and bottom runners laminated to each side of 1" × 6" full-length gypsum
coreboard ribs spaced 2" on center with approved laminating compound. Ribs centered
at vertical joints of face plies and joints staggered 24" in opposing faces. Ribs may be
recessed 6" from the top and bottom.
	—	—	—	21/4d
10-1.2	1" regular gypsum V-edge full-length backing board attached to both sides of wood or
metal top and bottom runners with nails or 15/8" drywall screws at 24" on center. Minimum
width of runners 15/8". Face layer of 1/2" regular full-length gypsum wallboard laminated
to outer faces of backing board with approved laminating compound.
	—	—	45/8d	—
11. Noncombustible
studs-interior
partition with
plaster each side
	11-1.1	31/4" × 0.044" (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) steel studs spaced 24" on center. 5/8" gypsum
plaster on metal lath each side mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	43/4d
11-1.2	33/8" × 0.055" (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) approved nailablek studs spaced 24" on
center. 5/8" neat gypsum wood-fibered plaster each side over 3/8" rib metal lath nailed to
studs with 6d common nails, 8" on center. Nails driven 11/4" and bent over.
	—	—	55/8	—
11-1.3	4" × 0.044" (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped steel studs at 16" on center.
On each side approved resilient clips pressed onto stud flange at 16" vertical spacing, 1/4"
pencil rods snapped into or wire tied onto outer loop of clips, metal lath wire-tied to pencil
rods at 6" intervals, 1" perlite gypsum plaster, each side.
	—	75/8d	—	—
11-1.4	21/2" × 0.044" (No. 18 carbon sheet steel gage) steel studs spaced 16" on center. Wood
fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight gypsum to sand aggregate applied on 3/4-
pound metal lath wire tied to studs, each side. 3/4" plaster applied over each face, including
finish coat.
	—	—	41/4d	—
12. Wood studs-
interior partition
with plaster each
side
	12-1.1l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with 5/8" gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath attached
by 4d common nails bent over or No. 14 gage by 11/4" by 3/4" crown width staples spaced
6" on center. Plaster mixed 1:11/2 for scratch coat and 1:3 for brown coat, by weight,
gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	51/8
12-1.2l	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with metal lath and 7/8" neat wood-fibered gypsum
plaster each side. Lath attached by 6d common nails, 7" on center. Nails driven 11/4" and
bent over.
	—	—	51/2d	—
12-1.3l	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with 3/8" perforated or plain gypsum lath and 1/2" gypsum
plaster each side. Lath nailed with 11/8" by No. 13 gage by 19/64" head plasterboard
blued nails, 4" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	51/4
12-1.4l	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with 3/8" Type X gypsum lath and 1/2" gypsum plaster
each side. Lath nailed with 11/8" by No. 13 gage by 19/64" head plasterboard blued nails,
5" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	51/4
13. Noncombustible
studs-interior
partition with gypsum
wallboard each side
	13-1.1	0.018" (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped studs 24" on center with one
full-length layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically attached with 1"-
long No. 6 drywall screws to each stud. Screws are 8" on center around the perimeter
and 12" on center on the intermediate stud. Where applied horizontally, the Type X gypsum
wallboard shall be attached to 35/8" studs and the horizontal joints shall be staggered
with those on the opposite side. Screws for the horizontal application shall be 8" on center
at vertical edges and 12" on center at intermediate studs.
	—	—	—	27/8d
13-1.2	0.018" (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) channel-shaped studs 25" on center with two
full-length layers of 1/2" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically each side. First
layer attached with 1"-long, No. 6 drywall screws, 8" on center around the perimeter and
12" on center on the intermediate stud. Second layer applied with vertical joints offset
one stud space from first layer using 15/8" long, No. 6 drywall screws spaced 9" on center
along vertical joints, 12" on center at intermediate studs and 24" on center along top and
bottom runners.
	—	—	35/8d	—
13-1.3	0.055" (No. 16 carbon sheet steel gage) approved nailable metal studse 24" on center
with full-length 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically and nailed 7" on center
with 6d cement-coated common nails. Approved metal fastener grips used with nails at
vertical butt joints along studs.
	—	—	—	47/8
14. Wood
studs-interior par-
tition with gypsum
wallboard each side
	14-1.1h, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with two layers of 3/8" regular gypsum
wallboarde each side, 4d coolern or wallboardn nails at 8" on center first layer, 5d
coolern or wallboardn nails at 8" on center second layer with laminating compound
between layers, joints staggered. First layer applied full length vertically, second
layer applied horizontally or vertically.
	—	—	—	5
14-1.2l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with two layers 1/2" regular gypsum wallboarde
applied vertically or horizontally each side,k joints staggered. Nail base layer with 5d
coolern or wallboardn nails at 8" on center face layer with 8d coolern or wallboardn
nails at 8" on center.
	—	—	—	51/2
14-1.3l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 24" on center with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied vertically
or horizontally nailed with 6d coolern or wallboardn nails at 7" on center with
end joints on nailing members. Stagger joints each side.
	—	—	—	43/4
14-1.4l	2" × 4" fire-retardant-treated wood studs spaced 24" on center with one layer of
5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied with face paper grain (long dimension) parallel
to studs. Wallboard attached with 6d coolern or wallboardn nails at 7" on center.
	—	—	—	43/4d
14-1.5l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with two layers 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde
each side. Base layers applied vertically and nailed with 6d coolern or wallboardn
nails at 9" on center. Face layer applied vertically or horizontally and nailed with 8d
coolern or wallboardn nails at 7" on center. For nail-adhesive application, base layers
are nailed 6" on center. Face layers applied with coating of approved wallboard
adhesive and nailed 12" on center.
	—	—	6	—
14-1.6l	2" × 3" fire-retardant-treated wood studs spaced 24" on center with one layer of
5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde applied with face paper grain (long dimension) at
right angles to studs. Wallboard attached with 6d cement-coated box nails spaced 7"
on center.
	—	—	—	35/8d
15. Exterior or
interior walls
	15-1.1l, m	Exterior surface with 3/4" drop siding over 1/2" gypsum sheathing on 2" × 4" wood
studs at 16" on center, interior surface treatment as required for 1-hour-rated exterior
or interior 2" × 4" wood stud partitions. Gypsum sheathing nailed with 13/4" by No.
11 gage by 7/16" head galvanized nails at 8" on center. Siding nailed with 7d galvanized
smooth box nails.
	—	—	—	Varies
15-1.2l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with metal lath and 3/4" cement plaster on each
side. Lath attached with 6d common nails 7" on center driven to 1" minimum penetration
and bent over. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and 1:5 for brown coat, by volume
, cement to sand.
	—	—	—	53/8
15-1.3l, m	2" × 4" wood studs 16" on center with 7/8" cement plaster (measured from the face of
studs) on the exterior surface with interior surface treatment as required for interior
wood stud partitions in this table. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and 1:5 for brown
coat, by volume, cement to sand.
	—	—	—	Varies
15-1.4	35/8" No. 16 gage noncombustible studs 16" on center with 7/8" cement plaster (measured
from the face of the studs) on the exterior surface with interior surface treatment
as required for interior, nonbearing, noncombustible stud partitions in this
table. Plaster mix 1:4 for scratch coat and 1:5 for brown coat, by volume, cement to
sand.
	—	—	—	Variesd
15-1.5m	21/4" × 33/4" clay face brick with cored holes over 1/2" gypsum sheathing on exterior
surface of 2" × 4" wood studs at 16" on center and two layers 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde
on interior surface. Sheathing placed horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over
studs nailed 6" on center with 13/4" × No. 11 gage by 7/16" head galvanized nails. Inner
layer of wallboard placed horizontally or vertically and nailed 8" on center with 6d coolern
or wallboardn nails. Outer layer of wallboard placed horizontally or vertically and
nailed 8" on center with 8d coolern or wallboardn nails. Joints staggered with vertical
joints over studs. Outer layer joints taped and finished with compound. Nail heads
covered with joint compound. 0.035 inch (No. 20 galvanized sheet gage) corrugated galvanized
steel wall ties 3/4" by 65/8" attached to each stud with two 8d coolern or wallboardn
nails every sixth course of bricks.
	—	—	10	—
15-1.6l, m	2" × 6" fire-retardant-treated wood studs 16" on center. Interior face has two layers of 5/8"
Type X gypsum with the base layer placed vertically and attached with 6d box nails 12"
on center. The face layer is placed horizontally and attached with 8d box nails 8" on center
at joints and 12" on center elsewhere. The exterior face has a base layer of 5/8" Type X
gypsum sheathing placed vertically with 6d box nails 8" on center at joints and 12" on
center elsewhere. An approved building paper is next applied, followed by self-furred
exterior lath attached with 21/2", No. 12 gage galvanized roofing nails with a 3/8" diameter
head and spaced 6" on center along each stud. Cement plaster consisting of a 1/2" brown
coat is then applied. The scratch coat is mixed in the proportion of 1:3 by weight, cement
to sand with 10 pounds of hydrated lime and 3 pounds of approved additives or admixtures
per sack of cement. The brown coat is mixed in the proportion of 1:4 by weight,
cement to sand with the same amounts of hydrated lime and approved additives or admixtures
used in the scratch coat.
	—	—	81/4	—
15-1.7l, m	2" × 6" wood studs 16" on center. The exterior face has a layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum
sheathing placed vertically with 6d box nails 8" on center at joints and 12" on center elsewhere.
An approved building paper is next applied, followed by 1" by No. 18 gage self-
furred exterior lath attached with 8d by 21/2" long galvanized roofing nails spaced 6" on
center along each stud. Cement plaster consisting of a 1/2" scratch coat, a bonding agent
and a 1/2" brown coat and a finish coat is then applied. The scratch coat is mixed in the
proportion of 1:3 by weight, cement to sand with 10 pounds of hydrated lime and 3
pounds of approved additives or admixtures per sack of cement. The brown coat is mixed
in the proportion of 1:4 by weight, cement to sand with the same amounts of hydrated
lime and approved additives or admixtures used in the scratch coat. The interior is cov-
ered with 3/8" gypsum lath with 1" hexagonal mesh of 0.035 inch (No. 20 B.W. gage)
woven wire lath furred out 5/16" and 1" perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster. Lath nailed
with 11/8" by No. 13 gage by 19/64" head plasterboard glued nails spaced 5" on center.
Mesh attached by 13/4" by No. 12 gage by 3/8" head nails with 3/8" furrings, spaced 8" on
center. The plaster mix shall not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate.
	—	—	83/8	—
15-1.8l, m	2" × 6" wood studs 16" on center. The exterior face has a layer of 5/8" Type X gypsum
sheathing placed vertically with 6d box nails 8" on center at joints and 12" on center
elsewhere. An approved building paper is next applied, followed by 11/2" by No. 17 gage
self-furred exterior lath attached with 8d by 21/2" long galvanized roofing nails spaced 6"
on center along each stud. Cement plaster consisting of a 1/2" scratch coat, and a 1/2"
brown coat is then applied. The plaster may be placed by machine. The scratch coat is
mixed in the proportion of 1:4 by weight, plastic cement to sand. The brown coat is
mixed in the proportion of 1:5 by weight, plastic cement to sand. The interior is covered
with 3/8" gypsum lath with 1" hexagonal mesh of No. 20 gage woven wire lath furred out
5/16" and 1" perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster. Lath nailed with 11/8" by No. 13 gage
by 19/64" head plasterboard glued nails spaced 5" on center. Mesh attached by 13/4" by No.
12 gage by 3/8" head nails with 3/8" furrings, spaced 8" on center. The plaster mix shall
not exceed 100 pounds of gypsum to 21/2 cubic feet of aggregate.
	—	—	83/8	—
15-1.9	4" No. 18 gage, nonload-bearing metal studs, 16" on center, with 1" Portland cement
lime plaster (measured from the back side of the 3/4-pound expanded metal lath) on the
exterior surface. Interior surface to be covered with 1" of gypsum plaster on 3/4-pound
expanded metal lath proportioned by weight-1:2 for scratch coat, 1:3 for brown, gypsum
to sand. Lath on one side of the partition fastened to 1/4" diameter pencil rods supported
by No. 20 gage metal clips, located 16" on center vertically, on each stud. 3" thick mineral
fiber insulating batts friction fitted between the studs.
	—	—	61/2d	—
15-1.10	Steel studs 0.060" thick, 4" deep or 6" at 16" or 24" centers, with 1/2" Glass Fiber Rein-
forced Concrete (GFRC) on the exterior surface. GFRC is attached with flex anchors at
24" on center, with 5" leg welded to studs with two 1/2"-long flare-bevel welds, and 4"
foot attached to the GFRC skin with 5/8" thick GFRC bonding pads that extend 21/2"
beyond the flex anchor foot on both sides. Interior surface to have two layers of 1/2" Type
X gypsum wallboard.e The first layer of wallboard to be attached with 1"-long Type S
buglehead screws spaced 24" on center and the second layer is attached with 15/8"-long
Type S screws spaced at 12" on center. Cavity is to be filled with 5" of 4 pcf (nominal)
mineral fiber batts. GFRC has 11/2" returns packed with mineral fiber and caulked on the
exterior.
	—	—	61/2	—
15-1.11	Steel studs 0.060" thick, 4" deep or 6" at 16" or 24" centers, respectively, with 1/2" Glass
Fiber Reinforced Concrete (GFRC) on the exterior surface. GFRC is attached with flex
anchors at 24" on center, with 5" leg welded to studs with two 1/2"-long flare-bevel
welds, and 4" foot attached to the GFRC skin with 5/8" -thick GFRC bonding pads that
extend 21/2" beyond the flex anchor foot on both sides. Interior surface to have one layer
of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboarde, attached with 11/4"-long Type S buglehead screws
spaced 12" on center. Cavity is to be filled with 5" of 4 pcf (nominal) mineral fiber batts.
GFRC has 11/2" returns packed with mineral fiber and caulked on the exterior.
	—	—	—	61/8
15-1.12q	2" × 6" wood studs at 16" with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and exterior
sides covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4′ wide, applied horizontally or
vertically with vertical joints over studs, and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws,
spaced 12" on center. Cavity to be filled with 51/2" mineral wool insulation.
	—	—	—	63/4
15-1.13q	2" × 6" wood studs at 16" with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and exterior
sides covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4′ wide, applied vertically with all joints
over framing or blocking and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws, spaced 12" on
center. R-19 mineral fiber insulation installed in stud cavity.
	—	—	—	63/4
15-1.14q	2" × 6" wood studs at 16" with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and exterior
sides covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4′ wide, applied horizontally or vertically
with vertical joints over studs, and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws, spaced
7" on center.
	—	—	—	63/4
15-1.15q	2" × 4" wood studs at 16" with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and exterior
sides covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard and sheathing, respectively, 4′ wide,
applied horizontally or vertically with vertical joints over studs, and fastened with 21/4"
Type S drywall screws, spaced 12" on center. Cavity to be filled with 31/2" mineral wool
insulation.
	—	—	—	43/4
15-1.16q	2" x 6" wood studs at 24" centers with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior and
exterior side covered with two layers of 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4' wide, applied
horizontally with vertical joints over studs. Base layer fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall
screws, spaced 24" on center and face layer fastened with Type S drywall screws, spaced
8" on center, wallboard joints covered with paper tape and joint compound, fastener heads
covered with joint compound. Cavity to be filled with 51/2" mineral wool insulation.
	—	—	8	—
15-2.1d	35/8" No. 16 gage steel studs at 24" on center or 2" × 4" wood studs at 24" on center. Metal
lath attached to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1" long No. 6 drywall screws at 6"
on center and covered with minimum 3/4" thick Portland cement plaster. Thin veneer brick
units of clay or shale complying with ASTM C1088, Grade TBS or better, installed in running
bond in accordance with Section 1405.10. Combined total thickness of the Portland
cement plaster, mortar and thin veneer brick units shall be not less than 13/4". Interior side
covered with one layer of 5/8" thick Type X gypsum wallboard attached to studs with 1"
long No. 6 drywall screws at 12" on center.
	—	—	—	6
15-2.2d	35/8" No. 16 gage steel studs at 24" on center or 2" × 4" wood studs at 24" on center. Metal
lath attached to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1" long No. 6 drywall screws at 6"
on center and covered with minimum 3/4" thick Portland cement plaster. Thin veneer brick
units of clay or shale complying with ASTM C1088, Grade TBS or better, installed in running
bond in accordance with Section 1405.10. Combined total thickness of the Portland cement
plaster, mortar and thin veneer brick units shall be not less than 2". Interior side
covered with two layers of 5/8" thick Type X gypsum wallboard. Bottom layer attached to
studs with 1" long No. 6 drywall screws at 24" on center. Top layer attached to studs with
15/8" long No. 6 drywall screws at 12" on center.
	—	—	67/8	—
15-2.3d	35/8" No. 16 gage steel studs at 16" on center or 2"× 4" wood studs at 16" on center. Where
metal lath is used, attach to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1" long No. 6 drywall
screws at 6" on center. Brick units of clay or shale not less than 25/8" thick complying with
ASTM C216 installed in accordance with Section 1405.6 with a minimum 1" airspace.
Interior side covered with one layer of 5/8" thick Type X gypsum wallboard attached to
studs with 1" long No. 6 drywall screws at 12" on center.
	—	—	—	77/8
15-2.4d	35/8" No. 16 gage steel studs at 16" on center or 2" × 4" wood studs at 16" on center.
Where metal lath is used, attach to the exterior side of studs with minimum 1" long No. 6
drywall screws at 6" on center. Brick units of clay or shale not less than 25/8" thick complying
with ASTM C216 installed in accordance with Section 1405.6 with a minimum 1"
airspace. Interior side covered with two layers of 5/8" thick Type X gypsum wallboard.
Bottom layer attached to studs with 1" long No. 6 drywall screws at 24" on center. Top
layer attached to studs with 15/8" long No. 6 drywall screws at 12" on center.
	—	—	81/2	—
16. Exterior walls
rated for fire
resistance from
the inside only in
accordance with
Section 705.5.
	16-1.1q	2" × 4" wood studs at 16" centers with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior
side covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4" wide, applied horizontally
unblocked, and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws, spaced 12" on center, wall-
board joints covered with paper tape and joint compound, fastener heads covered with
joint compound. Exterior covered with 3/8" wood structural panels, applied vertically,
horizontal joints blocked and fastened with 6d common nails (bright) — 12" on center in
the field, and 6" on center panel edges. Cavity to be filled with 31/2" mineral wool insulation.
Rating established for exposure from interior side only.
	—	—	—	41/2
16-1.2q	2" × 6" wood studs at 16" centers with double top plates, single bottom plate; interior
side covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4" wide, applied horizontally or verti-
cally with vertical joints over studs and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws,
spaced 12" on center, wallboard joints covered with paper tape and joint compound, fast-
ener heads covered with joint compound, exterior side covered with 7/16" wood structural
panels fastened with 6d common nails (bright) spaced 12" on center in the field and
6" on center along the panel edges. Cavity to be filled with 51/2" mineral wool insulation.
Rating established from the gypsum-covered side only.
	—	—	—	69/16
16-1.3q	2" × 6" wood studs at 16" centers with double top plates, single bottom plates; interior
side covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard, 4" wide, applied vertically with all
joints over framing or blocking and fastened with 21/4" Type S drywall screws spaced 7"
on center. Joints to be covered with tape and joint compound. Exterior covered with 3/8"
wood structural panels, applied vertically with edges over framing or blocking and fastened
with 6d common nails (bright) at 12" on center in the field and 6" on center on panel
edges. R-19 mineral fiber insulation installed in stud cavity. Rating established
from the gypsum-covered side only.
	—	—	—	61/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.2 mm2, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3.

a.	Staples with equivalent holding power and penetration shall be permitted to be used as alternate fasteners to nails for attachment to wood framing.

b.	Thickness shown for brick and clay tile is nominal thicknesses unless plastered, in which case thicknesses are net. Thickness shown for concrete masonry and clay masonry is equivalent thickness defined in Section 722.3.1 for concrete masonry and Section 722.4.1.1 for clay masonry. Where all cells are solid grouted or filled with silicone-treated perlite loose-fill insulation; vermiculite loose-fill insulation; or expanded clay, shale or slate lightweight aggregate, the equivalent thickness shall be the thickness of the block or brick using specified dimensions as defined in Chapter 21. Equivalent thickness shall include the thickness of applied plaster and lath or gypsum wallboard, where specified.

c.	For units in which the net cross-sectional area of cored brick in any plane parallel to the surface containing the cores is not less than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

d.	Shall be used for nonbearing purposes only.

e.	For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in this table, gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be permitted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard, and the joints on the face layer are reinforced and the entire surface is covered with not less than 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.

f.	The fire-resistance time period for concrete masonry units meeting the equivalent thicknesses required for a 2-hour fire-resistance rating in Item 3, and having a thickness of not less than 75/8 inches is 4 hours where cores that are not grouted are filled with silicone-treated perlite loose-fill insulation; vermiculite loose-fill insulation; or expanded clay, shale or slate lightweight aggregate, sand or slag having a maximum particle size of 3/8 inch.

g.	The fire-resistance rating of concrete masonry units composed of a combination of aggregate types or where plaster is applied directly to the concrete masonry shall be determined in accordance with ACI 216.1/TMS 0216. Lightweight aggregates shall have a maximum combined density of 65 pounds per cubic foot.

h.	See Note b. The equivalent thickness shall be permitted to include the thickness of cement plaster or 1.5 times the thickness of gypsum plaster applied in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 25.

i.	Concrete walls shall be reinforced with horizontal and vertical temperature reinforcement as required by Chapter 19.

j.	Studs are welded truss wire studs with 0.18 inch (No. 7 B.W. gage) flange wire and 0.18 inch (No. 7 B.W. gage) truss wires.

k.	Nailable metal studs consist of two channel studs spot welded back to back with a crimped web forming a nailing groove.

l.	Wood structural panels shall be permitted to be installed between the fire protection and the wood studs on either the interior or exterior side of the wood frame assemblies in this table, provided the length of the fasteners used to attach the fire protection is increased by an amount not less than the thickness of the wood structural panel.

m.	For studs with a slenderness ratio, le/d, greater than 33, the design stress shall be reduced to 78 percent of allowable F′c. For studs with a slenderness ratio, le/d, not exceeding 33, the design stress shall be reduced to 78 percent of the adjusted stress F′c calculated for studs having a slenderness ratio le/d of 33.

n.	For properties of cooler or wallboard nails, see ASTM C514, ASTM C547 or ASTM F1667.

o.	Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY∗ in the listing) in the GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.

p.	NCMA TEK 5-8A shall be permitted for the design of fire walls.

q.	The design stress of studs shall be equal to a maximum of 100 percent of the allowable F'c calculated in accordance with Section 2306.

TABLE 721.1(3) MINIMUM PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMSa, q

FLOOR OR ROOF
CONSTRUCTION
	ITEM
NUMBER
	CEILING CONSTRUCTION	THICKNESS OF FLOOR
OR ROOF SLAB
(inches)
	MINIMUM THICKNESS OF
CEILING
(inches)

4
hours
	3
hours
	2
hours
	1
hour
	4
hours
	3
hours
	2
hours
	1
hour

1. Siliceous aggregate concrete	1-1.1	Slab (no ceiling required). Minimum cover over nonpre-
stressed reinforcement shall be not less than 3/4".b
	7.0	6.2	5.0	3.5	—	—	—	—
2. Carbonate aggregate concrete	2-1.1	6.6	5.7	4.6	3.2	—	—	—	—
3. Sand-light-weight concrete	3-1.1	5.4	4.6	3.8	2.7	—	—	—	—
4. Lightweight concrete	4-1.1	5.1	4.4	3.6	2.5	—	—	—	—
5. Reinforced concrete	5-1.1	Slab with suspended ceiling of vermiculite gypsum plaster
over metal lath attached to 3/4" cold-rolled channels spaced
12" on center. Ceiling located 6" minimum below joists.
	3	2	—	—	1	3/4	—	—
5-2.1	5/8" Type X gypsum wallboardc attached to 0.018 inch (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) by 7/8" deep by 25/8" hat-shaped
galvanized steel channels with 1"-long No. 6 screws. The
channels are spaced 24" on center, span 35" and are sup-
ported along their length at 35" intervals by 0.033" (No. 21
galvanized sheet gage) galvanized steel flat strap hangers
having formed edges that engage the lips of the channel.
The strap hangers are attached to the side of the concrete
joists with 5/32" by 11/4" long power-driven fasteners. The
wallboard is installed with the long dimension perpendicular
to the channels. End joints occur on channels and sup-
plementary channels are installed parallel to the main
channels, 12" each side, at end joint occurrences. The
finished ceiling is located approximately 12" below the soffit
of the floor slab.
	—	—	21/2	—	—	—	5/8	—
6. Steel joists con-structed with a
poured reinforced concrete slab on
metal lath forms or steel form unitsd, e	6-1.1	Gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to the bottom cord
with single No. 16 gage or doubled No. 18 gage wire ties
spaced 6" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat, 1:3
for brown coat, by weight, gypsum-to-sand aggregate for 2-
hour system. For 3-hour system plaster is neat.
	—	—	21/2	21/4	—	—	3/4	5/8
6-2.1	Vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to the
bottom chord with single No.16 gage or doubled 0.049-
inch (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire ties 6" on center.
	—	2	—	—	—	5/8	—	—
6-3.1	Cement plaster over metal lath attached to the bottom chord
of joists with single No. 16 gage or doubled 0.049" (No. 18 B.W.
gage) wire ties spaced 6" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2
for scratch coat, 1:3 for brown coat for 1-hour system and
1:1 for scratch coat, 1:1 1/2 for brown coat for 2-hour system
, by weight, cement to sand.
	—	—	—	2	—	—	—	5/8f
6-4.1	Ceiling of 5/8" Type X wallboardc attached to 7/8" deep by
25/8" by 0.021 inch (No. 25 carbon sheet steel gage) hat-
shaped furring channels 12" on center with 1" long No. 6
wallboard screws at 8" on center. Channels wire tied to bot-
tom chord of joists with doubled 0.049 inch (No. 18 B.W.
gage) wire or suspended below joists on wire hangers.g
	—	—	21/2	—	—	—	5/8	—
6-5.1	Wood-fibered gypsum plaster mixed 1:1 by weight gypsum
to sand aggregate applied over metal lath. Lath tied 6" on
center to 3/4" channels spaced 131/2" on center. Channels
secured to joists at each intersection with two strands of
0.049 inch (No. 18 B.W. gage) galvanized wire.
	—	—	21/2	—	—	—	3/4	—
7. Reinforced concrete slabs and joists
with hollow clay tile fillers laid end to end
in rows 21/2" or more apart; reinforcement placed
between rows and concrete cast around
and over tile.
	7-1.1	5/8" gypsum plaster on bottom of floor or roof construction.	—	—	8h	—	—	—	5/8	—
7-1.2	None	—	—	—	51/2i	—	—	—	—
8. Steel joists constructed with a reinforced concrete
slab on top poured on a 1/2" deep steel deck.e
	8-1.1	Vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath attached to 3/4"
cold-rolled channels with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire
ties spaced 6" on center.
	21/2j	—	—	—	3/4	—	—	—
9. 3" deep cellular steel deck with
concrete slab on top. Slab thickness
measured to top.	9-1.1	Suspended ceiling of vermiculite gypsum plaster base coat
and vermiculite acoustical plaster on metal lath attached at
6" intervals to 3/4" cold-rolled channels spaced 12" on cen-
ter and secured to 11/2" cold-rolled channels spaced 36" on
center with 0.065" (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire. 11/2" channels
supported by No. 8 gage wire hangers at 36" on center.
Beams within envelope and with a 21/2" airspace between
beam soffit and lath have a 4-hour rating.
	21/2	—	—	—	11/8k	—	—	—
10. 11/2"-deep steel roof deck on steel framing. Insulation board, 30 pcf density, composed of wood fibers with cement binders of thickness shown bonded to deck with unified asphalt adhesive. Covered with a Class A or B roof covering.	10-1.1	Ceiling of gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath attached to
3/4" furring channels with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire
ties spaced 6" on center. 3/4" channel saddle tied to 2" chan-
nels with doubled 0.065" (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire ties. 2"
channels spaced 36" on center suspended 2" below steel
framing and saddle-tied with 0.165" (No. 8 B.W. gage)
wire. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum-to-sand
aggregate.
	—	—	17/8	1	—	—	3/41	3/41
11. 11/2"-deep steel roof deck on steel-framing wood fiber insulation board, 17.5 pcf density on top applied over a 15-lb asphalt-saturated felt. Class A or B roof covering.	11-1.1	Ceiling of gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath attached to
3/4" furring channels with 0.049" (No. 18 B.W. gage) wire
ties spaced 6" on center. 3/4" channels saddle tied to 2"
channels with doubled 0.065" (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire ties.
2" channels spaced 36" on center suspended 2" below steel
framing and saddle tied with 0.165" (No. 8 B.W. gage)
wire. Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat and 1:3 for brown
coat, by weight, gypsum-to-sand aggregate for 1-hour system.
For 2-hour system, plaster mix is 1:2 by weight, gypsum-
to-sand aggregate.
	—	—	11/2	1	—	—	7/8g	3/41
12. 11/2" deep steel roof deck on steel-framing insulation of rigid board consisting of expandedperlite and fibers impregnated with integral asphalt waterproofing; density 9 to 12 pcfsecured to metal roof deck by 1/2"wide ribbons of waterproof, cold-process liquid adhesive spaced 6"apart. Steel joist or light steel construction with metal roof deck, insulation,and Class A or B built-up roof cover-ing.e	12-1.1	Gypsum-vermiculite plaster on metal lath wire tied at 6"
intervals to 3/4" furring channels spaced 12" on center and
wire tied to 2" runner channels spaced 32" on center.
Runners wire tied to bottom chord of steel joists.
	—	—	1	—	—	—	7/8	—
13. Double wood floor over woodjoists spaced 16" on center.m,n	13-1.1	Gypsum plaster over 3/8" Type X gypsum lath. Lath initially
applied with not less than four 11/8" by No. 13 gage by 19/64"
head plasterboard blued nails per bearing. Continuous stripping
over lath along all joist lines. Stripping consists of 3"
wide strips of metal lath attached by 11/2" by No. 11 gage
by 1/2" head roofing nails spaced 6" on center. Alternate
stripping consists of 3" wide 0.049" diameter wire stripping
weighing 1 pound per square yard and attached by No.16
gage by 11/2" by 3/4" crown width staples, spaced 4" on
center. Where alternate stripping is used, the lath nailing shall
consist of two nails at each end and one nail at each inter-
mediate bearing. Plaster mixed 1:2 by weight, gypsum-to
-sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	7/8
13-1.2	Cement or gypsum plaster on metal lath. Lath fastened with
11/2" by No. 11 gage by 7/16" head barbed shank roofing
nails spaced 5" on center. Plaster mixed 1:2 for scratch coat
and 1:3 for brown coat, by weight, cement to sand aggregate.
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	5/8
13-1.3	Perlite or vermiculite gypsum plaster on metal lath secured
to joists with 11/2" by No. 11 gage by 7/16" head barbed
shank roofing nails spaced 5" on center.
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	5/8
13-1.4	1/2" Type X gypsum wallboardc nailed to joists with 5d
coolero or wallboardo nails at 6" on center. End joints of
wallboard centered on joists.
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	1/2
14. Plywood stressed skin panelsconsisting of 5/8" -thick interior C-D(exterior glue) top stressed skin on 2" × 6" nominal (minimum) stringers.Adjacent panel edges joined with 8d common wire nails spaced 6" on center.Stringers spaced 12" maximum on center.	14-1.1	1/2" -thick wood fiberboard weighing 15 to 18 pounds per
cubic foot installed with long dimension parallel to stringers
or 3/8" C-D (exterior glue) plywood glued and/or nailed
to stringers. Nailing to be with 5d coolero or wallboardo
nails at 12" on center. Second layer of 1/2" Type X gypsum
wallboardc applied with long dimension perpendicular to
joists and attached with 8d coolero or wallboardo nails at 6"
on center at end joints and 8" on center elsewhere. Wall-
board joints staggered with respect to fiberboard joints.
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	1
15. Vermiculite concrete slab proportioned 1:4 (Portlandcement to vermicu-lite aggregate) on a 11/2" -deep steeldeck supported on individually protected steel framing.Maximum span ofdeck 6′-10" where deck is less than 0.019 inch (No. 26carbon steel sheet gage) or greater. Slab reinforced with 4" × 8" 0.109/0.083"(No. 12/14 B.W. gage)welded wire mesh.	15-1.1	None	—	—	—	3j	—	—	—	—
16. Perlite concrete slab proportioned 1:6 (Portland cement to perlite aggregate) on a 11/4" -deep steeldeck supported on individually pro-tected steel framing. Slab reinforced with4" × 8" 0.109/0.083" (No. 12/14 B.W. gage)welded wire mesh.	16-1.1	None	—	—	—	31/2j	—	—	—	—
17. Perlite concrete slab proportioned 1:6 (Portland cement to perlite aggregate) on a 9/16"-deep steel deck supported by steel joists4′ on center. Class A or B roof covering on top.	17-1.1	Perlite gypsum plaster on metal lath wire tied to 3/4" furring
channels attached with 0.065" (No. 16 B.W. gage) wire ties
to lower chord of joists.
	—	2p	2p	—	—	7/8	3/4	—
18. Perlite concrete slab proportioned 1:6 (Portland cement to perlite aggregate) on 11/4" -deep steel decksupported on individually protected steel framing. Maximum span of deck6′-10" where deck is less than 0.019" (No. 26 carbon sheet steelgage) and 8′-0" where deck is 0.019" (No. 26 carbon sheetsteel gage) or greater. Slab reinforced with 0.042" (No. 19 B.W. gage)hexagonal wire mesh. Class A or Broof covering on top.	18-1.1	None	—	21/4p	21/4p	—	—	—	—	—
19. Floor and beam construction consistingof 3" -deep cellular steel floor unit mounted on steel members with 1:4(proportion of Portland cement to perlite aggregate) perlite-concrete floorslab on top.	19-1.1	Suspended envelope ceiling of perlite gypsum plaster on
metal lath attached to 3/4" cold-rolled channels, secured to
11/2" cold-rolled channels spaced 42" on center supported
by 0.203 inch (No. 6 B.W. gage) wire 36" on center. Beams
in envelope with 3" minimum airspace between beam soffit
and lath have a 4-hour rating.
	2p	—	—	—	1l	—	—	—
20. Perlite concrete proportioned 1:6 (Portland cement to perlite aggregate) poured to 1/8" thickness above top of corrugations of 15/16" -deep galvanized steel deck maximum span 8′-0" for 0.024" (No. 24 galvanized sheet gage) or 6′ 0" for 0.019" (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage) with deck supported by individually protected steel framing. Approved polystyrene foam plastic insulation board having a flame spread not exceeding 75 (1" to 4" thickness) with vent holes that approximate 3 percent of the board surface area placed on top of perlite slurry. A 2′ by 4′ insulation board contains six 23/4" diameter holes. Board covered with 21/4" minimum perlite concrete slab. Slab reinforced with mesh consisting of 0.042" (No. 19 B.W. gage) galvanized steel wire twisted together to form 2" hexagons with straight 0.065" (No. 16 B.W. gage) galvanized steel wire woven into mesh and spaced 3". Alternate slab reinforcement shall be permitted to consist of 4" × 8", 0.109/0.238" (No. 12/4 B.W. gage), or 2" × 2", 0.083/0.083" (No. 14/14 B.W. gage) welded wire fabric. Class A or B roof covering on top.	20-1.1	None	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	—	—
21. Wood joists, wood I-joists, floor trusses and flat or pitched roof trusses spaced a maximum 24" o.c. with 1/2" wood structural panels with exterior glue applied at right angles to top of joist or top chord of trusses with 8d nails. The wood structural panel thickness shall be not less than nominal 1/2" nor less than required by Chapter 23.	21-1.1	Base layer 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard applied at right angles to joist or truss 24" o.c. with 11/4" Type S or Type W drywall screws 24" o.c. Face layer 5/8" Type X gypsum wallboard or veneer base applied at right angles to joist or truss through base layer with 17/8" Type S or Type W drywall screws 12" o.c. at joints and intermediate joist or truss. Face layer Type G drywall screws placed 2" back on either side of face layer end joints, 12" o.c.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	11/4
22. Steel joists, floor trusses and flat or pitched roof trusses spaced a maximum 24" o.c. with 1/2" wood structural panels with exterior glue applied at right angles to top of joist or top chord of trusses with No. 8 screws. The wood structural panel thickness shall be not less than nom- inal 1/2" nor less than required by Chapter 23.	22-1.1	Base layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board applied at right angles to steel framing 24" on center with 1" Type S drywall screws spaced 24" on center. Face layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board applied at right angles to steel framing attached through base layer with 15/8" Type S drywall screws 12" on center at end joints and intermediate joints and 11/2" Type G drywall screws 12 inches on center placed 2" back on either side of face layer end joints. Joints of the face layer are offset 24" from the joints of the base layer.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	11/4
23. Wood I-joist (minimum joist depth 91/4" with a minimum flange depth of 15/16" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 2.25 square inches) at 24" o.c. spacing with a minimum 1 × 4 (3/4" × 3.5" actual) ledger strip applied parallel to and covering the bottom of the bottom flange of each member, tacked in place. 2" mineral wool insulation, 3.5 pcf (nominal) installed adjacent to the bottom flange of the I-joist and supported by the 1 × 4 ledger strip.	23-1.1	1/2" deep single leg resilient channel 16" on center (channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed perpendicular to the furring strip and joist and attached to each joist by 17/8" Type S drywall screws. 5/8" Type C gypsum wallboard applied perpendicular to the channel with end joints staggered not less than 4′ and fastened with 11/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 7" on center. Wallboard joints to be taped and covered with joint compound.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	5/8
24. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/4" with a minimum flange depth of 11/2" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 5.25 square inches; minimum web thickness of 3/8") @ 24" o.c., 11/2" mineral wool insulation (2.5 pcf-nominal) resting on hat-shaped furring channels.	24-1.1	Minimum 0.026" thick hat-shaped channel 16" o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to each joist by 11/4" Type S drywall screws. 5/8" Type C gyp- sum wallboard applied perpendicular to the channel with end joints staggered and fastened with 11/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. in the field and 8" o.c. at the wallboard ends. Wallboard joints to be taped and covered with joint compound.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	5/8
25. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/4" with a minimum flange depth of 11/2" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 5.25 square inches; minimum web thickness of 7/16") @ 24" o.c., 11/2" mineral wool insulation (2.5 pcf-nominal) resting on resilient channels.	25-1.1	Minimum 0.019" thick resilient channel 16" o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to each joist by 15/8" Type S drywall screws. 5/8" Type C gypsum wallboard applied perpendicular to the channel with end joints staggered and fastened with 1" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. in the field and 8" o.c. at the wallboard ends. Wallboard joints to be taped and covered with joint compound.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	5/8
26. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/4" with a minimum flange thickness of 11/2" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 2.25 square inches; minimum web thick- ness of 3/8") @ 24" o.c.	26-1.1	Two layers of 1/2" Type X gypsum wall- board applied with the long dimension perpendicular to the I-joists with end joints staggered. The base layer is fastened with 15/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. and the face layer is fastened with 2" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. in the field and 8" o.c. on the edges. Face layer end joints shall not occur on the same I-joist as base layer end joints and edge joints shall be offset 24" from base layer joints. Face layer to also be attached to base layer with 11/2" Type G drywall screws spaced 8" o.c. placed 6" from face layer end joints. Face layer wallboard joints to be taped and covered with joint compound.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	1
27. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/2" with a minimum flange depth of 15/16" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.95 square inches; minimum web thick- ness of 3/8") @ 24" o.c.	27-1.1	Minimum 0.019" thick resilient channel 16" o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed perpendicular to the joist and attached to each joist by 11/4" Type S drywall screws. Two layers of 1/2" Type X gypsum wallboard applied with the long dimension perpendicular to the resilient channels with end joints staggered. The base layer is fastened with 11/4" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. and the face layer is fastened with 15/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. Face layer end joints shall not occur on the same I-joist as base layer end joints and edge joints shall be offset 24" from base layer joints. Face layer to also be attached to base layer with 11/2" Type G drywall screws spaced 8" o.c. placed 6" from face layer end joints. Face layer wallboard joints to be taped and covered with joint compound.	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	1
28. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/4" with a minimum flange depth of 11/2" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 2.25 square
inches; minimum web thickness of 3/8") @ 24" o.c. Unfaced fiberglass
insulation or mineral wool insulation
is installed between the I-joists supported on the upper surface of the flange by stay wires spaced 12" o.c.
	28-1.1	Base layer of 5/8" Type C gypsum wall- board attached directly to I-joists with 15/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. with ends staggered. Minimum 0.0179" thick hat-shaped 7/8-inch fur- ring channel 16" o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard end joints), placed perpen- dicular to the joist and attached to each joist by 15/8" Type S drywall screws after the base layer of gypsum wall- board has been applied. The middle and face layers of 5/8" Type C gypsum wall-
board applied perpendicular to the channel with end joints staggered. The middle layer is fastened with 1" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. The face layer is applied parallel to the middle layer but with the edge joints offset 24" from those of the middle layer and fas- tened with 15/8" Type S drywall screws 8" o.c. The joints shall be taped and covered with joint compound.
	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	23/4	—
29. Channel-shaped 18 gage steel joists (minimum depth 8") spaced a maximum 24" o.c. supporting tongue-and-groove wood structural panels (nominal minimum 3/4" thick) applied perpendicular to framing members. Structural panels attached with 15/8" Type S-12 screws spaced 12" o.c.	29-1.1	Base layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board applied perpendicular to bottom of framing members with 11/8" Type S-12 screws spaced 12" o.c. Second layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board attached perpen- dicular to framing members with 15/8" Type S-12 screws spaced 12" o.c. Sec- ond layer joints offset 24" from base layer. Third layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board attached perpendicular to framing members with 23/8" Type S-12 screws spaced 12" o.c. Third layer joints offset 12" from second layer joints. Hat- shaped 7/8-inch rigid furring channels applied at right angles to framing mem- bers over third layer with two 23/8" Type S-12 screws at each framing member. Face layer 5/8" Type X gypsum board applied at right angles to furring channels with 11/8" Type S screws spaced 12" o.c.	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	33/8	—
30. Wood I-joist (minimum I-joist depth 91/2" with a minimum flange depth of 11/2" and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 2.25 square inches; minimum web thickness of 3/8") @ 24" o.c. Fiberglass insulation placed between I-joists supported by the resil- ient channels.	30-1.1	Minimum 0.019" thick resilient channel 16" o.c. (channels doubled at wallboard
end joints), placed perpendicular to the joists and attached to each joist by 11/4" Type S drywall screws. Two layers of 1/2" Type X gypsum wallboard applied with the long dimension perpendicular to the resilient channels with end joints staggered. The base layer is fastened with 11/4" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. and the face layer is fastened with 15/8" Type S drywall screws spaced 12" o.c. Face layer end joints shall not occur on the same I-joist as base layer end joints and edge joints shall be offset 24" from base layer joints. Face layer to be attached to base layer with 11/2" Type G drywall screws spaced 8" o.c. placed 6" from face layer end joints. Face layer wallboard joints to be taped and cov- ered with joint compound.
	—	—	—	Varies	—	—	—	1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 pound per linear foot = 1.4882 kg/m.

a.	Staples with equivalent holding power and penetration shall be permitted to be used as alternate fasteners to nails for attachment to wood framing.

b.	Where the slab is in an unrestrained condition, minimum reinforcement cover shall be not less than 15/8 inches for 4 hours (siliceous aggregate only); 11/4 inches for 4 and 3 hours; 1 inch for 2 hours (siliceous aggregate only); and 3/4 inch for all other restrained and unrestrained conditions.

c.	For all of the construction with gypsum wallboard described in this table, gypsum base for veneer plaster of the same size, thickness and core type shall be permitted to be substituted for gypsum wallboard, provided attachment is identical to that specified for the wallboard, and the joints on the face layer are reinforced and the entire surface is covered with not less than 1/16-inch gypsum veneer plaster.

d.	Slab thickness over steel joists measured at the joists for metal lath form and at the top of the form for steel form units.

e.

(a)	The maximum allowable stress level for H-Series joists shall not exceed 22,000 psi.

(b)	The allowable stress for K-Series joists shall not exceed 26,000 psi, the nominal depth of such joist shall be not less than 10 inches and the nominal joist weight shall be not less than 5 pounds per linear foot.

f.	Cement plaster with 15 pounds of hydrated lime and 3 pounds of approved additives or admixtures per bag of cement.

g.	Gypsum wallboard ceilings attached to steel framing shall be permitted to be suspended with 11/2-inch cold-formed carrying channels spaced 48 inches on center, that are suspended with No. 8 SWG galvanized wire hangers spaced 48 inches on center. Cross-furring channels are tied to the carrying channels with No. 18 SWG galvanized wire hangers spaced 48 inches on center. Cross-furring channels are tied to the carrying channels with No. 18 SWG galvanized wire (double strand) and spaced as required for direct attachment to the framing. This alternative is applicable to those steel framing assemblies recognized under Note q.

h.	Six-inch hollow clay tile with 2-inch concrete slab above.

i.	Four-inch hollow clay tile with 11/2-inch concrete slab above.

j.	Thickness measured to bottom of steel form units.

k.	Five-eighths inch of vermiculite gypsum plaster plus 1/2 inch of approved vermiculite acoustical plastic.

l.	Furring channels spaced 12 inches on center.

m.	Double wood floor shall be permitted to be either of the following:

(a)	Subfloor of 1-inch nominal boarding, a layer of asbestos paper weighing not less than 14 pounds per 100 square feet and a layer of 1-inch nominal tongue-and-groove finished flooring; or

(b)	Subfloor of 1-inch nominal tongue-and-groove boarding or 15/32-inch wood structural panels with exterior glue and a layer of 1-inch nominal tongue-and-groove finished flooring or 19/32-inch wood structural panel finish flooring or a layer of Type I Grade M-1 particleboard not less than 5/8-inch thick.

n.	The ceiling shall be permitted to be omitted over unusable space, and flooring shall be permitted to be omitted where unusable space occurs above.

o.	For properties of cooler or wallboard nails, see ASTM C514, ASTM C547 or ASTM F1667.

p.	Thickness measured on top of steel deck unit.

q.	Generic fire-resistance ratings (those not designated as PROPRIETARY∗ in the listing) in the GA 600 shall be accepted as if herein listed.

721.1.1 Thickness of protective coverings.

The thickness of fire-resistant materials required for protection of structural members shall be not less than set forth in Table 721.1(1), except as modified in this section. The figures shown shall be the net thickness of the protecting materials and shall not include any hollow space in back of the protection.

721.1.2 Unit masonry protection.

Where required, metal ties shall be embedded in bed joints of unit masonry for protection of steel columns. Such ties shall be as set forth in Table 721.1(1) or be equivalent thereto.

721.1.3 Reinforcement for cast-in-place concrete column protection.

Cast-in-place concrete protection for steel columns shall be reinforced at the edges of such members with wire ties of not less than 0.18 inch (4.6 mm) in diameter wound spirally around the columns on a pitch of not more than 8 inches (203 mm) or by equivalent reinforcement.

721.1.4 Plaster application.

The finish coat is not required for plaster protective coatings where those coatings comply with the design mix and thickness requirements of Tables 721.1(1), 721.1(2) and 721.1(3).

721.1.5 Bonded prestressed concrete tendons.

For members having a single tendon or more than one tendon installed with equal concrete cover measured from the nearest surface, the cover shall be not less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1). For members having multiple tendons installed with variable concrete cover, the average tendon cover shall be not less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1), provided:

1.	The clearance from each tendon to the nearest exposed surface is used to determine the average cover.

2.	In no case can the clear cover for individual tendons be less than one-half of that set forth in Table 721.1(1). A minimum cover of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) for slabs and 1 inch (25 mm) for beams is required for any aggregate concrete.

3.	For the purpose of establishing a fire-resistance rating, tendons having a clear covering less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1) shall not contribute more than 50 percent of the required ultimate moment capacity for members less than 350 square inches (0.226 m2) in cross-sectional area and 65 percent for larger members. For structural design purposes, however, tendons having a reduced cover are assumed to be fully effective.

SECTION 722
CALCULATED FIRE RESISTANCE
722.1 General.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire resistance of specific materials or combinations of materials is established by calculations. These procedures apply only to the information contained in this section and shall not be otherwise used. The calculated fire resistance of specific materials or combinations of materials shall be established by one of the following:

1.	Concrete, concrete masonry and clay masonry assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with ACI 216.1/TMS 0216.

2.	Precast and precast, prestressed concrete assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with PCI 124.

3.	Steel assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 29.

4.	Exposed wood members and wood decking shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 16 of ANSI/AWC National Design Specification for Wood Construction (NDS).

722.1.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET.

CONCRETE, CARBONATE AGGREGATE.

CONCRETE, CELLULAR.

CONCRETE, LIGHTWEIGHT AGGREGATE.

CONCRETE, PERLITE.

CONCRETE, SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT.

CONCRETE, SILICEOUS AGGREGATE.

CONCRETE, VERMICULITE.

GLASS FIBERBOARD.

MINERAL BOARD.

722.2 Concrete assemblies.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of concrete assemblies are established by calculations.

722.2.1 Concrete walls.

Cast-in-place and precast concrete walls shall comply with Section 722.2.1.1. Multiwythe concrete walls shall comply with Section 722.2.1.2. Joints between precast panels shall comply with Section 722.2.1.3. Concrete walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster finish shall comply with Section 722.2.1.4.

722.2.1.1 Cast-in-place or precast walls.

The minimum equivalent thicknesses of cast-in-place or precast concrete walls for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours are shown in Table 722.2.1.1. For solid walls with flat vertical surfaces, the equivalent thickness is the same as the actual thickness. The values in Table 722.2.1.1 apply to plain, reinforced or prestressed concrete walls.

TABLE 722.2.1.1

MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS OF CAST-IN-PLACE OR PRECAST CONCRETE WALLS, LOAD-BEARING OR NONLOAD-BEARING

CONCRETE
TYPE
	MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (inches)
FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF

1 hour	11/2 hours	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
Siliceous	3.5	4.3	5.0	6.2	7.0
Carbonate	3.2	4.0	4.6	5.7	6.6
Sand-lightweight	2.7	3.3	3.8	4.6	5.4
Lightweight	2.5	3.1	3.6	4.4	5.1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

722.2.1.1.1 Hollow-core precast wall panels.

For hollow-core precast concrete wall panels in which the cores are of constant cross section throughout the length, calculation of the equivalent thickness by dividing the net cross-sectional area (the gross cross section minus the area of the cores) of the panel by its width shall be permitted.

722.2.1.1.2 Core spaces filled.

Where all of the core spaces of hollow-core wall panels are filled with loose-fill material, such as expanded shale, clay or slag, or vermiculite or perlite, the fire-resistance rating of the wall is the same as that of a solid wall of the same concrete type and of the same overall thickness.

722.2.1.1.3 Tapered cross sections.

The thickness of panels with tapered cross sections shall be that determined at a distance 2t or 6 inches (152 mm), whichever is less, from the point of minimum thickness, where t is the minimum thickness.

722.2.1.1.4 Ribbed or undulating surfaces.

The equivalent thickness of panels with ribbed or undulating surfaces shall be determined by one of the following expressions:

For s ≥ 4t, the thickness to be used shall be t

For s ≤ 2t, the thickness to be used shall be te

For 4t > s > 2t, the thickness to be used shall be

(Equation 7-3)

where:

s = Spacing of ribs or undulations.

t = Minimum thickness.

te = Equivalent thickness of the panel calculated as the net cross-sectional area of the panel divided by the width, in which the maximum thickness used in the calculation shall not exceed 2t.

722.2.1.2 Multiwythe walls.

For walls that consist of two wythes of different types of concrete, the fire-resistance ratings shall be permitted to be determined from Figure 722.2.1.2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.1.2

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS OF TWO-WYTHE CONCRETE WALLS

TABLE 722.2.1.2(1)

VALUES OF Rn0.59 FOR USE IN EQUATION 7-4

TYPE OF MATERIAL	THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (inches)
11/2	2	21/2	3	31/2	4	41/2	5	51/2	6	61/2	7
Siliceous aggregate concrete	5.3	6.5	8.1	9.5	11.3	13.0	14.9	16.9	18.8	20.7	22.8	25.1
Carbonate aggregate concrete	5.5	7.1	8.9	10.4	12.0	14.0	16.2	18.1	20.3	21.9	24.7	27.2c
Sand-lightweight concrete	6.5	8.2	10.5	12.8	15.5	18.1	20.7	23.3	26.0c	Note c	Note c	Note c
Lightweight concrete	6.6	8.8	11.2	13.7	16.5	19.1	21.9	24.7	27.8c	Note c	Note c	Note c
Insulating concretea	9.3	13.3	16.6	18.3	23.1	26.5c	Note c	Note c	Note c	Note c	Note c	Note c
Airspaceb	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.

a.	Dry unit weight of 35 pcf or less and consisting of cellular, perlite or vermiculite concrete.

b.	The Rn0.59 value for one 1/2" to 31/2" airspace is 3.3. The Rn0.59 value for two 1/2" to 31/2" airspaces is 6.7.

c.	The fire-resistance rating for this thickness exceeds 4 hours.

TABLE 722.2.1.2(2)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS BASED ON R0.59

Ra (minutes)	R0.59
60	11.20
120	16.85
180	21.41
240	25.37

a.	Based on Equation 7-4.

722.2.1.2.1 Two or more wythes.

The fire-resistance rating for wall panels consisting of two or more wythes shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

(Equation 7-4)

where:

R = The fire endurance of the assembly, minutes.

R1, R2, and Rn = The fire endurances of the individual wythes, minutes. Values of Rn0.59 for use in Equation 7-4 are given in Table 722.2.1.2(1). Calculated fire-resistance ratings are shown in Table 722.2.1.2(2).

722.2.1.2.2 Foam plastic insulation.

The fire-resistance ratings of precast concrete wall panels consisting of a layer of foam plastic insulation sandwiched between two wythes of concrete shall be permitted to be determined by use of Equation 7-4. Foam plastic insulation with a total thickness of less than 1 inch (25 mm) shall be disregarded. The Rn value for thickness of foam plastic insulation of 1 inch (25 mm) or greater, for use in the calculation, is 5 minutes; therefore Rn0.59 = 2.5.

722.2.1.3 Joints between precast wall panels.

Joints between precast concrete wall panels that are not insulated as required by this section shall be considered as openings in walls. Uninsulated joints shall be included in determining the percentage of openings permitted by Table 705.8. Where openings are not permitted or are required by this code to be protected, the provisions of this section shall be used to determine the amount of joint insulation required. Insulated joints shall not be considered openings for purposes of determining compliance with the allowable percentage of openings in Table 705.8.

722.2.1.3.1 Ceramic fiber joint protection.

Figure 722.2.1.3.1 shows thicknesses of ceramic fiber blankets to be used to insulate joints between precast concrete wall panels for various panel thicknesses and for joint widths of 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) and 1 inch (25 mm) for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours. For joint widths between 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) and 1 inch (25 mm), the thickness of ceramic fiber blanket is allowed to be determined by direct interpolation. Other tested and labeled materials are acceptable in place of ceramic fiber blankets.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.1.3.1

CERAMIC FIBER JOINT PROTECTION

722.2.1.4 Walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster finishes.

The fire-resistance rating of cast-in-place or precast concrete walls with finishes of gypsum wallboard or plaster applied to one or both sides shall be permitted to be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.

TABLE 722.2.1.4(1)

MULTIPLYING FACTOR FOR FINISHES ON NONFIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

TYPE OF FINISH APPLIED TO CONCRETE
OR CONCRETE MASONRY WALL
	TYPE OF AGGREGATE USED IN CONCRETE OR CONCRETE MASONRY
Concrete: siliceous
or carbonate
Concrete Masonry:
siliceous or carbonate;
solid clay brick	Concrete: sand-lightweight
Concrete Masonry: clay tile;
hollow clay brick; concrete
masonry units of expanded
shale and < 20%
sand
	Concrete: lightweight Concrete
Masonry: concrete masonry
units of expanded shale,
expanded clay, expanded slag,
or pumice < 20% sand	Concrete Masonry:
concrete masonry
units of expanded
slag, expanded clay,
or pumice
Portland cement-sand plaster	1.00	0.75a	0.75a	0.50a
Gypsum-sand plaster	1.25	1.00	1.00	1.00
Gypsum-vermiculite or perlite plaster	1.75	1.50	1.25	1.25
Gypsum wallboard	3.00	2.25	2.25	2.25

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	For Portland cement-sand plaster 5/8 inch or less in thickness and applied directly to the concrete or concrete masonry on the nonfire-exposed side of the wall, the multiplying factor shall be 1.00.

TABLE 722.2.1.4(2)

TIME ASSIGNED TO FINISH MATERIALS ON FIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

FINISH DESCRIPTION	TIME (minutes)
Gypsum wallboard	
 3/8 inch	10
 1/2 inch	15
 5/8 inch	20
 2 layers of 3/8 inch	25
 1 layer of 3/8 inch, 1 layer of 1/2 inch	35
 2 layers of 1/2 inch	40
Type X gypsum wallboard	
 1/2 inch	25
 5/8 inch	40
Portland cement-sand plaster applied directly to concrete masonry	See Note a
Portland cement-sand plaster on metal lath	
 3/4 inch	20
 7/8 inch	25
 1 inch	30
Gypsum sand plaster on 3/8-inch gypsum lath	
 1/2 inch	35
 5/8 inch	40
 3/4 inch	50
Gypsum sand plaster on metal lath	
 3/4 inch	50
 7/8 inch	60
 1 inch	80

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The actual thickness of Portland cement-sand plaster, provided it is 5/8 inch or less in thickness, shall be permitted to be included in determining the equivalent thickness of the masonry for use in Table 722.3.2.

722.2.1.4.1 Nonfire-exposed side.

Where the finish of gypsum wallboard or plaster is applied to the side of the wall not exposed to fire, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The thickness of the finish shall first be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness of the finish by the applicable factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1) based on the type of aggregate in the concrete. The corrected thickness of finish shall then be added to the actual or equivalent thickness of concrete and fire-resistance rating of the concrete and finish determined from Tables 722.2.1.1 and 722.2.1.2(1) and Figure 722.2.1.2.

722.2.1.4.2 Fire-exposed side.

Where gypsum wallboard or plaster is applied to the fire-exposed side of the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The time assigned to the finish as established by Table 722.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rating determined from Tables 722.2.1.1 and 722.2.1.2(1) and Figure 722.2.1.2 for the concrete alone, or to the rating determined in Section 722.2.1.4.1 for the concrete and finish on the nonfire-exposed side.

722.2.1.4.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies.

For a wall having no finish on one side or different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of Sections 722.2.1.4.1 and 722.2.1.4.2 shall be performed twice, assuming either side of the wall to be the fire-exposed side. The fire-resistance rating of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values.

Exception: For an exterior wall with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

722.2.1.4.4 Minimum concrete fire-resistance rating.

Where finishes applied to one or both sides of a concrete wall contribute to the fire-resistance rating, the concrete alone shall provide not less than one-half of the total required fire-resistance rating. Additionally, the contribution to the fire resistance of the finish on the nonfire-exposed side of a load-bearing wall shall not exceed one-half the contribution of the concrete alone.

722.2.1.4.5 Concrete finishes.

Finishes on concrete walls that are assumed to contribute to the total fire-resistance rating of the wall shall comply with the installation requirements of Section 722.3.2.5.

722.2.2 Concrete floor and roof slabs.

Reinforced and prestressed floors and roofs shall comply with Section 722.2.2.1. Multicourse floors and roofs shall comply with Sections 722.2.2.2 and 722.2.2.3, respectively.

722.2.2.1 Reinforced and prestressed floors and roofs.

The minimum thicknesses of reinforced and prestressed concrete floor or roof slabs for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours are shown in Table 722.2.2.1.

Exception: Minimum thickness shall not be required for floors and ramps within open and enclosed parking garages constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively.

TABLE 722.2.2.1

MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (inches)

CONCRETE TYPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
Siliceous	3.5	4.3	5	6.2	7
Carbonate	3.2	4	4.6	5.7	6.6
Sand-lightweight	2.7	3.3	3.8	4.6	5.4
Lightweight	2.5	3.1	3.6	4.4	5.1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

722.2.2.1.1 Hollow-core prestressed slabs.

For hollow-core prestressed concrete slabs in which the cores are of constant cross section throughout the length, the equivalent thickness shall be permitted to be obtained by dividing the net cross-sectional area of the slab including grout in the joints, by its width.

722.2.2.1.2 Slabs with sloping soffits.

The thickness of slabs with sloping soffits (see Figure 722.2.2.1.2) shall be determined at a distance 2t or 6 inches (152 mm), whichever is less, from the point of minimum thickness, where t is the minimum thickness.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.2.1.2

DETERMINATION OF SLAB THICKNESS FOR SLOPING SOFFITS

722.2.2.1.3 Slabs with ribbed soffits.

The thickness of slabs with ribbed or undulating soffits (see Figure 722.2.2.1.3) shall be determined by one of the following expressions, whichever is applicable:

For s > 4t, the thickness to be used shall be t

For s ≤ 2t, the thickness to be used shall be te

For 4t > s > 2t, the thickness to be used shall be

(Equation 7-5)

where:

s = Spacing of ribs or undulations.

t = Minimum thickness.

te = Equivalent thickness of the slab calculated as the net area of the slab divided by the width, in which the maximum thickness used in the calculation shall not exceed 2t.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.2.1.3

SLABS WITH RIBBED OR UNDULATING SOFFITS

722.2.2.1.4 Flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids.

Table 722.2.2.1 shall be used to determine the fire resistance of 1 hour and 2 hours for flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids. The equivalent thickness of the slab shall be determined by dividing the net concrete volume of the slab by the floor area. The net concrete volume of the slab shall be equal to the volume of concrete of a solid slab minus the average concrete volume displaced by the hollow voids.

722.2.2.2 Multicourse floors.

The fire-resistance ratings of floors that consist of a base slab of concrete with a topping (overlay) of a different type of concrete shall comply with Figure 722.2.2.2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.2.2

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR TWO-COURSE CONCRETE FLOORS

722.2.2.3 Multicourse roofs.

The fire-resistance ratings of roofs that consist of a base slab of concrete with a topping (overlay) of an insulating concrete or with an insulating board and built-up roofing shall comply with Figures 722.2.2.3(1) and 722.2.2.3(2).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.2.3(1)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR CONCRETE ROOF ASSEMBLIES

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 722.2.2.3(2)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR CONCRETE ROOF ASSEMBLIES

722.2.2.3.1 Heat transfer.

For the transfer of heat, three-ply built-up roofing contributes 10 minutes to the fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating for concrete assemblies such as those shown in Figure 722.2.2.3(1) shall be increased by 10 minutes. This increase is not applicable to those shown in Figure 722.2.2.3(2).

722.2.2.4 Joints in precast slabs.

Joints between adjacent precast concrete slabs need not be considered in calculating the slab thickness provided that a concrete topping not less than 1 inch (25 mm) thick is used. Where no concrete topping is used, joints must be grouted to a depth of not less than one-third the slab thickness at the joint, but not less than 1 inch (25 mm), or the joints must be made fire resistant by other approved methods.

722.2.3 Concrete cover over reinforcement.

The minimum thickness of concrete cover over reinforcement in concrete slabs, reinforced beams and prestressed beams shall comply with this section.

TABLE 722.2.3(1)

COVER THICKNESS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (inches)

CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
Restrained	Unrestrained
1	11/2	2	3	4	1	11/2	2	3	4
Siliceous	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	1	11/4	15/8
Carbonate	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	11/4	11/4
Sand-lightweight or lightweight	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	11/4	11/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE 722.2.3(2)

COVER THICKNESS FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (inches)

CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
Restrained	Unrestrained
1	11/2	2	3	4	1	11/2	2	3	4
Siliceous	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	11/8	11/2	13/4	23/8	23/4
Carbonate	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	1	13/8	15/8	21/8	21/4
Sand-lightweight or lightweight	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	3/4	1	13/8	11/2	2	21/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE 722.2.3(3)

MINIMUM COVER FOR MAIN REINFORCING BARS OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMSc

(APPLICABLE TO ALL TYPES OF STRUCTURAL CONCRETE)

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa
	BEAM
WIDTHb (inches)
	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
Restrained	5
7
≥ 10
	3/4
3/4
3/4
	3/4
3/4
3/4
	3/4
3/4
3/4
	1a
3/4
3/4
	11/4a
3/4
3/4

Unrestrained	5
7
≥ 10
	3/4
3/4
3/4
	1
3/4
3/4
	11/4
3/4
3/4
	—
13/4
1
	—
3
13/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover of 3/4 inch is adequate for ratings of 4 hours or less.

b.	For beam widths between the tabulated values, the minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.

c.	The cover for an individual reinforcing bar is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the bar and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For beams in which several bars are used, the cover for corner bars used in the calculation shall be reduced to one-half of the actual value. The cover for an individual bar must be not less than one-half of the value given in Table 722.2.3(3) nor less than 3/4 inch.

TABLE 722.2.3(4)

MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS 8 INCHES OR GREATER IN WIDTHb

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa
	CONCRETE
AGGREGATE TYPE
	BEAM WIDTH
(inches)
	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
Restrained	Carbonate or siliceous
Carbonate or siliceous
Sand lightweight
Sand lightweight
	8
≥ 12
8
≥ 12
	11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
	11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
	11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
	13/4a
11/2
11/2
11/2
	21/2a
17/8a
2a
15/8a

Unrestrained	Carbonate or siliceous
Carbonate or siliceous
Sand lightweight
Sand lightweight
	8
≥ 12
8
≥ 12
	11/2
11/2
11/2
11/2
	13/4
11/2
11/2
11/2
	21/2
17/8a
2
15/8
	5c
21/2
31/4
2
	—
3
—
21/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover of 3/4 inch is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.

b.	For beam widths between 8 inches and 12 inches, minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.

c.	Not practical for 8-inch-wide beam but shown for purposes of interpolation.

TABLE 722.2.3(5)

MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS OF ALL WIDTHS

RESTRAINED OR
UNRESTRAINEDa
	CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE	BEAM AREAb
A (square inches)
	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
Restrained	All	40 ≤ A ≤ 150	11/2	11/2	2	21/2	—
Carbonate or
siliceous
	150 < A ≤ 300	11/2	11/2	11/2	13/4	21/2
300 < A	11/2	11/2	11/2	11/2	2
Sand lightweight	150 < A	11/2	11/2	11/2	11/2	2
Unrestrained	All	40 ≤ A ≤ 150	2	21/2	—	—	—
Carbonate or
siliceous
	150 < A ≤ 300	11/2	13/4	21/2	—	—
300 < A	11/2	11/2	2	3c	4c
Sand lightweight	150 < A	11/2	11/2	2	3c	4c

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 4 feet on center. For restrained beams spaced 4 feet or less on center, minimum cover of 3/4 inch is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.

b.	The cross-sectional area of a stem is permitted to include a portion of the area in the flange, provided the width of the flange used in the calculation does not exceed three times the average width of the stem.

c.	U-shaped or hooped stirrups spaced not to exceed the depth of the member and having a minimum cover of 1 inch shall be provided.

722.2.3.1 Slab cover.

The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment reinforcement shall comply with Table 722.2.3(1) for reinforced concrete and Table 722.2.3(2) for prestressed concrete. These tables are applicable for solid or hollow-core one-way or two-way slabs with flat undersurfaces. These tables are applicable to slabs that are either cast in place or precast. For precast prestressed concrete not covered elsewhere, the procedures contained in PCI 124 shall be acceptable.

722.2.3.2 Reinforced beam cover.

The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment reinforcement (bottom steel) for reinforced concrete beams is shown in Table 722.2.3(3) for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours.

722.2.3.3 Prestressed beam cover.

The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment prestressing tendons (bottom steel) for restrained and unrestrained prestressed concrete beams and stemmed units shall comply with the values shown in Tables 722.2.3(4) and 722.2.3(5) for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours. Values in Table 722.2.3(4) apply to beams 8 inches (203 mm) or greater in width. Values in Table 722.2.3(5) apply to beams or stems of any width, provided the cross-section area is not less than 40 square inches (25 806 mm2). In case of differences between the values determined from Table 722.2.3(4) or 722.2.3(5), it is permitted to use the smaller value. The concrete cover shall be calculated in accordance with Section 722.2.3.3.1. The minimum concrete cover for nonprestressed reinforcement in prestressed concrete beams shall comply with Section 722.2.3.2.

722.2.3.3.1 Calculating concrete cover.

The concrete cover for an individual tendon is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the tendon and the fire-exposed surface of the beam, except that for ungrouted ducts, the assumed cover thickness is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the duct and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For beams in which two or more tendons are used, the cover is assumed to be the average of the minimum cover of the individual tendons. For corner tendons (tendons equal distance from the bottom and side), the minimum cover used in the calculation shall be one-half the actual value. For stemmed members with two or more prestressing tendons located along the vertical centerline of the stem, the average cover shall be the distance from the bottom of the member to the centroid of the tendons. The actual cover for any individual tendon shall be not less than one-half the smaller value shown in Tables 722.2.3(4) and 722.2.3(5), or 1 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater.

722.2.4 Concrete columns.

Concrete columns shall comply with this section.

TABLE 722.2.4

MINIMUM DIMENSION OF CONCRETE COLUMNS (inches)

TYPES OF CONCRETE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2a	3a	4b
Siliceous	8	9	10	12	14
Carbonate	8	9	10	11	12
Sand-lightweight	8	81/2	9	101/2	12

For SI: 1 inch = 25 mm.

a.	The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 8 inches for rectangular columns with two parallel sides not less than 36 inches in length.

b.	The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 10 inches for rectangular columns with two parallel sides not less than 36 inches in length.

722.2.4.1 Minimum size.

The minimum overall dimensions of reinforced concrete columns for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours for exposure to fire on all sides shall comply with this section.

722.2.4.1.1 Concrete strength less than or equal to 12,000 psi.

For columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength, f′ c, of less than or equal to 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa), the minimum dimension shall comply with Table 722.2.4.

722.2.4.1.2 Concrete strength greater than 12,000 psi.

For columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength, f ′ c, greater than 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa), for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours the minimum dimension shall be 24 inches (610 mm).

722.2.4.2 Minimum cover for R/C columns.

The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the main longitudinal reinforcement in columns, regardless of the type of aggregate used in the concrete and the specified compressive strength of concrete, f ′ c, shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) times the number of hours of required fire resistance or 2 inches (51 mm), whichever is less.

722.2.4.3 Tie and spiral reinforcement.

For concrete columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength, f ′ c, greater than 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa), tie and spiral reinforcement shall comply with the following:

1.	The free ends of rectangular ties shall terminate with a 135-degree (2.4 rad) standard tie hook.

2.	The free ends of circular ties shall terminate with a 90-degree (1.6 rad) standard tie hook.

3.	The free ends of spirals, including at lap splices, shall terminate with a 90-degree (1.6 rad) standard tie hook.

The hook extension at the free end of ties and spirals shall be the larger of six bar diameters and the extension required by Section 7.1.3 of ACI 318. Hooks shall project into the core of the column.

722.2.4.4 Columns built into walls.

The minimum dimensions of Table 722.2.4 do not apply to a reinforced concrete column that is built into a concrete or masonry wall provided all of the following are met:

1.	The fire-resistance rating for the wall is equal to or greater than the required rating of the column;

2.	The main longitudinal reinforcing in the column has cover not less than that required by Section 722.2.4.2; and

3.	Openings in the wall are protected in accordance with Section 716.

Where openings in the wall are not protected as required by Section 716, the minimum dimension of columns required to have a fire-resistance rating of 3 hours or less shall be 8 inches (203 mm), and 10 inches (254 mm) for columns required to have a fire-resistance rating of 4 hours, regardless of the type of aggregate used in the concrete.

722.2.4.5 Precast cover units for steel columns.

See Section 722.5.1.4.

722.3 Concrete masonry.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of concrete masonry are established by calculations.

722.3.1 Equivalent thickness.

The equivalent thickness of concrete masonry construction shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.

722.3.1.1 Concrete masonry unit plus finishes.

The equivalent thickness of concrete masonry assemblies, Tea, shall be computed as the sum of the equivalent thickness of the concrete masonry unit, Te, as determined by Section 722.3.1.2, 722.3.1.3 or 722.3.1.4, plus the equivalent thickness of finishes, Tef, determined in accordance with Section 722.3.2:

(Equation 7-6)

722.3.1.2 Ungrouted or partially grouted construction.

Te shall be the value obtained for the concrete masonry unit determined in accordance with ASTM C140.

722.3.1.3 Solid grouted construction.

The equivalent thickness, Te, of solid grouted concrete masonry units is the actual thickness of the unit.

722.3.1.4 Airspaces and cells filled with loose-fill material.

The equivalent thickness of completely filled hollow concrete masonry is the actual thickness of the unit where loose-fill materials are: sand, pea gravel, crushed stone, or slag that meet ASTM C33 requirements; pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay, expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or cinders that comply with ASTM C331; or perlite or vermiculite meeting the requirements of ASTM C549 and ASTM C516, respectively.

722.3.2 Concrete masonry walls.

The fire-resistance rating of walls and partitions constructed of concrete masonry units shall be determined from Table 722.3.2. The rating shall be based on the equivalent thickness of the masonry and type of aggregate used.

TABLE 722.3.2

MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS (inches) OF BEARING OR NONBEARING CONCRETE MASONRY WALLSa, b, c, d

TYPE OF AGGREGATE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	13/4	2	21/4	21/2	23/4	3	31/4	31/2	33/4	4
Pumice or expanded slag	1.5	1.9	2.1	2.5	2.7	3.0	3.2	3.4	3.6	3.8	4.0	4.2	4.4	4.5	4.7
Expanded shale, clay or slate	1.8	2.2	2.6	2.9	3.3	3.4	3.6	3.8	4.0	4.2	4.4	4.6	4.8	4.9	5.1
Limestone, cinders or unexpanded slag	1.9	2.3	2.7	3.1	3.4	3.7	4.0	4.3	4.5	4.8	5.0	5.2	5.5	5.7	5.9
Calcareous or siliceous gravel	2.0	2.4	2.8	3.2	3.6	3.9	4.2	4.5	4.8	5.0	5.3	5.5	5.8	6.0	6.2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Values between those shown in the table can be determined by direct interpolation.

b.	Where combustible members are framed into the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between members set in from opposite sides, shall be not less than 93 percent of the thickness shown in the table.

c.	Requirements of ASTM C55, ASTM C73, ASTM C90 or ASTM C744 shall apply.

d.	Minimum required equivalent thickness corresponding to the hourly fire-resistance rating for units with a combination of aggregate shall be determined by linear interpolation based on the percent by volume of each aggregate used in manufacture.

722.3.2.1 Finish on nonfire-exposed side.

Where plaster or gypsum wallboard is applied to the side of the wall not exposed to fire, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The thickness of gypsum wallboard or plaster shall be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness of the finish by applicable factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1). This corrected thickness of finish shall be added to the equivalent thickness of masonry and the fire-resistance rating of the masonry and finish determined from Table 722.3.2.

722.3.2.2 Finish on fire-exposed side.

Where plaster or gypsum wallboard is applied to the fire-exposed side of the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The time assigned to the finish as established by Table 722.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rating determined in Section 722.3.2 for the masonry alone, or in Section 722.3.2.1 for the masonry and finish on the nonfire-exposed side.

722.3.2.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies.

For a wall having no finish on one side or having different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming either side of the wall to be the fire-exposed side. The fire-resistance rating of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values calculated.

Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

722.3.2.4 Minimum concrete masonry fire-resistance rating.

Where the finish applied to a concrete masonry wall contributes to its fire-resistance rating, the masonry alone shall provide not less than one-half the total required fire-resistance rating.

722.3.2.5 Attachment of finishes.

Installation of finishes shall be as follows:

1.	Gypsum wallboard and gypsum lath applied to concrete masonry or concrete walls shall be secured to wood or steel furring members spaced not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center (o.c.).

2.	Gypsum wallboard shall be installed with the long dimension parallel to the furring members and shall have all joints finished.

3.	Other aspects of the installation of finishes shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapters 7 and 25.

722.3.3 Multiwythe masonry walls.

The fire-resistance rating of wall assemblies constructed of multiple wythes of masonry materials shall be permitted to be based on the fire-resistance rating period of each wythe and the continuous airspace between each wythe in accordance with the following formula:

(Equation 7-7)

where:

RA = Fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).

R1, R2, ..., Rn = Fire-resistance rating of wythes for 1, 2, n (hours), respectively.

A1, A2, ...., An = 0.30, factor for each continuous airspace for 1, 2, ...n, respectively, having a depth of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) or more between wythes.

722.3.4 Concrete masonry lintels.

Fire-resistance ratings for concrete masonry lintels shall be determined based upon the nominal thickness of the lintel and the minimum thickness of concrete masonry or concrete, or any combination thereof, covering the main reinforcing bars, as determined in accordance with Table 722.3.4, or by approved alternate methods.

TABLE 722.3.4

MINIMUM COVER OF LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT IN FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED REINFORCED CONCRETE MASONRY LINTELS (inches)

NOMINAL WIDTH
OF LINTEL (inches)
	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	2	3	4
6	11/2	2	—	—
8	11/2	11/2	13/4	3
10 or greater	11/2	11/2	11/2	13/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

722.3.5 Concrete masonry columns.

The fire-resistance rating of concrete masonry columns shall be determined based upon the least plan dimension of the column in accordance with Table 722.3.5 or by approved alternate methods.

TABLE 722.3.5

MINIMUM DIMENSION OF CONCRETE MASONRY COLUMNS (inches)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	2	3	4
8 inches	10 inches	12 inches	14 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

722.4 Clay brick and tile masonry.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of clay brick and tile masonry are established by calculations.

722.4.1 Masonry walls.

The fire-resistance rating of masonry walls shall be based upon the equivalent thickness as calculated in accordance with this section. The calculation shall take into account finishes applied to the wall and airspaces between wythes in multiwythe construction.

TABLE 722.4.1(1)

FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS OF CLAY MASONRY WALLS

MATERIAL TYPE	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT THICKNESS FOR FIRE RESISTANCEa, b, c
(inches)

1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
Solid brick of clay or shaled	2.7	3.8	4.9	6.0
Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, unfilled	2.3	3.4	4.3	5.0
Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, grouted or filled with materials
specified in Section 722.4.1.1.3
	3.0	4.4	5.5	6.6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Equivalent thickness as determined from Section 722.4.1.1.

b.	Calculated fire resistance between the hourly increments listed shall be determined by linear interpolation.

c.	Where combustible members are framed in the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between members set in from opposite sides, shall be not less than 93 percent of the thickness shown.

d.	For units in which the net cross-sectional area of cored brick in any plane parallel to the surface containing the cores is not less than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

TABLE 722.4.1(2)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR BEARING STEEL FRAME BRICK VENEER WALLS OR PARTITIONS

WALL OR PARTITION ASSEMBLY	PLASTER SIDE
EXPOSED (hours)
	BRICK FACED SIDE
EXPOSED (hours)

Outside facing of steel studs:
1/2" wood fiberboard sheathing next to studs, 3/4" airspace formed with
3/4" × 15/8" wood strips placed over the fiberboard and secured to the studs;
metal or wire lath nailed to such strips, 33/4" brick veneer held in place by filling 3/4" airspace between
the brick and lath with mortar. Inside facing of studs: 3/4" unsanded gypsum plaster on metal or wire
lath attached to 5/16" wood strips secured to edges of the studs.
	1.5	4
Outside facing of steel studs:
1" insulation board sheathing attached to studs, 1" airspace, and 33/4" brick veneer attached to steel
frame with metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 7/8" sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix)
applied on metal or wire lath attached directly to the studs.
	1.5	4
Same as above except use 7/8" vermiculite-gypsum plaster or 1" sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix)
applied to metal or wire.
	2	4
Outside facing of steel studs:
1/2" gypsum sheathing board, attached to studs, and 33/4" brick veneer attached to steel frame with
metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 1/2" sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix) applied to 1/2"
perforated gypsum lath securely attached to studs and having strips of metal lath 3 inches wide
applied to all horizontal joints of gypsum lath.	2	4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE 722.4.1(3)

VALUES OF Rn0.59

Rn 0.59	R (hours)
1	1.0
2	1.50
3	1.91
4	2.27

TABLE 722.4.1(4)

COEFFICIENTS FOR PLASTER, pl a

THICKNESS OF PLASTER (inch)	ONE SIDE	TWO SIDES
1/2	0.3	0.6
5/8	0.37	0.75
3/4	0.45	0.90

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Values listed in the table are for 1:3 sanded gypsum plaster.

TABLE 722.4.1(5)

REINFORCED MASONRY LINTELS

NOMINAL
LINTEL WIDTH (inches)
	MINIMUM LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT
COVER FOR FIRE RESISTANCE (inches)

1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
6	11/2	2	NP	NP
8	11/2	11/2	13/4	3
10 or more	11/2	11/2	11/2	13/4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

NP = Not permitted.

TABLE 722.4.1(6)

REINFORCED CLAY MASONRY COLUMNS

COLUMN SIZE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING
(hours)

1	2	3	4
Minimum column dimension (inches)	8	10	12	14

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

722.4.1.1 Equivalent thickness.

The fire-resistance ratings of walls or partitions constructed of solid or hollow clay masonry units shall be determined from Table 722.4.1(1) or 722.4.1(2). The equivalent thickness of the clay masonry unit shall be determined by Equation 7-8 where using Table 722.4.1(1). The fire-resistance rating determined from Table 722.4.1(1) shall be permitted to be used in the calculated fire-resistance rating procedure in Section 722.4.2.

(Equation 7-8)

where:

Te = The equivalent thickness of the clay masonry unit (inches).

Vn = The net volume of the clay masonry unit (inch3).

L = The specified length of the clay masonry unit (inches).

H = The specified height of the clay masonry unit (inches).

722.4.1.1.1 Hollow clay units.

The equivalent thickness, Te, shall be the value obtained for hollow clay units as determined in accordance with Equation 7-8. The net volume, Vn, of the units shall be determined using the gross volume and percentage of void area determined in accordance with ASTM C67.

722.4.1.1.2 Solid grouted clay units.

The equivalent thickness of solid grouted clay masonry units shall be taken as the actual thickness of the units.

722.4.1.1.3 Units with filled cores.

The equivalent thickness of the hollow clay masonry units is the actual thickness of the unit where completely filled with loose-fill materials of: sand, pea gravel, crushed stone, or slag that meet ASTM C33 requirements; pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay, expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or cinders in compliance with ASTM C331; or perlite or vermiculite meeting the requirements of ASTM C549 and ASTM C516, respectively.

722.4.1.2 Plaster finishes.

Where plaster is applied to the wall, the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined by the formula:

(Equation 7-9)

where:

R = The fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).

Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individual wall (hours).

pl = Coefficient for thickness of plaster.

Values for Rn0.59 for use in Equation 7-9 are given in Table 722.4.1(3). Coefficients for thickness of plaster shall be selected from Table 722.4.1(4) based on the actual thickness of plaster applied to the wall or partition and whether one or two sides of the wall are plastered.

722.4.1.3 Multiwythe walls with airspace.

Where a continuous airspace separates multiple wythes of the wall or partition, the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined by the formula:

(Equation 7-10)

where:

R = The fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).

R1, R2 and Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individual wythes (hours).

as = Coefficient for continuous airspace.

Values for Rn0.59 for use in Equation 7-10 are given in Table 722.4.1(3). The coefficient for each continuous airspace of 1/2 inch to 31/2 inches (12.7 to 89 mm) separating two individual wythes shall be 0.3.

722.4.1.4 Nonsymmetrical assemblies.

For a wall having no finish on one side or having different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming either side to be the fire-exposed side of the wall. The fire resistance of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values determined.

Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 5 feet (1524 mm), the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

722.4.2 Multiwythe walls.

The fire-resistance rating for walls or partitions consisting of two or more dissimilar wythes shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

(Equation 7-11)

where:

R = The fire-resistance rating of the assembly (hours).

R1, R2 and Rn = The fire-resistance rating of the individual wythes (hours).

Values for Rn0.59 for use in Equation 7-11 are given in Table 722.4.1(3).

722.4.2.1 Multiwythe walls of different material.

For walls that consist of two or more wythes of different materials (concrete or concrete masonry units) in combination with clay masonry units, the fire-resistance rating of the different materials shall be permitted to be determined from Table 722.2.1.1 for concrete; Table 722.3.2 for concrete masonry units or Table 722.4.1(1) or 722.4.1(2) for clay and tile masonry units.

722.4.3 Reinforced clay masonry lintels.

Fire-resistance ratings for clay masonry lintels shall be determined based on the nominal width of the lintel and the minimum covering for the longitudinal reinforcement in accordance with Table 722.4.1(5).

722.4.4 Reinforced clay masonry columns.

The fire-resistance ratings shall be determined based on the last plan dimension of the column in accordance with Table 722.4.1(6). The minimum cover for longitudinal reinforcement shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

722.5 Steel assemblies.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of steel assemblies are established by calculations.

722.5.1 Structural steel columns.

The fire-resistance ratings of structural steel columns shall be based on the size of the element and the type of protection provided in accordance with this section.

FIGURE 722.5.1(1)

DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

FIGURE 722.5.1(2)

GYPSUM-PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH SHEET STEEL COLUMN COVERS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 305 mm.

1.	Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.

2.	Type X gypsum board or gypsum panel products in accordance with ASTM C1177, C1178, C1278, C1396 or C1658. The total thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products calculated as h in Section 722.5.1.2 shall be applied vertically to an individual column using one of the following methods:

1.	As a single layer with no horizontal joints.

2.	As multiple layers with no horizontal joints permitted in any layer.

3.	As multiple layers with horizontal joints staggered not less than 12 inches vertically between layers and not less than 8 feet vertically in any single layer. The total required thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column. For fire-resistance ratings of 2 hours or less, one of the required layers of gypsum board or gypsum panel product may be applied to the exterior of the sheet steel column covers with 1-inch long Type S screws spaced 1 inch from the wallboard edge and 8 inches on center. For such installations, 0.0149-inch minimum thickness galvanized steel corner beads with 11/2-inch legs shall be attached to the wallboard with Type S screws spaced 12 inches on center.

3.	For fire-resistance ratings of 3 hours or less, the column covers shall be fabricated from 0.0239 -inch minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel. For 4-hour fire-resistance ratings, the column covers shall be fabricated from 0.0239-inch minimum thickness stainless steel. The column covers shall be erected with the Snap Lock or Pittsburgh joint details.

For fire-resistance ratings of 2 hours or less, column covers fabricated from 0.0269-inch minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel shall be permitted to be erected with lap joints. The lap joints shall be permitted to be located anywhere around the perimeter of the column cover. The lap joints shall be secured with 1/2-inch-long No. 8 sheet metal screws spaced 12 inches on center.

The column covers shall be provided with a minimum expansion clearance of 1/8 inch per linear foot between the ends of the cover and any restraining construction.

FIGURE 722.5.1(3)

GYPSUM-PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH STEEL STUD/SCREW ATTACHMENT SYSTEM

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 305 mm.

1.	Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.

2.	15/8-inch deep studs fabricated from 0.0179-inch minimum thickness galvanized steel with 15/16 or 17/16-inch legs. The length of the steel studs shall be 1/2 inch less than the height of the assembly.

3.	Type X gypsum board or gypsum panel products in accordance with ASTM C1177, C1178, C1278, C1396 or C1658. The total thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products calculated as h in Section 722.5.1.2 shall be applied vertically to an individual column using one of the following methods:

1.	As a single layer with no horizontal joints.

2.	As multiple layers with no horizontal joints permitted in any layer.

3.	As multiple layers with horizontal joints staggered not less than 12 inches vertically between layers and not less than 8 feet vertically in any single layer. The total required thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column.

4.	Galvanized 0.0149-inch minimum thickness steel corner beads with 11/2-inch legs attached to the gypsum board or gypsum panel products with 1-inch-long Type S screws spaced 12 inches on center.

5.	No. 18 SWG steel tie wires spaced 24 inches on center.

6.	Sheet metal angles with 2-inch legs fabricated from 0.0221-inch minimum thickness galvanized steel.

7.	Type S screws, 1 inch long, shall be used for attaching the first layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs and the third layer to the sheet metal angles at 24 inches on center. Type S screws 13/4-inch long shall be used for attaching the second layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs and the fourth layer to the sheet metal angles at 12 inches on center. Type S screws 21/4 inches long shall be used for attaching the third layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs at 12 inches on center.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per linear foot/inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

FIGURE 722.5.1(4)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS PROTECTED WITH VARIOUS THICKNESSES OF TYPE X GYPSUM WALLBOARD

a.	The W/D ratios for typical wide flange columns are listed in Table 722.5.1(1). For other column shapes, the W/D ratios shall be determined in accordance with Section 722.5.1.1.

FIGURE 722.5.1(5)

WIDE FLANGE STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS

FIGURE 722.5.1(6)

CONCRETE PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNSa,b

a.	When the inside perimeter of the concrete protection is not square, L shall be taken as the average of L1 and L2. When the thickness of concrete cover is not constant, h shall be taken as the average of h1 and h2.

b.	Joints shall be protected with a minimum 1 inch thickness of ceramic fiber blanket but in no case less than one-half the thickness of the column cover (see Section 722.2.1.3).

FIGURE 722.5.1(7)

CONCRETE OR CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

d = Depth of a wide flange column, outside diameter of pipe column, or outside dimension of structural tubing column (inches).

tweb = Thickness of web of wide flange column (inches).

w = Width of flange of wide flange column (inches).

TABLE 722.5.1(1)

W/D RATIOS FOR STEEL COLUMNS

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	CONTOUR PROFILE	BOX
PROFILE
	STRUCTURAL SHAPE	CONTOUR PROFILE	BOX
PROFILE

W14 × 233	2.55	3.65	W10 × 112	1.81	2.57
× 211	2.32	3.35	× 100	1.64	2.33
× 193	2.14	3.09	× 88	1.45	2.08
× 176	1.96	2.85	× 77	1.28	1.85
× 159	1.78	2.60	× 68	1.15	1.66
× 145	1.64	2.39	× 60	1.01	1.48
× 132	1.56	2.25	× 54	0.922	1.34
× 120	1.42	2.06	× 49	0.84	1.23
× 109	1.29	1.88	× 45	0.888	1.24
× 99	1.18	1.72	× 39	0.78	1.09
× 90	1.08	1.58	× 33	0.661	0.93
× 82	1.23	1.68	
× 74	1.12	1.53	W8 × 67	1.37	1.94
× 68	1.04	1.41	× 58	1.20	1.71
× 61	0.928	1.28	× 48	1.00	1.44
× 53	0.915	1.21	× 40	0.849	1.23
× 48	0.835	1.10	× 35	0.749	1.08
× 43	0.752	0.99	× 31	0.665	0.97
	× 28	0.688	0.96
W12 × 190	2.50	3.51	× 24	0.591	0.83
× 170	2.26	3.20	× 21	0.577	0.77
× 152	2.04	2.90	× 18	0.499	0.67
× 136	1.86	2.63	
× 120	1.65	2.36	W6 ×25	0.696	1.00
× 106	1.47	2.11	× 20	0.563	0.82
× 96	1.34	1.93	× 16	0.584	0.78
× 87	1.22	1.76	× 15	0.431	0.63
× 79	1.11	1.61	× 12	0.448	0.60
× 72	1.02	1.48	× 9	0.338	0.46
× 65	0.925	1.35	
× 58	0.925	1.31	W5 ×19	0.644	0.93
× 53	0.855	1.20	× 16	0.55	0.80
× 50	0.909	1.23	
× 45	0.829	1.12	W4 ×13	0.556	0.79
× 40	0.734	1.00	

For SI: 1 pound per linear foot per inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

TABLE 722.5.1(2)

PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE

PROPERTY	NORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETE	STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE
Thermal conductivity (kc)	0.95 Btu/hr × ft × °F	0.35 Btu/hr × ft × °F
Specific heat (cc)	0.20 Btu/lb °F	0.20 Btu/lb °F
Density (Pc)	145 lb/ft3	110 lb/ft3
Equilibrium (free) moisture content (m) by volume	4%	5%

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 lb/ft3 = 16.0185 kg/m3, Btu/hr × ft × °F = 1.731 W/(m × K).

TABLE 722.5.1(3)

THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF CONCRETE OR CLAY MASONRY UNITS

DENSITY (dm) OF UNITS (lb/ft3)	THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY (K) OF UNITS (Btu/hr × ft × °F)
Concrete Masonry Units
80	0.207
85	0.228
90	0.252
95	0.278
100	0.308
105	0.340
110	0.376
115	0.416
120	0.459
125	0.508
130	0.561
135	0.620
140	0.685
145	0.758
150	0.837
Clay Masonry Units
120	1.25
130	2.25

For SI: 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.0185 kg/m3, Btu/hr × ft × °F = 1.731 W/(m × K).

TABLE 722.5.1(4)

WEIGHT-TO-HEATED-PERIMETER RATIOS (W/D) FOR TYPICAL WIDE FLANGE BEAM AND GIRDER SHAPES

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	CONTOUR PROFILE	BOX PROFILE	STRUCTURAL SHAPE	CONTOUR PROFILE	BOX PROFILE
W36 x 300	2.50	3.33	W24 x 68	0.942	1.21
x 280	2.35	3.12	x 62	0.934	1.14
x 260	2.18	2.92	x 55	0.828	1.02
x 245	2.08	2.76	
x 230	1.95	2.61	W21 x 147	1.87	2.60
x 210	1.96	2.45	x 132	1.68	2.35
x 194	1.81	2.28	x 122	1.57	2.19
x 182	1.72	2.15	x 111	1.43	2.01
x 170	1.60	2.01	x 101	1.30	1.84
x 160	1.51	1.90	x 93	1.40	1.80
x 150	1.43	1.79	x 83	1.26	1.62
x 135	1.29	1.63	x 73	1.11	1.44
	x 68	1.04	1.35
W33 x 241	2.13	2.86	W21 x 62	0.952	1.23
x 221	1.97	2.64	x 57	0.952	1.17
x 201	1.79	2.42	x 50	0.838	1.04
x 152	1.53	1.94	x 44	0.746	0.92
x 141	1.43	1.80	
x 130	1.32	1.67	W18 x 119	1.72	2.42
x 118	1.21	1.53	x 106	1.55	2.18
	x 97	1.42	2.01
W30 x 211	2.01	2.74	x 86	1.27	1.80
x 191	1.85	2.50	x 76	1.13	1.60
x 173	1.66	2.28	x 71	1.22	1.59
x 132	1.47	1.85	x 65	1.13	1.47
x 124	1.39	1.75	x 60	1.04	1.36
x 116	1.30	1.65	x 55	0.963	1.26
x 108	1.21	1.54	x 50	0.88	1.15
x 99	1.12	1.42	x 46	0.878	1.09
	x 40	0.768	0.96
W27 x 178	1.87	2.55	x 35	0.672	0.85
x 161	1.70	2.33	
x 146	1.55	2.12	W16 x 100	1.59	2.25
x 114	1.39	1.76	x 89	1.43	2.03
x 102	1.24	1.59	x 77	1.25	1.78
x 94	1.15	1.47	x 67	1.09	1.56
x 84	1.03	1.33	x 57	1.09	1.43
	x 50	0.962	1.26
	x 45	0.870	1.15
W24 x 162	1.88	2.57	x 40	0.780	1.03
x 146	1.70	2.34	x 36	0.702	0.93
x 131	1.54	2.12	x 31	0.661	0.83
x 117	1.38	1.91	x 26	0.558	0.70
x 104	1.24	1.71	
x 94	1.28	1.63	W14 x 132	1.89	3.00
x 84	1.15	1.47	x 120	1.71	2.75
x 76	1.05	1.34	x 109	1.57	2.52
	
W14 x 99	1.43	2.31	W10 x 30	0.806	1.12
x 90	1.31	2.11	x 26	0.708	0.98
x 82	1.45	2.12	x 22	0.606	0.84
x 74	1.32	1.93	x 19	0.607	0.78
x 68	1.22	1.78	x 17	0.543	0.70
x 61	1.10	1.61	x 15	0.484	0.63
x 53	1.06	1.48	x 12	0.392	0.51
x 48	0.970	1.35	
W14 x 43	0.874	1.22	W8 x 67	1.65	2.55
x 38	0.809	1.09	x 58	1.44	2.26
x 34	0.725	0.98	x 48	1.21	1.91
x 30	0.644	0.87	x 40	1.03	1.63
x 26	0.628	0.79	x 35	0.907	1.44
x 22	0.534	0.68	x 31	0.803	1.29
	x 28	0.819	1.24
W12 x 87	1.47	2.34	x 24	0.704	1.07
x 79	1.34	2.14	x 21	0.675	0.96
x 72	1.23	1.97	x 18	0.583	0.84
x 65	1.11	1.79	x 15	0.551	0.74
x 58	1.10	1.69	x 13	0.483	0.65
x 53	1.02	1.55	x 10	0.375	0.51
x 50	1.06	1.54	
x 45	0.974	1.40	W6 x 25	0.839	1.33
x 40	0.860	1.25	x 20	0.678	1.09
x 35	0.810	1.11	x 16	0.684	0.96
x 30	0.699	0.96	x 15	0.521	0.83
x 26	0.612	0.84	x 12	0.526	0.75
x 22	0.623	0.77	x 9	0.398	0.57
x 19	0.540	0.67	
x 16	0.457	0.57	W5 x 19	0.776	1.24
x 14	0.405	0.50	x 16	0.664	1.07
	
W10 x 112	2.17	3.38	W4 x 13	0.670	1.05
x 100	1.97	3.07		
x 88	1.74	2.75
x 77	1.54	2.45
x 68	1.38	2.20
x 60	1.22	1.97
x 54	1.11	1.79
x 49	1.01	1.64
x 45	1.06	1.59
x 39	0.94	1.40
x 33	0.77	1.20

For SI: 1 pound per linear foot per inch = 0.059 kg/m/mm.

TABLE 722.5.1(5)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CONCRETE MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

COLUMN SIZE	CONCRETE
MASONRY
DENSITY
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
	COLUMN SIZE	CONCRETE
MASONRY
DENSITY
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CONCRETE MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)

1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours	1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
W14 × 82	80	0.74	1.61	2.36	3.04	W10 × 68	80	0.72	1.58	2.33	3.01
100	0.89	1.85	2.67	3.40	100	0.87	1.83	2.65	3.38
110	0.96	1.97	2.81	3.57	110	0.94	1.95	2.79	3.55
120	1.03	2.08	2.95	3.73	120	1.01	2.06	2.94	3.72
W14 × 68	80	0.83	1.70	2.45	3.13	W10 × 54	80	0.88	1.76	2.53	3.21
100	0.99	1.95	2.76	3.49	100	1.04	2.01	2.83	3.57
110	1.06	2.06	2.91	3.66	110	1.11	2.12	2.98	3.73
120	1.14	2.18	3.05	3.82	120	1.19	2.24	3.12	3.90
W14 × 53	80	0.91	1.81	2.58	3.27	W10 × 45	80	0.92	1.83	2.60	3.30
100	1.07	2.05	2.88	3.62	100	1.08	2.07	2.90	3.64
110	1.15	2.17	3.02	3.78	110	1.16	2.18	3.04	3.80
120	1.22	2.28	3.16	3.94	120	1.23	2.29	3.18	3.96
W14 × 43	80	1.01	1.93	2.71	3.41	W10 × 33	80	1.06	2.00	2.79	3.49
100	1.17	2.17	3.00	3.74	100	1.22	2.23	3.07	3.81
110	1.25	2.28	3.14	3.90	110	1.30	2.34	3.20	3.96
120	1.32	2.38	3.27	4.05	120	1.37	2.44	3.33	4.12
W12 × 72	80	0.81	1.66	2.41	3.09	W8 × 40	80	0.94	1.85	2.63	3.33
100	0.91	1.88	2.70	3.43	100	1.10	2.10	2.93	3.67
110	0.99	1.99	2.84	3.60	110	1.18	2.21	3.07	3.83
120	1.06	2.10	2.98	3.76	120	1.25	2.32	3.20	3.99
W12 × 58	80	0.88	1.76	2.52	3.21	W8 × 31	80	1.06	2.00	2.78	3.49
100	1.04	2.01	2.83	3.56	100	1.22	2.23	3.07	3.81
110	1.11	2.12	2.97	3.73	110	1.29	2.33	3.20	3.97
120	1.19	2.23	3.11	3.89	120	1.36	2.44	3.33	4.12
W12 × 50	80	0.91	1.81	2.58	3.27	W8 × 24	80	1.14	2.09	2.89	3.59
100	1.07	2.05	2.88	3.62	100	1.29	2.31	3.16	3.90
110	1.15	2.17	3.02	3.78	110	1.36	2.42	3.28	4.05
120	1.22	2.28	3.16	3.94	120	1.43	2.52	3.41	4.20
W12 × 40	80	1.01	1.94	2.72	3.41	W8 × 18	80	1.22	2.20	3.01	3.72
100	1.17	2.17	3.01	3.75	100	1.36	2.40	3.25	4.01
110	1.25	2.28	3.14	3.90	110	1.42	2.50	3.37	4.14
120	1.32	2.39	3.27	4.06	120	1.48	2.59	3.49	4.28
4 × 4 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	80	0.93	1.90	2.71	3.43	4 double extra
strong 0.674
wall thickness	80	0.80	1.75	2.56	3.28
100	1.08	2.13	2.99	3.76	100	0.95	1.99	2.85	3.62
110	1.16	2.24	3.13	3.91	110	1.02	2.10	2.99	3.78
120	1.22	2.34	3.26	4.06	120	1.09	2.20	3.12	3.93
4 × 4 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	80	1.05	2.03	2.84	3.57	4 extra strong
0.337 wall
thickness	80	1.12	2.11	2.93	3.65
100	1.20	2.25	3.11	3.88	100	1.26	2.32	3.19	3.95
110	1.27	2.35	3.24	4.02	110	1.33	2.42	3.31	4.09
120	1.34	2.45	3.37	4.17	120	1.40	2.52	3.43	4.23
4 × 4 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	80	1.21	2.20	3.01	3.73	4 standard
0.237 wall
thickness	80	1.26	2.25	3.07	3.79
100	1.35	2.40	3.26	4.02	100	1.40	2.45	3.31	4.07
110	1.41	2.50	3.38	4.16	110	1.46	2.55	3.43	4.21
120	1.48	2.59	3.50	4.30	120	1.53	2.64	3.54	4.34
6 × 6 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	80	0.82	1.75	2.54	3.25	5 double extra
strong 0.750
wall thickness	80	0.70	1.61	2.40	3.12
100	0.98	1.99	2.84	3.59	100	0.85	1.86	2.71	3.47
110	1.05	2.10	2.98	3.75	110	0.91	1.97	2.85	3.63
120	1.12	2.21	3.11	3.91	120	0.98	2.02	2.99	3.79
6 × 6 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	80	0.96	1.91	2.71	3.42	5 extra strong
0.375 wall
thickness	80	1.04	2.01	2.83	3.54
100	1.12	2.14	3.00	3.75	100	1.19	2.23	3.09	3.85
110	1.19	2.25	3.13	3.90	110	1.26	2.34	3.22	4.00
120	1.26	2.35	3.26	4.05	120	1.32	2.44	3.34	4.14
6 × 6 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	80	1.14	2.11	2.92	3.63	5 standard
0.258 wall
thickness	80	1.20	2.19	3.00	3.72
100	1.29	2.32	3.18	3.93	100	1.34	2.39	3.25	4.00
110	1.36	2.43	3.30	4.08	110	1.41	2.49	3.37	4.14
120	1.42	2.52	3.43	4.22	120	1.47	2.58	3.49	4.28
8 × 8 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	80	0.77	1.66	2.44	3.13	6 double extra
strong 0.864
wall thickness	80	0.59	1.46	2.23	2.92
100	0.92	1.91	2.75	3.49	100	0.73	1.71	2.54	3.29
110	1.00	2.02	2.89	3.66	110	0.80	1.82	2.69	3.47
120	1.07	2.14	3.03	3.82	120	0.86	1.93	2.83	3.63
8 × 8 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	80	0.91	1.84	2.63	3.33	6 extra strong
0.432 wall
thickness	80	0.94	1.90	2.70	3.42
100	1.07	2.08	2.92	3.67	100	1.10	2.13	2.98	3.74
110	1.14	2.19	3.06	3.83	110	1.17	2.23	3.11	3.89
120	1.21	2.29	3.19	3.98	120	1.24	2.34	3.24	4.04
8 × 8 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	80	1.10	2.06	2.86	3.57	6 standard
0.280 wall
thickness	80	1.14	2.12	2.93	3.64
100	1.25	2.28	3.13	3.87	100	1.29	2.33	3.19	3.94
110	1.32	2.38	3.25	4.02	110	1.36	2.43	3.31	4.08
120	1.39	2.48	3.38	4.17	120	1.42	2.53	3.43	4.22

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic feet = 16.02 kg/m3.

Note: Tabulated values assume 1-inch air gap between masonry and steel section.

TABLE 722.5.1(6)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

COLUMN SIZE	CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
	COLUMN SIZE	CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)

1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours	1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
W14 × 82	120	1.23	2.42	3.41	4.29	W10 × 68	120	1.27	2.46	3.26	4.35
130	1.40	2.70	3.78	4.74	130	1.44	2.75	3.83	4.80
W14 × 68	120	1.34	2.54	3.54	4.43	W10 × 54	120	1.40	2.61	3.62	4.51
130	1.51	2.82	3.91	4.87	130	1.58	2.89	3.98	4.95
W14 × 53	120	1.43	2.65	3.65	4.54	W10 × 45	120	1.44	2.66	3.67	4.57
130	1.61	2.93	4.02	4.98	130	1.62	2.95	4.04	5.01
W14 × 43	120	1.54	2.76	3.77	4.66	W10 × 33	120	1.59	2.82	3.84	4.73
130	1.72	3.04	4.13	5.09	130	1.77	3.10	4.20	5.13
W12 × 72	120	1.32	2.52	3.51	4.40	W8 × 40	120	1.47	2.70	3.71	4.61
130	1.50	2.80	3.88	4.84	130	1.65	2.98	4.08	5.04
W12 × 58	120	1.40	2.61	3.61	4.50	W8 × 31	120	1.59	2.82	3.84	4.73
130	1.57	2.89	3.98	4.94	130	1.77	3.10	4.20	5.17
W12 × 50	120	1.43	2.65	3.66	4.55	W8 × 24	120	1.66	2.90	3.92	4.82
130	1.61	2.93	4.02	4.99	130	1.84	3.18	4.28	5.25
W12 × 40	120	1.54	2.77	3.78	4.67	W8 × 18	120	1.75	3.00	4.01	4.91
130	1.72	3.05	4.14	5.10	130	1.93	3.27	4.37	5.34
STEEL TUBING		STEEL PIPE
NOMINAL TUBE
SIZE (inches)
	CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)
	NOMINAL PIPE
SIZE (inches)
	CLAY
MASONRY
DENSITY,
POUNDS PER
CUBIC FOOT	MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT
THICKNESS FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF CLAY MASONRY
PROTECTION ASSEMBLY, Te (inches)

1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours	1 hour	2 hours	3 hours	4 hours
4 × 4 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	120	1.44	2.72	3.76	4.68	4 double extra
strong 0.674
wall thickness	120	1.26	2.55	3.60	4.52
130	1.62	3.00	4.12	5.11	130	1.42	2.82	3.96	4.95
4 × 4 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	120	1.56	2.84	3.88	4.78	4 extra strong
0.337 wall
thickness	120	1.60	2.89	3.92	4.83
130	1.74	3.12	4.23	5.21	130	1.77	3.16	4.28	5.25
4 × 4 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	120	1.72	2.99	4.02	4.92	4 standard
0.237 wall
thickness	120	1.74	3.02	4.05	4.95
130	1.89	3.26	4.37	5.34	130	1.92	3.29	4.40	5.37
6 × 6 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	120	1.33	2.58	3.62	4.52	5 double extra
strong 0.750
wall thickness	120	1.17	2.44	3.48	4.40
130	1.50	2.86	3.98	4.96	130	1.33	2.72	3.84	4.83
6 × 6 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	120	1.48	2.74	3.76	4.67	5 extra strong
0.375
wall thickness	120	1.55	2.82	3.85	4.76
130	1.65	3.01	4.13	5.10	130	1.72	3.09	4.21	5.18
6 × 6 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	120	1.66	2.91	3.94	4.84	5 standard
0.258 wall
thickness	120	1.71	2.97	4.00	4.90
130	1.83	3.19	4.30	5.27	130	1.88	3.24	4.35	5.32
8 × 8 × 1/2 wall
thickness
	120	1.27	2.50	3.52	4.42	6 double extra
strong 0.864
wall thickness	120	1.04	2.28	3.32	4.23
130	1.44	2.78	3.89	4.86	130	1.19	2.60	3.68	4.67
8 × 8 × 3/8 wall
thickness
	120	1.43	2.67	3.69	4.59	6 extra strong
0.432 wall
thickness	120	1.45	2.71	3.75	4.65
130	1.60	2.95	4.05	5.02	130	1.62	2.99	4.10	5.08
8 × 8 × 1/4 wall
thickness
	120	1.62	2.87	3.89	4.78	6 standard
0.280 wall
thickness	120	1.65	2.91	3.94	4.84
130	1.79	3.14	4.24	5.21	130	1.82	3.19	4.30	5.27

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3.

TABLE 722.5.1(7)

MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS ENCASED IN NORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETEa [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)(c)]

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
W14 × 233	1	1	1	11/2	2
× 176	21/2
× 132	2
× 90	11/2
× 61	3
× 48	11/2	21/2
× 43
W12 × 152	1	1	1	2	21/2
× 96
× 65	11/2	11/2	3
× 50	21/2
× 40
W10 × 88	1	11/2	11/2	2	3
× 49	1	21/2
× 45
× 39	31/2
× 33	2
W8 × 67	1	1	11/2	21/2	3
× 58
× 48	11/2	31/2
× 31	2	3
× 21
× 18	4
W6 × 25	1	11/2	2	3	31/2
× 20	2	21/2	4
× 16	31/2
× 15	11/2
× 9

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of normal-weight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

TABLE 722.5.1(8)

MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS ENCASED IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETEa [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)(c)]

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (HOURS)
1	11/2	2	3	4
W14 × 233	1	1	1	1	11/2
× 193	11/2
× 74	2
× 61	21/2
× 43	11/2	2
W12 × 65	1	1	1	11/2	2
× 53	2	21/2
× 40	11/2
W10 × 112	1	1	1	11/2	2
× 88
× 60	2	21/2
× 33	11/2
W8 × 35	1	1	11/2	2	21/2
× 28	3
× 24	21/2
× 18	11/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of structural lightweight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

TABLE 722.5.1(9)

MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS IN NORMAL-WEIGHT PRECAST COVERSa [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)(a)]

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
W14 × 233	11/2	11/2	11/2	21/2	3
× 211	31/2
× 176	2
× 145	3
× 109	2	21/2
× 99	4
× 61	31/2
× 43	41/2
W12 × 190	11/2	11/2	11/2	21/2	31/2
× 152	2
× 120	3	4
× 96
× 87	2	21/2	31/2
× 58	41/2
× 40
W10 × 112	11/2	11/2	2	3	31/2
× 88	4
× 77	2	21/2
× 54	31/2
× 33	41/2
W8 × 67	11/2	11/2	2	3	4
× 58	2	21/2	31/2
× 48
× 28	41/2
× 21	21/2	3
× 18	4
W6 × 25	11/2	2	21/2	31/2	41/2
× 20	21/2	3
× 16	4
× 12	2
× 9	5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of normal-weight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

TABLE 722.5.1(10)

MINIMUM COVER (inch) FOR STEEL COLUMNS IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT PRECAST COVERSa [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)(a)]

STRUCTURAL SHAPE	FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
1	11/2	2	3	4
W14 × 233	11/2	11/2	11/2	2	21/2
× 176	3
× 145	21/2
× 132
× 109
× 99	2
× 68	31/2
× 43	3
W12 × 190	11/2	11/2	11/2	2	21/2
× 152
× 136	3
× 106	21/2
× 96	31/2
× 87
× 65	2
× 40	3
W10 × 112	11/2	11/2	11/2	2	3
× 100	21/2
× 88
× 77	2	31/2
× 60
× 39	3
× 33	2
W8 × 67	11/2	11/2	11/2	21/2	3
× 48	2	3	31/2
× 35
× 28	2
× 18	21/2	4
W6 × 25	11/2	2	2	3	31/2
× 15	21/2	4
× 9	31/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of structural lightweight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

722.5.1.1 General.

These procedures establish a basis for determining the fire resistance of column assemblies as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant material and, the weight, W, and heated perimeter, D, of structural steel columns. As used in these sections, W is the average weight of a structural steel column in pounds per linear foot. The heated perimeter, D, is the inside perimeter of the fire-resistant material in inches as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(1).

722.5.1.1.1 Nonload-bearing protection.

The application of these procedures shall be limited to column assemblies in which the fire-resistant material is not designed to carry any of the load acting on the column.

722.5.1.1.2 Embedments.

In the absence of substantiating fire-endurance test results, ducts, conduit, piping, and similar mechanical, electrical, and plumbing installations shall not be embedded in any required fire-resistant materials.

722.5.1.1.3 Weight-to-perimeter ratio.

Table 722.5.1(1) contains weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) for both contour and box fire-resistant profiles, for the wide flange shapes most often used as columns. For different fire-resistant protection profiles or column cross sections, the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) shall be determined in accordance with the definitions given in this section.

722.5.1.2 Gypsum wallboard protection.

The fire resistance of structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) less than or equal to 3.65 and that are protected with Type X gypsum wallboard shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

(Equation 7-12)

where:

R = Fire resistance (minutes).

h = Total thickness of gypsum wallboard (inches).

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column (inches).

W' = Total weight of the structural steel column and gypsum wallboard protection (pounds per linear foot).

W' = W + 50hD/144.

722.5.1.2.1 Attachment.

The gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be supported as illustrated in either Figure 722.5.1(2) for fire-resistance ratings of 4 hours or less, or Figure 722.5.1(3) for fire-resistance ratings of 3 hours or less.

722.5.1.2.2 Gypsum wallboard equivalent to concrete.

The determination of the fire resistance of structural steel columns from Figure 722.5.1(4) is permitted for various thicknesses of gypsum wallboard as a function of the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column. For structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) greater than 3.65, the thickness of gypsum wallboard required for specified fire-resistance ratings shall be the same as the thickness determined for a W14 × 233 wide flange shape.

722.5.1.3 Sprayed fire-resistant materials.

The fire resistance of wide-flange structural steel columns protected with sprayed fire-resistant materials, as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(5), shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

(Equation 7-13)

where:

R = Fire resistance (minutes).

h = Thickness of sprayed fire-resistant material (inches).

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column (inches).

C1 and C2 = Material-dependent constants.

W = Weight of structural steel columns (pounds per linear foot).

The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with intumescent fire-resistive materials shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

722.5.1.3.1 Material-dependent constants.

The material-dependent constants, C1 and C2, shall be determined for specific fire-resistant materials on the basis of standard fire endurance tests in accordance with Section 703.2. Unless evidence is submitted to the building official substantiating a broader application, this expression shall be limited to determining the fire resistance of structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) between the largest and smallest columns for which standard fire-resistance test results are available.

722.5.1.3.2 Identification.

Sprayed fire-resistant materials shall be identified by density and thickness required for a given fire-resistance rating.

722.5.1.4 Concrete-protected columns.

The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with concrete, as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(6)(a) and (b), shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

(Equation 7-14)

where:

Ro = 10 (W/D) 0.7 + 17 (h1.6/kc0.2) × [1 + 26 {H/pccch (L + h)}0.8]

As used in these expressions:

R = Fire endurance at equilibrium moisture conditions (minutes).

Ro = Fire endurance at zero moisture content (minutes).

m = Equilibrium moisture content of the concrete by volume (percent).

W = Average weight of the structural steel column (pounds per linear foot).

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column (inches).

h = Thickness of the concrete cover (inches).

kc = Ambient temperature thermal conductivity of the concrete (Btu/hr ft °F).

H = Ambient temperature thermal capacity of the steel column = 0.11W (Btu/ft °F).

pc = Concrete density (pounds per cubic foot).

cc = Ambient temperature specific heat of concrete (Btu/lb °F).

L = Interior dimension of one side of a square concrete box protection (inches).

722.5.1.4.1 Reentrant space filled.

For wide-flange structural steel columns completely encased in concrete with all reentrant spaces filled [Figure 722.5.1(6)(c)], the thermal capacity of the concrete within the reentrant spaces shall be permitted to be added to the thermal capacity of the steel column, as follows:

(Equation 7-15)

where:

bf = Flange width of the structural steel column (inches).

d = Depth of the structural steel column (inches).

As = Cross-sectional area of the steel column (square inches).

722.5.1.4.2 Concrete properties unknown.

If specific data on the properties of concrete are not available, the values given in Table 722.5.1(2) are permitted.

722.5.1.4.3 Minimum concrete cover.

For structural steel column encased in concrete with all reentrant spaces filled, Figure 722.5.1(6)(c) and Tables 722.5.1(7) and 722.5.1(8) indicate the thickness of concrete cover required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical wide-flange sections. The thicknesses of concrete indicated in these tables apply to structural steel columns larger than those listed.

722.5.1.4.4 Minimum precast concrete cover.

For structural steel columns protected with precast concrete column covers as shown in Figure 722.5.1(6)(a), Tables 722.5.1(9) and 722.5.1(10) indicate the thickness of the column covers required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical wide-flange shapes. The thicknesses of concrete given in these tables apply to structural steel columns larger than those listed.

722.5.1.4.5 Masonry protection.

The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with concrete masonry units or clay masonry units as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(7) shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

(Equation 7-16)

where:

R = Fire-resistance rating of column assembly (hours).

W = Average weight of structural steel column (pounds per foot).

D = Heated perimeter of structural steel column (inches) [see Figure 722.5.1(7)].

Te = Equivalent thickness of concrete or clay masonry unit (inches) (see Table 722.3.2 Note a or Section 722.4.1).

K = Thermal conductivity of concrete or clay masonry unit (Btu/hr · ft · °F) [see Table 722.5.1(3)].

As = Cross-sectional area of structural steel column (square inches).

dm = Density of the concrete or clay masonry unit (pounds per cubic foot).

p = Inner perimeter of concrete or clay masonry protection (inches) [see Figure 722.5.1(7)].

722.5.1.4.6 Equivalent concrete masonry thickness.

For structural steel columns protected with concrete masonry, Table 722.5.1(5) gives the equivalent thickness of concrete masonry required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical column shapes. For structural steel columns protected with clay masonry, Table 722.5.1(6) gives the equivalent thickness of concrete masonry required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical column shapes.

722.5.2 Structural steel beams and girders.

The fire-resistance ratings of structural steel beams and girders shall be based upon the size of the element and the type of protection provided in accordance with this section.

FIGURE 722.5.2

DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER OF STRUCTURAL STEEL BEAMS AND GIRDERS

722.5.2.1 Determination of fire resistance.

These procedures establish a basis for determining resistance of structural steel beams and girders that differ in size from that specified in approved fire-resistance-rated assemblies as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant material and the weight (W) and heated perimeter (D) of the beam or girder. As used in these sections, W is the average weight of a structural steel element in pounds per linear foot (plf). The heated perimeter, D, is the inside perimeter of the fire-resistant material in inches as illustrated in Figure 722.5.2.

722.5.2.1.1 Weight-to-heated perimeter.

The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D), for both contour and box fire-resistant protection profiles, for the wide flange shapes most often used as beams or girders are given in Table 722.5.1(4). For different shapes, the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) shall be determined in accordance with the definitions given in this section.

722.5.2.1.2 Beam and girder substitutions.

Except as provided for in Section 722.5.2.2, structural steel beams in approved fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall be considered the minimum permissible size. Other beam or girder shapes shall be permitted to be substituted provided that the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the substitute beam is equal to or greater than that of the beam specified in the approved assembly.

722.5.2.2 Sprayed fire-resistant materials.

The provisions in this section apply to structural steel beams and girders protected with sprayed fire-resistant materials. Larger or smaller beam and girder shapes shall be permitted to be substituted for beams specified in approved unrestrained or restrained fire-resistance-rated assemblies, provided that the thickness of the fire-resistant material is adjusted in accordance with the following expression:

(Equation 7-17)

where:

h = Thickness of sprayed fire-resistant material in inches.

W = Weight of the structural steel beam or girder in pounds per linear foot.

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel beam in inches.

Subscript 1 refers to the beam and fire-resistant material thickness in the approved assembly.

Subscript 2 refers to the substitute beam or girder and the required thickness of fire-resistant material.

The fire resistance of structural steel beams and girders protected with intumescent fire-resistive materials shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

722.5.2.2.1 Minimum thickness.

The use of Equation 7-17 is subject to the following conditions:

1.	The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio for the substitute beam or girder (W2/D2) shall be not less than 0.37.

2.	The thickness of fire protection materials calculated for the substitute beam or girder (T1) shall be not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

3.	The unrestrained or restrained beam rating shall be not less than 1 hour.

4.	Where used to adjust the material thickness for a restrained beam, the use of this procedure is limited to structural steel sections classified as compact in accordance with AISC 360.

722.5.2.3 Structural steel trusses.

The fire resistance of structural steel trusses protected with fire-resistant materials sprayed to each of the individual truss elements shall be permitted to be determined in accordance with this section. The thickness of the fire-resistant material shall be determined in accordance with Section 722.5.1.3. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of truss elements that can be simultaneously exposed to fire on all sides shall be determined on the same basis as columns, as specified in Section 722.5.1.1. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of truss elements that directly support floor or roof assembly shall be determined on the same basis as beams and girders, as specified in Section 722.5.2.1.

The fire resistance of structural steel trusses protected with intumescent fire-resistive materials shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

722.6 Wood assemblies.

The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of wood assemblies are established by calculations.

722.6.1 General.

This section contains procedures for calculating the fire-resistance ratings of walls, floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies based in part on the standard method of testing referenced in Section 703.2.

722.6.1.1 Maximum fire-resistance rating.

Fire-resistance ratings calculated for assemblies using the methods in Section 722.6 shall be limited to a maximum of 1 hour.

722.6.1.2 Dissimilar membranes.

Where dissimilar membranes are used on a wall assembly that requires consideration of fire exposure from both sides, the calculation shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.

722.6.2 Walls, floors and roofs.

These procedures apply to both load-bearing and nonload-bearing assemblies.

TABLE 722.6.2(1)

TIME ASSIGNED TO WALLBOARD MEMBRANESa, b, c, d

DESCRIPTION OF FINISH	TIMEe(minutes)
3/8-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue
	5
15/32-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue
	10
19/32-inch wood structural panel bonded with
exterior glue
	15
3/8-inch gypsum wallboard	10
1/2-inch gypsum wallboard	15
5/8-inch gypsum wallboard	30
1/2-inch Type X gypsum wallboard	25
5/8-inch Type X gypsum wallboard	40
Double 3/8-inch gypsum wallboard	25
1/2-inch + 3/8-inch gypsum wallboard	35
Double 1/2-inch gypsum wallboard	40

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	These values apply only where membranes are installed on framing members that are spaced 16 inches o.c. or less.

b.	Gypsum wallboard installed over framing or furring shall be installed so that all edges are supported, except 5/8-inch Type X gypsum wallboard shall be permitted to be installed horizontally with the horizontal joints staggered 24 inches each side and unsupported but finished.

c.	On wood frame floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, gypsum board shall be installed with the long dimension perpendicular to framing members and shall have all joints finished.

d.	The membrane on the unexposed side shall not be included in determining the fire resistance of the assembly. Where dissimilar membranes are used on a wall assembly, the calculation shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.

e.	The time assigned is not a finished rating.

TABLE 722.6.2(2)

TIME ASSIGNED FOR CONTRIBUTION OF WOOD FRAMEa, b, c

DESCRIPTION	TIME ASSIGNED TO FRAME (minutes)
Wood studs 16 inches o.c.	20
Wood floor and roof joists 16 inches o.c.	10

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	This table does not apply to studs or joists spaced more than 16 inches o.c.

b.	All studs shall be nominal 2 × 4 and all joists shall have a nominal thickness of not less than 2 inches.

c.	Allowable spans for joists shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 23.

TABLE 722.6.2(3)

MEMBRANEa ON EXTERIOR FACE OF WOOD STUD WALLS

SHEATHING	PAPER	EXTERIOR FINISH
5/8-inch T & G lumber
5/16-inch exterior glue wood structural panel
1/2-inch gypsum wallboard
5/8-inch gypsum wallboard
1/2-inch fiberboard	Sheathing paper	Lumber siding
Wood shingles and shakes
1/4-inch fiber-cement lap, panel or shingle siding
1/4-inch wood structural panels-exterior type
1/4-inch hardboard
Metal siding
Stucco on metal lath
Masonry veneer
Vinyl siding
None	—	3/8-inch exterior-grade wood structural panels

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Any combination of sheathing, paper and exterior finish is permitted.

TABLE 722.6.2(4)

FLOORING OR ROOFING OVER WOOD FRAMINGa

ASSEMBLY	STRUCTURAL
MEMBERS
	SUBFLOOR OR ROOF DECK	FINISHED FLOORING OR ROOFING
Floor	Wood	15/32-inch wood structural panels or
11/16-inch T & G softwood
	Hardwood or softwood flooring on building paper resilient flooring,
parquet floor felted-synthetic fiber floor coverings, carpeting, or ceramic
tile on 1/4-inch-thick fiber-cement underlayment or 3/8-inch-
thick panel-type underlay
Ceramic tile on 11/4-inch mortar bed
Roof	Wood	15/32-inch wood structural panels or
11/16-inch T & G softwood
	Finished roofing material with or without insulation

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	This table applies only to wood joist construction. It is not applicable to wood truss construction.

TABLE 722.6.2(5)

TIME ASSIGNED FOR ADDITIONAL PROTECTION

DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL PROTECTION	FIRE RESISTANCE (minutes)
Add to the fire-resistance rating of wood stud walls if the spaces between the studs are completely filled with
glass fiber mineral wool batts weighing not less than 2 pounds per cubic foot (0.6 pound per square foot of wall
surface) or rockwool or slag material wool batts weighing not less than 3.3 pounds per cubic foot (1 pound per
square foot of wall surface), or cellulose insulation having a nominal density not less than 2.6 pounds per cubic foot.
	15

For SI: 1 pound/cubic foot = 16.0185 kg/m3.

722.6.2.1 Fire-resistance rating of wood frame assemblies.

The fire-resistance rating of a wood frame assembly is equal to the sum of the time assigned to the membrane on the fire-exposed side, the time assigned to the framing members and the time assigned for additional contribution by other protective measures such as insulation. The membrane on the unexposed side shall not be included in determining the fire resistance of the assembly.

722.6.2.2 Time assigned to membranes.

Table 722.6.2(1) indicates the time assigned to membranes on the fire-exposed side.

722.6.2.3 Exterior walls.

For an exterior wall with a fire separation distance greater than 10 feet (3048 mm), the wall is assigned a rating dependent on the interior membrane and the framing as described in Tables 722.6.2(1) and 722.6.2(2). The membrane on the outside of the nonfire-exposed side of exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) shall consist of sheathing, sheathing paper and siding as described in Table 722.6.2(3).

722.6.2.4 Floors and roofs.

In the case of a floor or roof, the standard test provides only for testing for fire exposure from below. Except as noted in Section 703.2.3, floor or roof assemblies of wood framing shall have an upper membrane consisting of a subfloor and finished floor conforming to Table 722.6.2(4) or any other membrane that has a contribution to fire resistance of not less than 15 minutes in Table 722.6.2(1).

722.6.2.5 Additional protection.

Table 722.6.2(5) indicates the time increments to be added to the fire resistance where glass fiber, rockwool, slag mineral wool or cellulose insulation is incorporated in the assembly.

722.6.2.6 Fastening.

Fastening of wood frame assemblies and the fastening of membranes to the wood framing members shall be done in accordance with Chapter 23.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-8]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 8
INTERIOR FINISHES AND DECORATIVE MATERIALS
SECTION 801
GENERAL
801.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the use of materials used as interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.

801.2 Interior wall and ceiling finish.

The provisions of Section 803 shall limit the allowable fire performance and smoke development of interior wall and ceiling finish materials based on occupancy classification.

801.3 Interior floor finish.

The provisions of Section 804 shall limit the allowable fire performance of interior floor finish materials based on occupancy classification.

[F] 801.4 Decorative materials and trim.

Decorative materials and trim shall be restricted by combustibility, fire performance or flame propagation performance criteria in accordance with Section 806 for the interior of the building and Section 809 for the exterior of the building.

801.5 Applicability.

For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, interior finishes, trim and decorative materials below the elevation required by Section 1612 shall be flood-damage-resistant materials.

801.6 Application.

Combustible materials shall be permitted to be used as finish for walls, ceilings, floors and other interior surfaces of buildings.

801.7 Windows.

Show windows in the exterior walls of the first story above grade plane shall be permitted to be of wood or of unprotected metal framing.

801.8 Foam plastics.

Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 803.4. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior trim except as provided in Section 806.5 or 2604.2. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.

SECTION 802
DEFINITIONS
802.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING.

FLAME SPREAD.

FLAME SPREAD INDEX.

INTERIOR FINISH.

INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH.

INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE.

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH.

SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM.

SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX.

TRIM.

SECTION 803
WALL AND CEILING FINISHES
803.1 General.

Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified for fire performance and smoke development in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, except as shown in Sections 803.2 through 803.13. Materials tested in accordance with Section 803.1.2 shall not be required to be tested in accordance with Section 803.1.1.

803.1.1 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials.

Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Such interior finish materials shall be grouped in the following classes in accordance with their flame spread and smoke-developed indexes.

Class A:	=	Flame spread index 0-25; smoke-developed index 0-450.
Class B:	=	Flame spread index 26-75; smoke-developed index 0-450.
Class C:	=	Flame spread index 76-200; smoke-developed index 0-450.

Exception: Materials tested in accordance with Section 803.1.2.

803.1.2 Room corner test for interior wall or ceiling finish materials.

Interior wall or ceiling finish materials shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with NFPA 286. Interior wall or ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286 shall comply with Section 803.1.2.1.

803.1.2.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 286.

The interior finish shall comply with the following:

1.	During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2.	The flame shall not spread to the outer extremity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.

3.	Flashover, as defined in NFPA 286, shall not occur.

4.	The peak heat release rate throughout the test shall not exceed 800 kW.

5.	The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m2.

803.1.3 Room corner test for textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings.

Textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings shall meet the criteria of Section 803.1.3.1 when tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with the Method B protocol of NFPA 265 using the product-mounting system, including adhesive.

803.1.3.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 265.

The interior finish shall comply with the following:

1.	During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2.	The flame shall not spread to the outer extremities of the samples on the 8-foot by 12-foot (203 by 305 mm) walls.

3.	Flashover, as defined in NFPA 265, shall not occur.

4.	The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m2.

803.1.4 Acceptance criteria for textile and expanded vinyl wall or ceiling coverings tested to ASTM E84 or UL 723.

Textile wall and ceiling coverings and expanded vinyl wall and ceiling coverings shall have a Class A flame spread index in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2404.

803.2 Thickness exemption.

Materials having a thickness less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) applied directly to the surface of walls or ceilings shall not be required to be tested.

803.3 Heavy timber exemption.

Exposed portions of building elements complying with the requirements for buildings of heavy timber construction in Section 602.4 or Section 2304.11 shall not be subject to interior finish requirements, except in interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps and exit passageways.

803.4 Foam plastics.

Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 2603.9. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.

803.5 Textile wall coverings.

Where used as interior wall finish materials, textile wall coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.

803.6 Textile ceiling coverings.

Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, textile ceiling coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or 803.1.4.

803.7 Expanded vinyl wall coverings.

Where used as interior wall finish materials, expanded vinyl wall coverings shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2, 803.1.3 or 803.1.4.

803.8 Expanded vinyl ceiling coverings.

Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, expanded vinyl ceiling coverings shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or 803.1.4.

803.9 High-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polypropylene (PP).

Where high-density polyethylene or polypropylene is used as an interior finish it shall comply with Section 803.1.2.

803.10 Site-fabricated stretch systems.

Where used as interior wall or interior ceiling finish materials, site-fabricated stretch systems containing all three components described in the definition in Chapter 2 shall be tested in the manner intended for use, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.2 or with the requirements of Class A in accordance with Section 803.1.1. If the materials are tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2573.

803.11 Interior finish requirements based on group.

Interior wall and ceiling finish shall have a flame spread index not greater than that specified in Table 803.11 for the group and location designated. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meeting the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.2.1, shall be permitted to be used where a Class A classification in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 is required.

TABLE 803.11

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH REQUIREMENTS BY OCCUPANCYk

GROUP	SPRINKLEREDl	NONSPRINKLERED
Interior exit stairways and ramps
and exit passagewaysa, b
	Corridors and
enclosure for exit
access stairways
and ramps
	Rooms and
enclosed
spacesc	Interior exit stairways and
ramps and exit
passagewaysa, b	Corridors and
enclosure for exit
access stairways
and ramps
	Rooms and
enclosed
spacesc
A-1 & A-2	B	B	C	A	Ad	Be
A-3f, A-4, A-5	B	B	C	A	Ad	C
B, E, M, R-1	B	C	C	A	B	C
R-4	B	C	C	A	B	B
F	C	C	C	B	C	C
H	B	B	Cg	A	A	B
I-1	B	C	C	A	B	B
I-2	B	B	Bh, i	A	A	B
I-3	A	Aj	C	A	A	B
I-4	B	B	Bh, i	A	A	B
R-2	C	C	C	B	B	C
R-3	C	C	C	C	C	C
S	C	C	C	B	B	C
U	No restrictions	No restrictions

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted for wainscotting or paneling of not more than 1,000 square feet of applied surface area in the grade lobby where applied directly to a noncombustible base or over furring strips applied to a noncombustible base and fireblocked as required by Section 803.13.1.

b.	In other than Group I-3 occupancies in buildings less than three stories above grade plane, Class B interior finish for nonsprinklered buildings and Class C interior finish for sprinklered buildings shall be permitted in interior exit stairways and ramps.

c.	Requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces shall be based upon spaces enclosed by partitions. Where a fire-resistance rating is required for structural elements, the enclosing partitions shall extend from the floor to the ceiling. Partitions that do not comply with this shall be considered enclosing spaces and the rooms or spaces on both sides shall be considered one. In determining the applicable requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces, the specific occupancy thereof shall be the governing factor regardless of the group classification of the building or structure.

d.	Lobby areas in Group A-1, A-2 and A-3 occupancies shall not be less than Class B materials.

e.	Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in places of assembly with an occupant load of 300 persons or less.

f.	For places of religious worship, wood used for ornamental purposes, trusses, paneling or chancel furnishing shall be permitted.

g.	Class B material is required where the building exceeds two stories.

h.	Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in administrative spaces.

i.	Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in rooms with a capacity of four persons or less.

j.	Class B materials shall be permitted as wainscotting extending not more than 48 inches above the finished floor in corridors and exit access stairways and ramps.

k.	Finish materials as provided for in other sections of this code.

l.	Applies when protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

803.12 Stability.

Interior finish materials regulated by this chapter shall be applied or otherwise fastened in such a manner that such materials will not readily become detached where subjected to room temperatures of 200°F (93°C) for not less than 30 minutes.

803.13 Application of interior finish materials to fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible building elements.

Where interior finish materials are applied on walls, ceilings or structural elements required to have a fire-resistance rating or to be of noncombustible construction, these finish materials shall comply with the provisions of this section.

803.13.1 Direct attachment and furred construction.

Where walls and ceilings are required by any provision in this code to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible construction, the interior finish material shall be applied directly against such construction or to furring strips not exceeding 13/4 inches (44 mm), applied directly against such surfaces.

803.13.1.1 Furred construction.

If the interior finish material is applied to furring strips, the intervening spaces between such furring strips shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Be filled with material that is inorganic or noncombustible;

2.	Be filled with material that meets the requirements of a Class A material in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2; or

3.	Be fireblocked at a maximum of 8 feet (2438 mm) in every direction in accordance with Section 718.

803.13.2 Set-out construction.

Where walls and ceilings are required to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible construction and walls are set out or ceilings are dropped distances greater than specified in Section 803.13.1, Class A finish materials, in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, shall be used.

Exceptions:

1.	Where interior finish materials are protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.	Where interior finish materials are attached to noncombustible backing or furring strips installed as specified in Section 803.13.1.1.

803.13.2.1 Hangers and assembly members.

The hangers and assembly members of such dropped ceilings that are below the horizontal fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assemblies shall be of noncombustible materials. The construction of each set-out wall and horizontal fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assembly shall be of fire-resistance-rated construction as required elsewhere in this code.

Exception: In Type III and V construction, fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted for use as hangers and assembly members of dropped ceilings.

803.13.3 Heavy timber construction.

Wall and ceiling finishes of all classes as permitted in this chapter that are installed directly against the wood decking or planking of heavy timber construction in Section 602.4.2 or 2304.11 or to wood furring strips applied directly to the wood decking or planking shall be fireblocked as specified in Section 803.13.1.1.

803.13.4 Materials.

An interior wall or ceiling finish material that is not more than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick shall be applied directly onto the wall, ceiling or structural element without the use of furring strips and shall not be suspended away from the building element to which that finish material it is applied.

Exceptions:

1.	Noncombustible interior finish materials.

2.	Materials that meet the requirements of Class A materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made with the material furred out from the noncombustible backing shall be permitted to be used with furring strips.

3.	Materials that meet the requirements of Class A materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made with the material suspended away from the noncombustible backing shall be permitted to be used suspended away from the building element.

SECTION 804
INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH
804.1 General.

Interior floor finish and floor covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.2 through 804.4.2.

Exception: Floor finishes and coverings of a traditional type, such as wood, vinyl, linoleum or terrazzo, and resilient floor covering materials that are not comprised of fibers.

804.2 Classification.

Interior floor finish and floor covering materials required by Section 804.4.2 to be of Class I or II materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253. The classification referred to herein corresponds to the classifications determined by ASTM E648 or NFPA 253 as follows: Class I, 0.45 watts/cm2 or greater; Class II, 0.22 watts/cm2 or greater.

804.3 Testing and identification.

Interior floor finish and floor covering materials shall be tested by an agency in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253 and identified by a hang tag or other suitable method so as to identify the manufacturer or supplier and style, and shall indicate the interior floor finish or floor covering classification in accordance with Section 804.2. Carpet-type floor coverings shall be tested as proposed for use, including underlayment. Test reports confirming the information provided in the manufacturer’s product identification shall be furnished to the building official upon request.

804.4 Interior floor finish requirements.

Interior floor covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.4.1 and 804.4.2 and interior floor finish materials shall comply with Section 804.4.2.

804.4.1 Test requirement.

In all occupancies, interior floor covering materials shall comply with the requirements of the DOC FF-1 “pill test” (CPSC 16 CFR Part 1630) or with ASTM D2859.

804.4.2 Minimum critical radiant flux.

In all occupancies, interior floor finish and floor covering materials in enclosures for stairways and ramps, exit passageways, corridors and rooms or spaces not separated from corridors by partitions extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling shall withstand a minimum critical radiant flux. The minimum critical radiant flux shall be not less than Class I in Groups I-1, I-2 and I-3 and not less than Class II in Groups A, B, E, H, I-4, M, R-1, R-2 and S.

Exception: Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, Class II materials are permitted in any area where Class I materials are required, and materials complying with DOC FF-1 “pill test” (CPSC 16 CFR Part 1630) or with ASTM D2859 are permitted in any area where Class II materials are required.

SECTION 805
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS IN
TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION
805.1 Application.

Combustible materials installed on or embedded in floors of buildings of Type I or II construction shall comply with Sections 805.1.1 through 805.1.3.

Exception: Stages and platforms constructed in accordance with Sections 410.3 and 410.4, respectively.

805.1.1 Subfloor construction.

Floor sleepers, bucks and nailing blocks shall not be constructed of combustible materials, unless the space between the fire-resistance-rated floor assembly and the flooring is either solidly filled with noncombustible materials or fireblocked in accordance with Section 718, and provided that such open spaces shall not extend under or through permanent partitions or walls.

805.1.2 Wood finish flooring.

Wood finish flooring is permitted to be attached directly to the embedded or fire-blocked wood sleepers and shall be permitted where cemented directly to the top surface of fire-resistance-rated floor assemblies or directly to a wood subfloor attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

805.1.3 Insulating boards.

Combustible insulating boards not more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick and covered with finish flooring are permitted where attached directly to a noncombustible floor assembly or to wood subflooring attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

SECTION 806
DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND TRIM
[F] 806.1 General.

Combustible decorative materials, other than decorative vegetation, shall comply with Sections 806.2 through 806.8.

[F] 806.2 Noncombustible materials.

The permissible amount of noncombustible materials shall not be limited.

[F] 806.3 Combustible decorative materials.

In other than Group I-3, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 806.4 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which such materials are attached.

Fixed or movable walls and partitions, paneling, wall pads and crash pads applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation or other purposes shall be considered interior finish shall comply with Section 803 and shall not be considered decorative materials or furnishings.

Exceptions:

1.	In auditoriums in Group A, the permissible amount of curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall not exceed 75 percent of the aggregate wall area where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and where the material is installed in accordance with Section 803.13 of this code.

2.	In Group R-2 dormitories, within sleeping units and dwelling units, the permissible amount of curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar decorative materials suspended from walls or ceiling shall not exceed 50 percent of the aggregate wall areas where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.

3.	In Group B and M occupancies, the amount of combustible fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling and not supported by the floor shall comply with Section 806.4 and shall not be limited.

[F] 806.4 Acceptance criteria and reports.

Where required to exhibit improved fire performance, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall be tested by an approved agency and meet the flame propagation performance criteria of Test 1 or 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701, or exhibit a maximum heat release rate of 100 kW when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20 kW ignition source. Reports of test results shall be prepared in accordance with the test method used and furnished to the building official upon request.

[F] 806.5 Foam plastic.

Foam plastic used as trim in any occupancy shall comply with Section 2604.2.

[F] 806.6 Pyroxylin plastic.

Imitation leather or other material consisting of or coated with a pyroxylin or similarly hazardous base shall not be used in Group A occupancies.

[F] 806.7 Interior trim.

Material, other than foam plastic used as interior trim, shall have a minimum Class C flame spread and smoke-developed index when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, as described in Section 803.1.1. Combustible trim, excluding handrails and guardrails, shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which it is attached.

[F] 806.8 Interior floor-wall base.

Interior floor-wall base that is 6 inches (152 mm) or less in height shall be tested in accordance with Section 804.2 and shall be not less than Class II. Where a Class I floor finish is required, the floor-wall base shall be Class I.

Exception: Interior trim materials that comply with Section 806.7.

[F] 806.9 Combustible lockers.

Where lockers constructed of combustible materials are used, the lockers shall be considered to be interior finish and shall comply with Section 803.

Exception: Lockers constructed entirely of wood and noncombustible materials shall be permitted to be used wherever interior finish materials are required to meet a Class C classification in accordance with Section 803.1.1.

SECTION 807
INSULATION
807.1 Insulation.

Thermal and acoustical insulation shall comply with Section 720.

SECTION 808
ACOUSTICAL CEILING SYSTEMS
808.1 Acoustical ceiling systems.

The quality, design, fabrication and erection of metal suspension systems for acoustical tile and lay-in panel ceilings in buildings or structures shall conform to generally accepted engineering practice, the provisions of this chapter and other applicable requirements of this code.

808.1.1 Materials and installation.

Acoustical materials complying with the interior finish requirements of Section 803 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and applicable provisions for applying interior finish.

808.1.1.1 Suspended acoustical ceilings.

Suspended acoustical ceiling systems shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of ASTM C635 and ASTM C636.

808.1.1.2 Fire-resistance-rated construction.

Acoustical ceiling systems that are part of fire-resistance-rated construction shall be installed in the same manner used in the assembly tested and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.

SECTION 809
ARTIFICIAL DECORATIVE VEGETATION ON
BUILDINGS AND IN OUTDOOR OCCUPANCIES
809.1 General.

Fixed artificial decorative vegetation placed in outdoor occupancies or on an occupied roof of a building shall comply with this section.

809.2 Testing.

Artificial decorative vegetation shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of the Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701. Meeting such criteria shall be documented and certified by the manufacturer in an approved manner. Alternatively, the artificial decorative vegetation shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20 kW ignition source, and shall have a maximum heat release rate of 100 kW.

809.3 Electrical fixtures and wiring.

The use of unlisted electrical wiring and lighting on artificial decorative vegetation shall be prohibited. The use of electrical wiring and lighting on artificial trees constructed entirely of metal shall be prohibited.

809.4 Ignition sources and maintenance.

Ignition sources and maintenance of outdoor artificial vegetation shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-chapter-9]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 9
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
SECTION 901
GENERAL
901.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall specify where fire protection systems are required and shall apply to the design, installation and operation of fire protection systems and carbon monoxide detection alarms.

901.2 Fire protection systems.

Fire protection systems shall be installed, repaired, operated and maintained in accordance with this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

Any fire protection system for which an exception or reduction to the provisions of this code has been granted shall be considered to be a required system.

Exception: Any fire protection system or portion thereof not required by this code shall be permitted to be installed for partial or complete protection provided that such system meets the requirements of this code.

901.3 Modifications.

Persons shall not remove or modify any fire protection system installed or maintained under the provisions of this code or the Florida Fire Prevention Code without approval by the building official.

901.4 Threads.

Threads provided for fire department connections to sprinkler systems, standpipes, yard hydrants or any other fire hose connection shall be compatible with the connections used by the local fire department.

901.5 Acceptance tests.

Fire protection systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code. When required, the tests shall be conducted in the presence of the building official. Tests required by this code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code and the standards listed in this code shall be conducted at the expense of the owner or the owner's authorized agent. It shall be unlawful to occupy portions of a structure until the required fire protection systems within that portion of the structure have been tested and approved.

901.6 Supervisory service.

Where required, fire protection systems shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72.

901.6.1 Automatic sprinkler systems.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be monitored by an approved supervising station.

Exceptions:

1.	A supervising station is not required for automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings.

2.	Limited area systems in accordance with Section 903.3.8.

901.6.2 Fire alarm systems.

Fire alarm systems required by the provisions of Section 907.2 of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with Section 907.6.6.

Exceptions:

1.	Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.

2.	Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.

3.	Supervisory service is not required for automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.

901.6.3 Group H.

Supervision and monitoring of emergency alarm, detection and automatic fire-extinguishing systems in Group H occupancies shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

901.7 Fire areas.

Where buildings, or portions thereof, are divided into fire areas so as not to exceed the limits established for requiring a fire protection system in accordance with this chapter, such fire areas shall be separated by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, having a fire-resistance rating of not less than that determined in accordance with Section 707.3.10.

[F] 901.8 Pump and riser room size.

Where provided, fire pump rooms and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be designed with adequate space for all equipment necessary for the installation, as defined by the manufacturer, with sufficient working room around the stationary equipment. Clearances around equipment to elements of permanent construction, including other installed equipment and appliances, shall be sufficient to allow inspection, service, repair or replacement without removing such elements of permanent construction or disabling the function of a required fire-resistance-rated assembly. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with a door(s) and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment.

SECTION 902
DEFINITIONS
902.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

[F] ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.

[F] ALARM SIGNAL.

[F] ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE.

[F] ANNUNCIATOR.

[F] AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.

[F] AUTOMATIC.

[F] AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.

[F] AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM.

[F] AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM.

[F] AUTOMATIC WATER MIST SYSTEM.

[F] AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL.

[F] CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.

[F] CEILING LIMIT.

[F] CLEAN AGENT.

[F] COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.

[F] CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION.

[F] DELUGE SYSTEM.

[F] DETECTOR, HEAT.

[F] DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING AGENT.

[F] ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT PROTECTIVE SYSTEM.

[F] ELEVATOR GROUP.

[F] EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM.

[F] EMERGENCY VOICE/ALARM COMMUNICATIONS.

[F] FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL.

[F] FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT.

[F] FIRE ALARM SIGNAL.

[F] FIRE ALARM SYSTEM.

FIRE AREA.

[F] FIRE COMMAND CENTER.

[F] FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC.

[F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM.

[F] FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS.

[F] FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.

[F] HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.

[F] INITIATING DEVICE.

[F] MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX.

[F] MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE.

[F] MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM.

[F] NOTIFICATION ZONE.

[F] NUISANCE ALARM.

PRIVATE GARAGE.

[F] RECORD DRAWINGS.

[F] SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM.

[F] SMOKE ALARM.

[F] SMOKE DETECTOR.

[F] SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE.

[F] STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF.

Class I system.

Class II system.

Class III system.

[F] STANDPIPE, TYPES OF.

Automatic dry.

Automatic wet.

Manual dry.

Manual wet.

Semiautomatic dry.

[F] SUPERVISING STATION.

[F] SUPERVISORY SERVICE.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL.

[F] SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING DEVICE.

[F] TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF.

[F] TROUBLE SIGNAL.

[F] VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE.

[F] WET CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM.

[F] WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM.

[F] ZONE.

[F] ZONE, NOTIFICATION.

SECTION 903
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
[F] 903.1 General.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section.

[F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection.

Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted instead of automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard and approved by the fire code official.

[F] 903.2 Where required.

Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.

Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 903.2.1 Group A.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings and portions thereof used as Group A occupancies as provided in this section. For Group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the story where the fire area containing the Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancy is located, and throughout all stories from the Group A occupancy to, and including, the levels of exit discharge serving the Group A occupancy. For Group A-5 occupancies, the automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in the spaces indicated in Section 903.2.1.5.

[F] 903.2.1.1 Group A-1.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-1 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.	The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

4.	The fire area contains a multitheater complex.

[F] 903.2.1.2 Group A-2.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-2 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464.5 m2).

2.	The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.

Exception: A restaurant, cafeteria, or similar dining facility, including an associated commercial kitchen, is required to have sprinklers only if it has a fire area occupancy load of 200 patrons or more.

3.	The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

[F] 903.2.1.3 Group A-3.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-3 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.	The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

[F] 903.2.1.4 Group A-4.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-4 occupancies and intervening floors of the building where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more.

3.	The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.

[F] 903.2.1.5 Group A-5.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail areas, press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet (93 m2).

[F] 903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs.

Where an occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant load exceeding 100 for Group A-2 and 300 for other Group A occupancies, all floors between the occupied roof and the level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction.

903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of theses fire areas is 300 or more.

[F] 903.2.2 Ambulatory care facilities.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire floor containing an ambulatory care facility where either of the following conditions exist at any time:

1.	Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable.

2.	One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such a facility.

In buildings where ambulatory care is provided on levels other than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire floor where such care is provided as well as all floors below, and all floors between the level of ambulatory care and the nearest level of exit discharge, including the level of exit discharge.

[F] 903.2.3 Group E.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies as follows:

1.	Throughout all Group E fire areas greater than 12,000 square feet (1115 m2) in area.

2.	Throughout every portion of educational buildings below the lowest level of exit discharge serving that portion of the building.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system is not required in existing educational buildings unless 50 percent of the aggregate area of the building is being remodeled.

[F] 903.2.4 Group F-1.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.	The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m2).

4.	A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2).

[F] 903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet (232 m2) in area that generate finely divided combustible waste or use finely divided combustible materials.

[F] 903.2.5 Group H.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in high-hazard occupancies as required in Sections 903.2.5.1 through 903.2.5.3.

[F] 903.2.5.1 General.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in Group H occupancies.

[F] 903.2.5.2 Group H-5 occupancies.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings containing Group H-5 occupancies. The design of the sprinkler system shall be not less than that required by this code for the occupancy hazard classifications in accordance with Table 903.2.5.2.

Where the design area of the sprinkler system consists of a corridor protected by one row of sprinklers, the maximum number of sprinklers required to be calculated is 13.

[F] TABLE 903.2.5.2

GROUP H-5 SPRINKLER DESIGN CRITERIA

LOCATION	OCCUPANCY HAZARD
CLASSIFICATION

Fabrication areas	Ordinary Hazard Group 2
Service corridors	Ordinary Hazard Group 2
Storage rooms without dispensing	Ordinary Hazard Group 2
Storage rooms with dispensing	Extra Hazard Group 2
Corridors	Ordinary Hazard Group 2
[F] 903.2.5.3 Pyroxylin plastics.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in buildings, or portions thereof, where cellulose nitrate film or pyroxylin plastics are manufactured, stored or handled in quantities exceeding 100 pounds (45 kg).

[F] 903.2.6 Group I.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area.

Exceptions:

1.	An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group I-1 Condition 1 facilities.

2.	An automatic sprinkler system is not required where Group I-4 day care facilities are at the level of exit discharge and where every room where care is provided has not fewer than one exterior exit door.

3.	In buildings where Group I-4 day care is provided on levels other than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be installed on the entire floor where care is provided, all floors between the level of care and the level of exit discharge, and all floors below the level of exit discharge other than areas classified as an open parking garage.

[F] 903.2.7 Group M.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	A Group M fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.	The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m2).

4.	A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).

[F] 903.2.7.1 High-piled storage.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code in all buildings of Group M where storage of merchandise is in high-piled or rack storage arrays.

[F] 903.2.8 Group R.

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.

[F] 903.2.8.1 Group R-3.

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in Group R-3 occupancies.

[F] 903.2.8.2 Group R-4 Condition 1.

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in Group R-4 Condition 1 occupancies.

[F] 903.2.8.3 Group R-4 Condition 2.

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be permitted in Group R-4 Condition 2 occupancies.

[F] 903.2.8.4 Care facilities.

An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in care facilities with five or fewer individuals in a single-family dwelling.

[F] 903.2.9 Group S-1.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane.

3.	The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m2).

4.	A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).

5.	A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2).

[F] 903.2.9.1 Repair garages.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406, as shown:

1.	Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square feet (929 m2).

2.	Buildings not more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

3.	Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements.

4.	A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).

[F] 903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires.

Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 20,000 cubic feet (566 m3) shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

[F] 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 where either of the following conditions exists:

1.	Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2).

2.	Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups.

Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-3 occupancies.

[F] 903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).

[F] 903.2.11 Specific building areas and hazards.

In all occupancies other than Group U, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed for building design or hazards in the locations set forth in Sections 903.2.11.1 through 903.2.11.6.

[F] 903.2.11.1 Stories without openings.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all stories, including basements, of all buildings where the floor area exceeds 1,500 square feet (139.4 m2) and where there is not provided not fewer than one of the following types of exterior wall openings:

1.	Openings below grade that lead directly to ground level by an exterior stairway complying with Section 1011 or an outside ramp complying with Section 1012. Openings shall be located in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side. The required openings shall be distributed such that the lineal distance between adjacent openings does not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm).

2.	Openings entirely above the adjoining ground level totaling not less than 20 square feet (1.86 m2) in each 50 linear feet (15 240 mm), or fraction thereof, of exterior wall in the story on at least one side. The required openings shall be distributed such that the lineal distance between adjacent openings does not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm). The height of the bottom of the clear opening shall not exceed 44 inches (1118 mm) measured from the floor.

[F] 903.2.11.1.1 Opening dimensions and access.

Openings shall have a minimum dimension of not less than 30 inches (762 mm). Such openings shall be accessible to the fire department from the exterior and shall not be obstructed in a manner such that fire fighting or rescue cannot be accomplished from the exterior.

[F] 903.2.11.1.2 Openings on one side only.

Where openings in a story are provided on only one side and the opposite wall of such story is more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) from such openings, the story shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system, or openings as specified above shall be provided on not fewer than two sides of the story.

[F] 903.2.11.1.3 Basements.

Where any portion of a basement is located more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) from openings required by Section 903.2.11.1, or where walls, partitions or other obstructions are installed that restrict the application of water from hose streams, the basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

[F] 903.2.11.2 Rubbish and linen chutes.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed at the top of rubbish and linen chutes and in their terminal rooms. Chutes shall have additional sprinkler heads installed at alternate floors and at the lowest intake. Where a rubbish chute extends through a building more than one floor below the lowest intake, the extension shall have sprinklers installed that are recessed from the drop area of the chute and protected from freezing in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Such sprinklers shall be installed at alternate floors, beginning with the second level below the last intake and ending with the floor above the discharge. Chute sprinklers shall be accessible for servicing.

[F] 903.2.11.3 Buildings three stories or more in height.

Any building which is of three stories or more in height shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.1.

Exceptions:

1.	Single- and two-family dwellings.

2.	A stand-alone parking garage constructed with noncombustible materials, the design of which is such that all levels of the garage are uniformly open to the atmosphere on all sides with the percentages of openings equal to or greater than those specified in Section 406.3. Such garages shall be separated from any other structure by not less than 20 feet (6096 mm). A stand-alone parking garage is one that is solely for the parking of vehicles and does not have any other occupancy group in the building.

3.	Telecommunication spaces located within telecommunication buildings, if the spaces are equipped to meet an equivalent fire prevention standard approved by both the Florida Building Commission and the State Fire Marshal.

4.	Telecommunications spaces within telecommunication buildings, if the telecommunications space is equipped with:

4.1.	Air sampling smoke detection.

4.2.	Remote, proprietary or central station fire alarm monitoring.

4.3.	Automatic smoke exhaust system.

4.4.	One-hour fire-resistance wall separating the telecommunications space from the adjacent areas on the same floor.

4.5.	Two-hour floor/ceiling assembly separating the telecommunications space from adjacent floors.

4.6.	All other portions ancillary to the telecommunications equipment area shall be provided with fire sprinkler protection.

5.	Sprinkler systems installed solely as a requirement of Section 903.2.11.3 may be a NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D system in accordance with their scopes.

903.2.11.3.1

NFPA 101 as adopted by Florida Fire Prevention Code, as regarding the requirements for fire protection sprinklers, is applicable to all multiple-family residential buildings, whether designated as townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses, tenements, garden apartments or by any other name. The attorney general has determined that for the purpose of the fire protection sprinkler requirements in Section 553.895(2), Florida Statutes, townhouses that are three or more stories tall and consist of three or more units together are multiple-family dwellings. Therefore, these types of townhouses are not exempt from being considered for the requirements to provide fire protection sprinklers (even if there are any other definitions that define a townhouse as a single-family residence). When determining whether townhouses require fire protection sprinkler systems, the building official must consider in parallel: (a) the attorney general’s opinion defining the statutory language for townhouses; (b) the building code requirements, including all life-safety chapters, that provide additional determining criteria, such as construction types, fire resistance, fire protection systems and egress; and (c) the NFPA 101 as adopted by Florida Fire Prevention Code, egress and protection determining criteria. The more restrictive criteria are then applied.

[F] 903.2.11.4 Ducts conveying hazardous exhausts.

Where required by the Florida Building Code, Mechanical, automatic sprinklers shall be provided in ducts conveying hazardous exhaust or flammable or combustible materials.

Exception: Ducts where the largest cross-sectional diameter of the duct is less than 10 inches (254 mm).

[F] 903.2.11.5 Commercial cooking operations.

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct systems where an automatic sprinkler system is used to comply with Section 904.

[F] 903.2.11.6 Other required suppression systems.

In addition to the requirements of Section 903.2, the provisions indicated in Table 903.2.11.6 require the installation of a fire suppression system for certain buildings and areas.

[F] TABLE 903.2.11.6

ADDITIONAL REQUIRED SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS

SECTION	SUBJECT
402.5, 402.6.2	Covered and open mall buildings
403.3	High-rise buildings
404.3	Atriums
405.3	Underground structures
407.7	Group I-2
410.7	Stages
411.4	Special amusement buildings
412.3.4	Airport traffic control towers
412.4.6, 412.4.6.1,
412.6.5
	Aircraft hangars
415.11.12	Group H-5 HPM exhaust ducts
416.5	Flammable finishes
417.4	Drying rooms
508.5.7	Live/work units
424.3	Children’s play structures
507	Unlimited area buildings
509.4	Incidental uses
1029.6.2.3	Smoke-protected assembly seating
FFPC	Sprinkler system requirements as set forth in
the Florida Fire Prevention Code.
[F] 903.2.12 During construction.

Automatic sprinkler systems required during construction, alteration and demolition operations shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 903.3 Installation requirements.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections 903.3.1 through 903.3.8.

[F] 903.3.1 Standards.

Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 unless otherwise permitted by Sections 903.3.1.2 and 903.3.1.3 and other chapters of this code, as applicable.

[F] 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 sprinkler systems.

Where the provisions of this code require that a building or portion thereof be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section, sprinklers shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 except as provided in Sections 903.3.1.1.1 and 903.3.1.1.2.

[F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations.

Automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from a room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.

1.	A room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard.

2.	A room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, where approved by the fire code official.

3.	Generator and transformer rooms separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

4.	Rooms or areas that are of noncombustible construction with wholly noncombustible contents.

5.	Fire service access elevator machine rooms and machinery spaces.

6.	Machine rooms, machinery spaces, control rooms and control spaces associated with occupant evacuation elevators designed in accordance with Section 3008.

[F] 903.3.1.1.2 Bathrooms.

In Group R occupancies, other than Group R-4 occupancies, sprinklers shall not be required in bathrooms that do not exceed 55 square feet (5 m2) in area and are located within individual dwelling units or sleeping units, provided that walls and ceilings, including the walls and ceilings behind a shower enclosure or tub, are of noncombustible or limited-combustible materials with a 15-minute thermal barrier rating.

[F] 903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R sprinkler systems.

Automatic sprinkler systems in Group R occupancies up to and including four stories in height in buildings not exceeding 60 feet (18 288 mm) in height above grade plane shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13R.

The number of stories of Group R occupancies constructed in accordance with Sections 510.2 and 510.4 shall be measured from the horizontal assembly creating separate buildings.

[F] 903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks.

Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks and ground floor patios of dwelling units and sleeping units where the building is of Type V construction, provided there is a roof or deck above. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch (25 mm) to 6 inches (152 mm) below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches (356 mm) below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist construction.

[F] 903.3.1.2.2 Corridors and balconies in the means of egress.

Sprinkler protection shall be provided in corridors and for balconies in the means of egress where any of the following conditions apply:

1.	Corridors with combustible floor or walls.

2.	Corridors with an interior change of direction exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad).

3.	Corridors that are less than 50 percent open to the outside atmosphere at the ends.

4.	Open-ended corridors and associated exterior stairways and ramps as specified in Section 1027.6, Exception 3.

5.	Egress balconies not complying with Sections 1021.2 and 1021.3

903.3.1.2.3 Attics.

Attic protection shall be provided as follows:

1.	Attics that are used or intended for living purposes or storage shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system.

2.	Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in an unsprinklered attic, at least one quickresponse intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment.

3.	Where located in a building of Type III, Type IV or Type V construction designed in accordance with Section 510.2 or Section 510.4, attics not required by Item 1 to have sprinkler protection shall comply with one of the following if the roof assembly is located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access needed to meet the provisions in Section 503:

a.	Provide automatic sprinkler system protection.

b.	Construct the attic using noncombustible materials.

c.	Construct the attic using fire-retardanttreated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

d.	Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation.

 The height of the roof assembly shall be determined by measuring the distance from the lowest required fire vehicle access road surface adjacent to the building to the eave of the highest pitched roof, the intersection of the highest roof to the exterior wall, or the top of the highest parapet, whichever yields the greatest distance. For the purpose of this measurement, required fire vehicle access roads shall include only those roads that are necessary for compliance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

4.	Group R-4 Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following:

a.	Provide automatic sprinkler system protection.

b.	Provide a heat detector system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the building fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907.2.10.

c.	Construct the attic using noncombustible materials.

d.	Construct the attic using fire-retardanttreated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

e.	Fill the attic with noncombustible insulation.

[F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems.

Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings; Group R-3, Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D.

[F] 903.3.2 Quick-response and residential sprinklers.

Where automatic sprinkler systems are required by this code, quick-response or residential automatic sprinklers shall be installed in all of the following areas in accordance with Section 903.3.1 and their listings:

1.	Throughout all spaces within a smoke compartment containing care recipient sleeping units in Group I-2 in accordance with this code.

2.	Throughout all spaces within a smoke compartment containing treatment rooms in ambulatory care facilities.

3.	Dwelling units and sleeping units in Group I-1 and R occupancies.

4.	Light-hazard occupancies as defined in NFPA 13.

[F] 903.3.3 Obstructed locations.

Automatic sprinklers shall be installed with due regard to obstructions that will delay activation or obstruct the water distribution pattern. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in or under covered kiosks, displays, booths, concession stands, or equipment that exceeds 4 feet (1219 mm) in width. Not less than a 3-foot (914 mm) clearance shall be maintained between automatic sprinklers and the top of piles of combustible fibers.

Exception: Kitchen equipment under exhaust hoods protected with a fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 904.

[F] 903.3.4 Actuation.

Automatic sprinkler systems shall be automatically actuated unless specifically provided for in this code.

[F] 903.3.5 Water supplies.

Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the fire code official.

[F] 903.3.5.1 Domestic services.

Where the domestic service provides the water supply for the automatic sprinkler system, the supply shall be in accordance with this section.

[F] 903.3.5.2 Residential combination services.

A single combination water supply shall be allowed provided that the domestic demand is added to the sprinkler demand as required by NFPA 13R.

[F] 903.3.6 Hose threads.

Fire hose threads and fittings used in connection with automatic sprinkler systems shall be as prescribed by the fire code official.

[F] 903.3.7 Fire department connections.

Fire department connections for automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with Section 912.

[F] 903.3.8 Limited area sprinkler systems.

Limited area sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the standards listed in Section 903.3.1 except as provided in Sections 903.3.8.1 through 903.3.8.5.

903.3.8.1 Number of sprinklers.

Limited area sprinkler systems shall not exceed six sprinklers in any single fire area.

903.3.8.2 Occupancy hazard classification.

Only areas classified by NFPA 13 as Light Hazard or Ordinary Hazard Group 1 shall be permitted to be protected by limited area sprinkler systems.

903.3.8.3 Piping arrangement.

Where a limited area sprinkler system is installed in a building with an automatic wet standpipe system, sprinklers shall be supplied by the standpipe system. Where a limited area sprinkler system is installed in a building without an automatic wet standpipe system, water shall be permitted to be supplied by the plumbing system provided that the plumbing system is capable of simultaneously supplying domestic and sprinkler demands.

903.3.8.4 Supervision.

Control valves shall not be installed between the water supply and sprinklers unless the valves are of an approved indicating type that are supervised or secured in the open position.

903.3.8.5 Calculations.

Hydraulic calculations in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be provided to demonstrate that the available water flow and pressure are adequate to supply all sprinklers installed in any single fire area with discharge densities corresponding to the hazard classification.

[F] 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms.

Valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and waterflow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit.

Exceptions:

1.	Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings.

2.	Limited area sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.3.8.

3.	Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R where a common supply main is used to supply both domestic water and the automatic sprinkler system, and a separate shutoff valve for the automatic sprinkler system is not provided.

4.	Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open position.

5.	Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint spray booths or dip tanks that are sealed or locked in the open position.

6.	Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed or locked in the open position.

7.	Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, preaction and deluge sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position.

[F] 903.4.1 Monitoring.

Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and shall be automatically transmitted to an approved supervising station or, where approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible signal at a constantly attended location.

Exceptions:

1.	Underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes provided by the municipality or public utility are not required to be monitored.

2.	Backflow prevention device test valves located in limited area sprinkler system supply piping shall be locked in the open position. In occupancies required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, the backflow preventer valves shall be electrically supervised by a tamper switch installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and separately annunciated.

[F] 903.4.2 Alarms.

An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler waterflow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.

[F] 903.4.3 Floor control valves.

Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in high-rise buildings.

[F] 903.5 Testing and maintenance.

Sprinkler systems shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 904
ALTERNATIVE AUTOMATIC
FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
[F] 904.1 General.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems, other than automatic sprinkler systems, shall be designed, installed, inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section and the applicable referenced standards.

[F] 904.2 Where permitted.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems installed as an alternative to the required automatic sprinkler systems of Section 903 shall be approved by the fire code official.

[F] 904.2.1 Restriction on using automatic sprinkler system exceptions or reductions.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall not be considered alternatives for the purposes of exceptions or reductions allowed for automatic sprinkler systems or by other requirements of this code.

[F] 904.2.2 Commercial hood and duct systems.

Each required commercial kitchen exhaust hood and duct system required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code or Chapter 5 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical to have a Type I hood shall be protected with an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with this code.

[F] 904.3 Installation.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be installed in accordance with this section.

[F] 904.3.1 Electrical wiring.

Electrical wiring shall be in accordance with NFPA 70.

[F] 904.3.2 Actuation.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be automatically actuated and provided with a manual means of actuation in accordance with Section 904.11.1. Where more than one hazard could be simultaneously involved in fire due to their proximity, all hazards shall be protected by a single system designed to protect all hazards that could become involved.

Exception: Multiple systems shall be permitted to be installed if they are designed to operate simultaneously.

[F] 904.3.3 System interlocking.

Automatic equipment interlocks with fuel shutoffs, ventilation controls, door closers, window shutters, conveyor openings, smoke and heat vents and other features necessary for proper operation of the fire-extinguishing system shall be provided as required by the design and installation standard utilized for the hazard.

[F] 904.3.4 Alarms and warning signs.

Where alarms are required to indicate the operation of automatic fire-extinguishing systems, distinctive audible and visible alarms and warning signs shall be provided to warn of pending agent discharge. Where exposure to automatic-extinguishing agents poses a hazard to persons and a delay is required to ensure the evacuation of occupants before agent discharge, a separate warning signal shall be provided to alert occupants once agent discharge has begun. Audible signals shall be in accordance with Section 907.5.2.

[F] 904.3.5 Monitoring.

Where a building fire alarm system is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 904.4 Inspection and testing.

Automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be inspected and tested in accordance with the provisions of this section prior to acceptance.

[F] 904.4.1 Inspection.

Prior to conducting final acceptance tests, all of the following items shall be inspected:

1.	Hazard specification for consistency with design hazard.

2.	Type, location and spacing of automatic- and manual-initiating devices.

3.	Size, placement and position of nozzles or discharge orifices.

4.	Location and identification of audible and visible alarm devices.

5.	Identification of devices with proper designations.

6.	Operating instructions.

[F] 904.4.2 Alarm testing.

Notification appliances, connections to fire alarm systems and connections to approved supervising stations shall be tested in accordance with this section and Section 907 to verify proper operation.

[F] 904.4.2.1 Audible and visible signals.

The audibility and visibility of notification appliances signaling agent discharge or system operation, where required, shall be verified.

[F] 904.4.3 Monitor testing.

Connections to protected premises and supervising station fire alarm systems shall be tested to verify proper identification and retransmission of alarms from automatic fire-extinguishing systems.

[F] 904.5 Wet-chemical systems.

Wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 17A and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.6 Dry-chemical systems.

Dry-chemical extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 17 and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.7 Foam systems.

Foam-extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 11 and NFPA 16 and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.8 Carbon dioxide systems.

Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 12 and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.9 Halon systems.

Halogenated extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 12A and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.10 Clean-agent systems.

Clean-agent fire-extinguishing systems shall be installed, maintained, periodically inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 2001 and their listing. Records of inspections and testing shall be maintained.

[F] 904.11 Automatic water mist systems.

Automatic water mist systems shall be permitted in applications that are consistent with the applicable listing or approvals and shall comply with Sections 904.11.1 through 904.11.3.

[F] 904.11.1 Design and installation requirements.

Automatic water mist systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections 904.11.1.1 through 904.11.1.4.

[F] 904.11.1.1 General.

Automatic water mist systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 750 and the manufacturer’s instructions.

[F] 904.11.1.2 Actuation.

Automatic water mist systems shall be automatically actuated.

[F] 904.11.1.3 Water supply protection.

Connections to a potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

[F] 904.11.1.4 Secondary water supply.

Where a secondary water supply is required for an automatic sprinkler system, an automatic water mist system shall be provided with an approved secondary water supply.

[F] 904.11.2 Water mist system supervision and alarms.

Supervision and alarms shall be provided as required for automatic sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.4.

[F] 904.11.2.1 Monitoring.

Monitoring shall be provided as required for automatic sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.4.1.

[F] 904.11.2.2 Alarms.

Alarms shall be provided as required for automatic sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.4.2.

[F] 904.11.2.3 Floor control valves.

Floor control valves shall be provided as required for automatic sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.4.3.

[F] 904.11.3 Testing and maintenance.

Automatic water mist systems shall be tested and maintained in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 904.12 Commercial cooking systems.

The automatic fire-extinguishing system for commercial cooking systems shall be of a type recognized for protection of commercial cooking equipment and exhaust systems of the type and arrangement protected. Preengineered automatic dry- and wet-chemical extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300 and listed and labeled for the intended application. Other types of automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be listed and labeled for specific use as protection for commercial cooking operations. The system shall be installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Automatic fire-extinguishing systems of the following types shall be installed in accordance with the referenced standard indicated, as follows:

1.	Carbon dioxide extinguishing systems, NFPA 12.

2.	Automatic sprinkler systems, NFPA 13.

3.	Foam-water sprinkler system or foam-water spray systems, NFPA 16.

4.	Dry-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17.

5.	Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, NFPA 17A.

Exception: Factory-built commercial cooking recirculating systems that are tested in accordance with UL 710B and listed, labeled and installed in accordance with Section 304.1 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 904.12.1 Manual system operation.

A manual actuation device shall be located at or near a means of egress from the cooking area not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) from the kitchen exhaust system. The manual actuation device shall be installed not more than 48 inches (1200 mm) or less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the floor and shall clearly identify the hazard protected. The manual actuation shall require a maximum force of 40 pounds (178 N) and a maximum movement of 14 inches (356 mm) to actuate the fire suppression system.

Exception: Automatic sprinkler systems shall not be required to be equipped with manual actuation means.

[F] 904.12.2 System interconnection.

The actuation of the fire suppression system shall automatically shut down the fuel or electrical power supply to the cooking equipment. The fuel and electrical supply reset shall be manual.

[F] 904.12.3 Carbon dioxide systems.

Where carbon dioxide systems are used, there shall be a nozzle at the top of the ventilating duct. Additional nozzles that are symmetrically arranged to give uniform distribution shall be installed within vertical ducts exceeding 20 feet (6096 mm) and horizontal ducts exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm). Dampers shall be installed at either the top or the bottom of the duct and shall be arranged to operate automatically upon activation of the fire-extinguishing system. Where the damper is installed at the top of the duct, the top nozzle shall be immediately below the damper. Automatic carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing systems shall be sufficiently sized to protect against all hazards venting through a common duct simultaneously.

[F] 904.12.3.1 Ventilation system.

Commercial-type cooking equipment protected by an automatic carbon dioxide-extinguishing system shall be arranged to shut off the ventilation system upon activation.

[F] 904.12.4 Special provisions for automatic sprinkler systems.

Automatic sprinkler systems protecting commercial-type cooking equipment shall be supplied from a separate, readily accessible, indicating-type control valve that is identified.

[F] 904.12.4.1 Listed sprinklers.

Sprinklers used for the protection of fryers shall be tested in accordance with UL 199E, listed for that application and installed in accordance with their listing.

[F] 904.13 Domestic cooking systems in Group I-2 Condition 1.

In Group I-2 Condition 1, occupancies where cooking facilities are installed in accordance with Section 407.2.6 of this code, the domestic cooking hood provided over the cooktop or range shall be equipped with an automatic fire-extinguishing system of a type recognized for protection of domestic cooking equipment. Preengineered automatic extinguishing systems shall be tested in accordance with UL 300A and listed and labeled for the intended application. The system shall be installed in accordance with this code, its listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

[F] 904.13.1 Manual system operation and interconnection.

Manual actuation and system interconnection for the hood suppression system shall be installed in accordance with Sections 904.12.1 and 904.12.2, respectively.

[F] 904.13.2 Portable fire extinguishers for domestic cooking equipment in Group I-2 Condition 1.

A portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 shall be installed within a 30-foot (9144 mm) distance of travel from domestic cooking appliances.

SECTION 905
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
[F] 905.1 General.

Standpipe systems shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 905.2 through 905.10. In buildings used for high-piled combustible storage, fire protection shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 905.2 Installation standard.

Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Fire department connections for standpipe systems shall be in accordance with Section 912.

[F] 905.3 Required installations.

Standpipe systems shall be installed where required by Sections 905.3.1 through 905.3.8. Standpipe systems are allowed to be combined with automatic sprinkler systems.

Exception: Standpipe systems are not required in Group R-3 occupancies.

[F] 905.3.1 Height.

Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) below the highest level of fire department vehicle access.

Exceptions:

1.	Class I standpipes are allowed in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.	Class I manual standpipes are allowed in open parking garages where the highest floor is located not more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

3.	Class I manual dry standpipes are allowed in open parking garages that are subject to freezing temperatures, provided that the hose connections are located as required for Class II standpipes in accordance with Section 905.5.

4.	Class I standpipes are allowed in basements equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

5.	In determining the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, it shall not be required to consider either of the following:

5.1.	Recessed loading docks for four vehicles or less.

5.2.	Conditions where topography makes access from the fire department vehicle to the building impractical or impossible.

[F] 905.3.2 Group A.

Class I automatic wet standpipes shall be provided in nonsprinklered Group A buildings having an occupant load exceeding 1,000 persons.

Exceptions:

1.	Open-air-seating spaces without enclosed spaces.

2.	Class I automatic dry and semiautomatic dry standpipes or manual wet standpipes are allowed in buildings that are not high-rise buildings.

[F] 905.3.3 Covered and open mall buildings.

Covered mall and open mall buildings shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system where required by Section 905.3.1. Mall buildings not required to be equipped with a standpipe system by Section 905.3.1 shall be equipped with Class I hose connections connected to the automatic sprinkler system sized to deliver water at 250 gallons per minute (946.4 L/min) at the most hydraulically remote hose connection while concurrently supplying the automatic sprinkler system demand. The standpipe system shall be designed to not exceed a 50 pounds per square inch (psi) (345 kPa) residual pressure loss with a flow of 250 gallons per minute (946.4 L/min) from the fire department connection to the hydraulically most remote hose connection. Hose connections shall be provided at each of the following locations:

1.	Within the mall at the entrance to each exit passageway or corridor.

2.	At each floor-level landing within interior exit stairways opening directly on the mall.

3.	At exterior public entrances to the mall of a covered mall building.

4.	At public entrances at the perimeter line of an open mall building.

5.	At other locations as necessary so that the distance to reach all portions of a tenant space does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm) from a hose connection.

[F] 905.3.4 Stages.

Stages greater than 1,000 square feet in area (93 m2) shall be equipped with a Class III wet standpipe system with 11/2-inch and 21/2-inch (38 mm and 64 mm) hose connections on each side of the stage.

Exception: Where the building or area is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, a 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose connection shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13 or in accordance with NFPA 14 for Class II or III standpipes.

[F] 905.3.4.1 Hose and cabinet.

The 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose connections shall be equipped with sufficient lengths of 11/2-inch (38 mm) hose to provide fire protection for the stage area. Hose connections shall be equipped with an approved adjustable fog nozzle and be mounted in a cabinet or on a rack.

[F] 905.3.5 Underground buildings.

Underground buildings shall be equipped throughout with a Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipe system.

[F] 905.3.6 Helistops and heliports.

Buildings with a rooftop helistop or heliport shall be equipped with a Class I or III standpipe system extended to the roof level on which the helistop or heliport is located in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 905.3.7 Marinas and boatyards.

Standpipes in marinas and boatyards shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 905.3.8 Rooftop gardens and landscaped roofs.

Buildings or structures that have rooftop gardens or landscaped roofs and that are equipped with a standpipe system shall have the standpipe system extended to the roof level on which the rooftop garden or landscaped roof is located.

[F] 905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections.

Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations:

1.	In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade. Hose connections shall be located at the main floor landing, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.

Exception: A single hose connection shall be permitted to be installed in the open corridor or open breezeway between open stairs that are not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) apart.

2.	On each side of the wall adjacent to the exit opening of a horizontal exit.

Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to a horizontal exit are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the horizontal exit.

3.	In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.

Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building.

4.	In covered mall buildings, adjacent to each exterior public entrance to the mall and adjacent to each entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. In open mall buildings, adjacent to each public entrance to the mall at the perimeter line and adjacent to each entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall.

5.	Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), a hose connection shall be located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an interior exit stairway with access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12.

6.	Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor or story is more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) from a hose connection or the most remote portion of a sprinklered floor or story is more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) from a hose connection, the fire code official is authorized to require that additional hose connections be provided in approved locations.

[F] 905.4.1 Protection.

Risers and laterals of Class I standpipe systems not located within an interior exit stairway shall be protected by a degree of fire resistance equal to that required for vertical enclosures in the building in which they are located.

Exception: In buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system, laterals that are not located within an interior exit stairway are not required to be enclosed within fire-resistance-rated construction.

[F] 905.4.2 Interconnection.

In buildings where more than one standpipe is provided, the standpipes shall be interconnected in accordance with NFPA 14.

[F] 905.5 Location of Class II standpipe hose connections.

Class II standpipe hose connections shall be accessible and located so that all portions of the building are within 30 feet (9144 mm) of a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30 480 mm) of hose.

[F] 905.5.1 Groups A-1 and A-2.

In Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies having occupant loads exceeding 1,000 persons, hose connections shall be located on each side of any stage, on each side of the rear of the auditorium, on each side of the balcony and on each tier of dressing rooms.

[F] 905.5.2 Protection.

Fire-resistance-rated protection of risers and laterals of Class II standpipe systems is not required.

[F] 905.5.3 Class II system 1-inch hose.

A minimum 1-inch (25 mm) hose shall be allowed to be used for hose stations in light-hazard occupancies where investigated and listed for this service and where approved by the fire code official.

[F] 905.6 Location of Class III standpipe hose connections.

Class III standpipe systems shall have hose connections located as required for Class I standpipes in Section 905.4 and shall have Class II hose connections as required in Section 905.5.

[F] 905.6.1 Protection.

Risers and laterals of Class III standpipe systems shall be protected as required for Class I systems in accordance with Section 905.4.1.

[F] 905.6.2 Interconnection.

In buildings where more than one Class III standpipe is provided, the standpipes shall be interconnected in accordance with NFPA 14.

[F] 905.7 Cabinets.

Cabinets containing fire-fighting equipment such as standpipes, fire hoses, fire extinguishers or fire department valves shall not be blocked from use or obscured from view.

[F] 905.7.1 Cabinet equipment identification.

Cabinets shall be identified in an approved manner by a permanently attached sign with letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high in a color that contrasts with the background color, indicating the equipment contained therein.

Exceptions:

1.	Doors not large enough to accommodate a written sign shall be marked with a permanently attached pictogram of the equipment contained therein.

2.	Doors that have either an approved visual identification clear glass panel or a complete glass door panel are not required to be marked.

[F] 905.7.2 Locking cabinet doors.

Cabinets shall be unlocked.

Exceptions:

1.	Visual identification panels of glass or other approved transparent frangible material that is easily broken and allows access.

2.	Approved locking arrangements.

3.	Group I-3.

[F] 905.8 Dry standpipes.

Dry standpipes shall not be installed.

Exception: Where subject to freezing and in accordance with NFPA 14.

[F] 905.9 Valve supervision.

Valves controlling water supplies shall be supervised in the open position so that a change in the normal position of the valve will generate a supervisory signal at the supervising station required by Section 903.4. Where a fire alarm system is provided, a signal shall be transmitted to the control unit.

Exceptions:

1.	Valves to underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes do not require supervision.

2.	Valves locked in the normal position and inspected as provided in this code in buildings not equipped with a fire alarm system.

[F] 905.10 During construction.

Standpipe systems required during construction and demolition operations shall be provided in accordance with Section 3311.

SECTION 906
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
[F] 906.1 Where required.

Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in all of the following locations:

1.	In Group A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1, R-2, R-4 and S occupancies.

Exceptions:

1.	In Group R-2 occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 6 where each dwelling unit is provided with a portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 1-A:10-B:C.

2.	In Group E occupancies. portable fire extinguishers shall be required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 6 where each classroom is provided with a portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 2-A:20-B:C.

3.	In storage areas of Group S occupancies where forklift, powered industrial truck or powered cart operators are the primary occupants, fixed extinguishers, as specified in NFPA 10, shall not be required where in accordance with all of the following:

3.1.	Use of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be approved by the fire code official.

3.2.	Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 10-pound, 40A:80B:C extinguisher affixed to the vehicle using a mounting bracket approved by the extinguisher manufacturer or the fire code official for vehicular use.

3.3.	Not less than two spare extinguishers of equal or greater rating shall be available on site to replace a discharged extinguisher.

3.4.	Vehicle operators shall be trained in the proper operation, use and inspection of extinguishers.

3.5.	Inspections of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be performed daily.

2.	Within 30 feet (9144 mm) of commercial cooking equipment.

3.	In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are stored, used or dispensed.

4.	On each floor of structures under construction, except Group R-3 occupancies, in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

5.	Where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

6.	Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to laboratories, computer rooms and generator rooms, where required by the fire code official.

Exception: Portable fire extinguishers are not required at normally unmanned Group U occupancy buildings or structures where a portable fire extinguisher suitable to the hazard of the location is provided on the vehicle of visiting personnel.

Table [F] 906.1 Additional Required Portable Fire Extinguishers in the Florida Fire Prevention Code. Reserved.

[F] 906.2 General requirements.

Portable fire extinguishers shall be selected and installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 10.

Exceptions:

1.	The distance of travel to reach an extinguisher shall not apply to the spectator seating portions of Group A-5 occupancies.

2.	In Group I-3, portable fire extinguishers shall be permitted to be located at staff locations.

[F] 906.3 Size and distribution.

The size and distribution of portable fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Sections 906.3.1 through 906.3.4.

[F] TABLE 906.3(1)

FIRE EXTINGUISHERS FOR CLASS A FIRE HAZARDS

	LIGHT
(Low)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY
	ORDINARY
(Moderate)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY
	EXTRA
(High)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY

Minimum rated single
extinguisher
	2-Ac	2-A	4-Aa
Maximum floor area
per unit of A
	3,000
square feet
	1,500
square feet
	1,000
square feet

Maximum floor area
for extinguisherb
	11,250
square feet
	11,250
square feet
	11,250
square feet

Maximum distance of
travel to extinguisher
	75 feet	75 feet	75 feet

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 gallon = 3.785 L.

a.	Two 21/2-gallon water-type extinguishers shall be deemed the equivalent of one 4-A rated extinguisher.

b.	Annex E.3.3 of NFPA 10 provides more details concerning application of the maximum floor area criteria.

c.	Two water-type extinguishers each with a 1-A rating shall be deemed the equivalent of one 2-A rated extinguisher for Light (Low) Hazard Occupancies.

[F] TABLE 906.3(2)

FIRE EXTINGUISHERS FOR FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS WITH DEPTHS LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 0.25 INCH

TYPE OF HAZARD	BASIC MINIMUM
EXTINGUISHER RATING
	MAXIMUM
DISTANCE OF TRAVEL
TO EXTINGUISHERS
(feet)

Light
(Low)
	5-B	30
10-B	50
Ordinary
(Moderate)
	10-B	30
20-B	50
Extra (High)	40-B	30
80-B	50

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

Note: For requirements on water-soluble flammable liquids and alternative sizing criteria, see Section 5.5 of NFPA 10.

[F] 906.3.1 Class A fire hazards.

The minimum sizes and distribution of portable fire extinguishers for occupancies that involve primarily Class A fire hazards shall comply with Table 906.3(1).

[F] 906.3.2 Class B fire hazards.

Portable fire extinguishers for occupancies involving flammable or combustible liquids with depths less than or equal to 0.25-inch (6.4 mm) shall be selected and placed in accordance with Table 906.3(2).

Portable fire extinguishers for occupancies involving flammable or combustible liquids with a depth of greater than 0.25-inch (6.4 mm) shall be selected and placed in accordance with NFPA 10.

[F] 906.3.3 Class C fire hazards.

Portable fire extinguishers for Class C fire hazards shall be selected and placed on the basis of the anticipated Class A or B hazard.

[F] 906.3.4 Class D fire hazards.

Portable fire extinguishers for occupancies involving combustible metals shall be selected and placed in accordance with NFPA 10.

[F] 906.4 Cooking grease fires.

Fire extinguishers provided for the protection of cooking grease fires shall be of an approved type compatible with the automatic fire-extinguishing system agent and in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 906.5 Conspicuous location.

Portable fire extinguishers shall be located in conspicuous locations where they will be readily accessible and immediately available for use. These locations shall be along normal paths of travel, unless the fire code official determines that the hazard posed indicates the need for placement away from normal paths of travel.

[F] 906.6 Unobstructed and unobscured.

Portable fire extinguishers shall not be obstructed or obscured from view. In rooms or areas in which visual obstruction cannot be completely avoided, means shall be provided to indicate the locations of extinguishers.

[F] 906.7 Hangers and brackets.

Hand-held portable fire extinguishers, not housed in cabinets, shall be installed on the hangers or brackets supplied. Hangers or brackets shall be securely anchored to the mounting surface in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

[F] 906.8 Cabinets.

Cabinets used to house portable fire extinguishers shall not be locked.

Exceptions:

1.	Where portable fire extinguishers subject to malicious use or damage are provided with a means of ready access.

2.	In Group I-3 occupancies and in mental health areas in Group I-2 occupancies, access to portable fire extinguishers shall be permitted to be locked or to be located in staff locations provided the staff has keys.

[F] 906.9 Extinguisher installation.

The installation of portable fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with Sections 906.9.1 through 906.9.3.

[F] 906.9.1 Extinguishers weighing 40 pounds or less.

Portable fire extinguishers having a gross weight not exceeding 40 pounds (18 kg) shall be installed so that their tops are not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor.

[F] 906.9.2 Extinguishers weighing more than 40 pounds.

Hand-held portable fire extinguishers having a gross weight exceeding 40 pounds (18 kg) shall be installed so that their tops are not more than 3.5 feet (1067 mm) above the floor.

[F] 906.9.3 Floor clearance.

The clearance between the floor and the bottom of installed hand-held portable fire extinguishers shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

[F] 906.10 Wheeled units.

Wheeled fire extinguishers shall be conspicuously located in a designated location.

SECTION 907
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
[F] 907.1 General.

This section covers the application, installation, performance and maintenance of fire alarm systems and their components.

[F] 907.1.1 Construction documents.

Construction documents for fire alarm systems shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the fire code official.

[F] 907.1.2 Fire alarm shop drawings.

Shop drawings for fire alarm systems shall be prepared in accordance with NFPA 72 and submitted for review and approval prior to system installation.

[F] 907.1.3 Equipment.

Systems and components shall be listed and approved for the purpose for which they are installed.

907.1.4 Accessibility.

Every required fire alarm system shall include a visible alarm indicating appliances in public and common areas. For more specific accessibility requirements related to alarm indicating appliances, refer to applicable sections of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

[F] 907.2 Where required—new buildings and structures.

An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code.

Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a fire alarm signal for fire alarm systems employing automatic fire detectors or waterflow detection devices. Where other sections of this code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.

Exceptions:

1.	The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems dedicated to elevator recall control and supervisory service.

2.	The manual fire alarm box is not required for Group R-2 occupancies unless required by the fire code official to provide a means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a sprinkler system impairment event. Where provided, the manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area that is accessible to the public.

[F] 907.2.1 Group A.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies where the occupant load due to the assembly occupancy is 300 or more, or where the Group A occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.

Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.

[F] 907.2.1.1 System initiation in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more.

Activation of the fire alarm in Group A occupancies with an occupant load of 1,000 or more shall initiate a signal using an emergency voice/alarm communications system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

Exception: Where approved, the prerecorded announcement is allowed to be manually deactivated for a period of time, not to exceed 3 minutes, for the sole purpose of allowing a live voice announcement from an approved, constantly attended location.

[F] 907.2.1.2 Emergency voice/alarm communication captions.

Stadiums, arenas and grandstands required to caption audible public announcements shall be in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.4.

[F] 907.2.2 Group B.

A manual fire alarm system, which activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5, shall be installed in Group B occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The combined Group B occupant load of all floors is 500 or more.

2.	The Group B occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.

3.	The fire area contains an ambulatory care facility.

Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.

[F] 907.2.2.1 Ambulatory care facilities.

Fire areas containing ambulatory care facilities shall be provided with an electronically supervised automatic smoke detection system installed within the ambulatory care facility and in public use areas outside of tenant spaces, including public corridors and elevator lobbies.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, provided the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler waterflow.

[F] 907.2.3 Group E.

A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system.

Exceptions:

1.	A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less.

2.	Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates an approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5.

3.	Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where all of the following apply:

3.1.	Interior corridors are protected by smoke detectors.

3.2.	Auditoriums, cafeterias, gymnasiums and similar areas are protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices.

3.3.	Shops and laboratories involving dusts or vapors are protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices.

3.4.	Manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location.

4.	Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where all of the following apply:

4.1.	The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

4.2.	The emergency voice/alarm communication system will activate on sprinkler waterflow.

4.3.	Manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location.

[F] 907.2.4 Group F.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group F occupancies where both of the following conditions exist:

1.	The Group F occupancy is two or more stories in height.

2.	The Group F occupancy has a combined occupant load of 500 or more above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.

Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.

[F] 907.2.5 Group H.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group H-5 occupancies and in occupancies used for the manufacture of organic coatings. An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed for highly toxic gases, organic peroxides and oxidizers in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.6 Group I.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group I occupancies. An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.6.1, 907.2.6.2 and 907.2.6.3.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Manual fire alarm boxes in sleeping units of Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies shall not be required at exits if located at all care providers’ control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that the distances of travel required in Section 907.4.2.1 are not exceeded.

2.	Occupant notification systems are not required to be activated where private mode signaling installed in accordance with NFPA 72 is approved by the fire code official and staff evacuation responsibilities are included in the fire safety and evacuation plan required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.6.1 Group I-1.

In Group I-1 occupancies, an automatic smoke detection system shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens. The system shall be activated in accordance with Section 907.5.

Exceptions:

1.	For Group I-1 Condition 1 occupancies, smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	Smoke detection is not required for exterior balconies.

[F] 907.2.6.1.1 Smoke alarms.

Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

[F] 907.2.6.2 Group I-2.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed in corridors in Group I-2 Condition 1 facilities and spaces permitted to be open to the corridors by Section 407.2. The system shall be activated in accordance with Section 907.4. Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancies shall be equipped with an automatic smoke detection system as required in Section 407.

Exceptions:

1.	Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain sleeping units where such units are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall provide a visual display on the corridor side of each sleeping unit and shall provide an audible and visual alarm at the care providers’ station attending each unit.

2.	Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain sleeping units where sleeping unit doors are equipped with automatic door-closing devices with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance with their listing, provided that the integral detectors perform the required alerting function.

[F] 907.2.6.3 Group I-3 occupancies.

Group I-3 occupancies shall be equipped with a manual fire alarm system and automatic smoke detection system installed for alerting staff.

[F] 907.2.6.3.1 System initiation.

Actuation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system, automatic sprinkler system, a manual fire alarm box or a fire detector shall initiate an approved fire alarm signal that automatically notifies staff.

[F] 907.2.6.3.2 Manual fire alarm boxes.

Manual fire alarm boxes are not required to be located in accordance with Section 907.4.2 where the fire alarm boxes are provided at staff-attended locations having direct supervision over areas where manual fire alarm boxes have been omitted.

[F] 907.2.6.3.2.1 Manual fire alarm boxes in detainee areas.

Manual fire alarm boxes are allowed to be locked in areas occupied by detainees, provided that staff members are present within the subject area and have keys readily available to operate the manual fire alarm boxes.

[F] 907.2.6.3.3 Automatic smoke detection system.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed throughout resident housing areas, including sleeping units and contiguous day rooms, group activity spaces and other common spaces normally accessible to residents.

Exceptions:

1.	Other approved smoke detection arrangements providing equivalent protection, including, but not limited to, placing detectors in exhaust ducts from cells or behind protective guards listed for the purpose, are allowed when necessary to prevent damage or tampering.

2.	Sleeping units in Use Conditions 2 and 3 as described in Section 308.

3.	Smoke detectors are not required in sleeping units with four or fewer occupants in smoke compartments that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

[F] 907.2.7 Group M.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group M occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:

1.	The combined Group M occupant load of all floors is 500 or more persons.

2.	The Group M occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.

Exceptions:

1.	A manual fire alarm system is not required in covered or open mall buildings complying with Section 402.

2.	Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will automatically activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.

[F] 907.2.7.1 Occupant notification.

During times that the building is occupied, the initiation of a signal from a manual fire alarm box or from a waterflow switch shall not be required to activate the alarm notification appliances when an alarm signal is activated at a constantly attended location from which evacuation instructions shall be initiated over an emergency voice/alarm communication system installed in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.8 Group R-1.

Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in Group R-1 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.8.1 through 907.2.8.3.

[F] 907.2.8.1 Manual fire alarm system.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R- 1 occupancies.

Exceptions:

1.	A manual fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two stories in height where all individual sleeping units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces to those units are separated from each other and public or common areas by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public way, egress court or yard.

2.	Manual fire alarm boxes are not required throughout the building where all of the following conditions are met:

2.1.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.2.	The notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow.

2.3.	Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box is installed at an approved location.

[F] 907.2.8.2 Automatic smoke detection system.

An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units.

Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit.

[F] 907.2.8.3 Smoke alarms.

Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

[F] 907.2.9 Group R-2.

Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.9.1 through 907.2.9.3.

[F] 907.2.9.1 Manual fire alarm system.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies where any of the following conditions apply:

1.	Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located three or more stories above the lowest level of exit discharge.

2.	Any dwelling unit or sleeping unit is located more than one story below the highest level of exit discharge of exits serving the dwelling unit or sleeping unit.

3.	The building contains more than 16 dwelling units or sleeping units.

Exceptions:

1.	A fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two stories in height where all dwelling units or sleeping units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces are separated from each other and public or common areas by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each dwelling unit or sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public way, egress court or yard.

2.	Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the occupant notification appliances will automatically activate throughout the notification zones upon a sprinkler water flow.

3.	A fire alarm system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving dwelling units and are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, provided that dwelling units either have a means of egress door opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to the exits or are served by open-ended corridors designed in accordance with Section 1027.6, Exception 3.

[F] 907.2.9.2 Smoke alarms.

Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

[F] 907.2.9.3 Group R-2 college and university buildings.

An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-2 occupancies operated by a college or university for student or staff housing in all of the following locations:

1.	Common spaces outside of dwelling units and sleeping units.

2.	Laundry rooms, mechanical equipment rooms and storage rooms.

3.	All interior corridors serving sleeping units or dwelling units.

Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units or dwelling units and where each sleeping unit or dwelling unit either has a means of egress door opening directly to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit or a means of egress door opening directly to an exit.

Required smoke alarms in dwelling units and sleeping units in Group R-2 occupancies operated by a college or university for student or staff housing shall be interconnected with the fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 907.2.10 Group R-4.

Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.10.1 through 907.2.10.3.

[F] 907.2.10.1 Manual fire alarm system.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies.

Exceptions:

1.	A manual fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two stories in height where all individual sleeping units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces to those units are separated from each other and public or common areas by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public way, egress court or yard.

2.	Manual fire alarm boxes are not required throughout the building where all of the following conditions are met:

2.1.	The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.2.	The notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow.

2.3.	Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box is installed at an approved location.

3.	Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient sleeping areas shall not be required at exits where located at all nurses’ control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that the distances of travel required in Section 907.4.2.1 are not exceeded.

[F] 907.2.10.2 Automatic smoke detection system.

An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens.

Exceptions:

1.	Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2.	An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit.

[F] 907.2.10.3 Smoke alarms.

Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

[F] 907.2.11 Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.

Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance with Sections 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.6 and NFPA 72.

[F] 907.2.11.1 Group R-1.

Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all of the following locations in Group R-1:

1.	In sleeping areas.

2.	In every room in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area to the door leading from the sleeping unit.

3.	In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. For sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

[F] 907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1.

Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:

1.	On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.

2.	In each room used for sleeping purposes.

3.	In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

[F] 907.2.11.3 Installation near cooking appliances.

Smoke alarms shall not be installed in the following locations unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm in a location required by Section 907.2.11.1 or 907.2.11.2:

1.	Ionization smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 20 feet (6096 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

2.	Ionization smoke alarms with an alarm-silencing switch shall not be installed less than 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

3.	Photoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 6 feet (1829 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

[F] 907.2.11.4 Installation near bathrooms.

Smoke alarms shall be installed not less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally from the door or opening of a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm required by Section 907.2.11.1 or 907.2.11.2.

[F] 907.2.11.5 Interconnection.

Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in Group R or I-1 occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.

[F] 907.2.11.6 Power source.

In new construction, required smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be connected to an emergency electrical system in accordance with Section 2702. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.

Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system that complies with Section 2702.

[F] 907.2.11.7 Smoke detection system.

Smoke detectors listed in accordance with UL 268 and provided as part of the building fire alarm system shall be an acceptable alternative to single- and multiple-station smoke alarms and shall comply with the following:

1.	The fire alarm system shall comply with all applicable requirements in Section 907.

2.	Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall initiate alarm notification in the dwelling unit or sleeping unit in accordance with Section 907.5.2.

3.	Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall not activate alarm notification appliances outside of the dwelling unit or sleeping unit, provided that a supervisory signal is generated and monitored in accordance with Section 907.6.6.

[F] 907.2.12 Special amusement buildings.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be provided in special amusement buildings in accordance with Sections 907.2.12.1 through 907.2.12.3.

[F] 907.2.12.1 Alarm.

Activation of any single smoke detector, the automatic sprinkler system or any other automatic fire detection device shall immediately activate an audible and visible alarm at the building at a constantly attended location from which emergency action can be initiated, including the capability of manual initiation of requirements in Section 907.2.12.2.

[F] 907.2.12.2 System response.

The activation of two or more smoke detectors, a single smoke detector equipped with an alarm verification feature, the automatic sprinkler system or other approved fire detection device shall automatically do all of the following:

1.	Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface level.

2.	Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.

3.	Activate an approved directional exit marking that will become apparent in an emergency.

4.	Activate a prerecorded message, audible throughout the special amusement building, instructing patrons to proceed to the nearest exit. Alarm signals used in conjunction with the prerecorded message shall produce a sound that is distinctive from other sounds used during normal operation.

[F] 907.2.12.3 Emergency voice/alarm communication system.

An emergency voice/alarm communication system, which is also allowed to serve as a public address system, shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2 and be audible throughout the entire special amusement building.

[F] 907.2.13 High-rise buildings.

High-rise buildings shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire department communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Sections 412 and 907.2.22.

2.	Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.

3.	Buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1.

4.	Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1.

5.	Buildings with an occupancy in Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 in accordance with Section 415.

6.	In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound at a constantly attended location and occupant notification shall be broadcast by the emergency voice/alarm communication system.

[F] 907.2.13.1 Automatic smoke detection.

Automatic smoke detection in high-rise buildings shall be in accordance with Sections 907.2.13.1.1 and 907.2.13.1.2.

[F] 907.2.13.1.1 Area smoke detection.

Area smoke detectors shall be provided in accordance with this section. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an automatic fire alarm system. The activation of any detector required by this section shall activate the emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. In addition to smoke detectors required by Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.10, smoke detectors shall be located as follows:

1.	In each mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment or similar room that is not provided with sprinkler protection.

2.	In each elevator machine room, machinery space, control room and control space and in elevator lobbies.

[M] 907.2.13.1.2 Duct smoke detection.

Duct smoke detectors complying with Section 907.3.1 shall be located as follows:

1.	In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of each air-conditioning system having a capacity greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (0.94 m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct inlet.

2.	At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more stories from a return air duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system. In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke detector is allowed to be used in each return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet openings.

[F] 907.2.13.2 Fire department communication system.

Where a wired communication system is approved in lieu of an emergency communication coverage system in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the wired fire department communication system shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall operate between a fire command center complying with Section 911, elevators, elevator lobbies, emergency and standby power rooms, fire pump rooms, areas of refuge and inside interior exit stairways. The fire department communication device shall be provided at each floor level within the interior exit stairway.

[F] 907.2.14 Atriums connecting more than two stories.

A fire alarm system shall be installed in occupancies with an atrium that connects more than two stories, with smoke detection installed in locations required by a rational analysis in Section 909.4 and in accordance with the system operation requirements in Section 909.17. The system shall be activated in accordance with Section 907.5. Such occupancies in Group A, E or M shall be provided with an emergency voice/alarm communication system complying with the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.15 High-piled combustible storage areas.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed throughout high-piled combustible storage areas where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.16 Aerosol storage uses.

Aerosol storage rooms and general-purpose warehouses containing aerosols shall be provided with an approved manual fire alarm system where required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.17 Lumber, wood structural panel and veneer mills.

Lumber, wood structural panel and veneer mills shall be provided with a manual fire alarm system.

[F] 907.2.18 Underground buildings with smoke control systems.

Where a smoke control system is installed in an underground building in accordance with this code, automatic smoke detectors shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.18.1.

[F] 907.2.18.1 Smoke detectors.

Not fewer than one smoke detector listed for the intended purpose shall be installed in all of the following areas:

1.	Mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment, elevator machine or similar rooms.

2.	Elevator lobbies.

3.	The main return and exhaust air plenum of each air-conditioning system serving more than one story and located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct inlet.

4.	Each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more floors from return air ducts or plenums of heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems, except that in Group R occupancies, a listed smoke detector is allowed to be used in each return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet openings.

[F] 907.2.18.2 Alarm required.

Activation of the smoke control system shall activate an audible alarm at a constantly attended location.

[F] 907.2.19 Deep underground buildings.

Where the lowest level of a structure is more than 60 feet (18 288 mm) below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge, the structure shall be equipped throughout with a manual fire alarm system, including an emergency voice/alarm communication system installed in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.20 Covered and open mall buildings.

Where the total floor area exceeds 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) within either a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building, an emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be provided. Emergency voice/alarm communication systems serving a mall, required or otherwise, shall be accessible to the fire department. The system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

[F] 907.2.21 Residential aircraft hangars.

Not fewer than one single-station smoke alarm shall be installed within a residential aircraft hangar as defined in Chapter 2 and shall be interconnected into the residential smoke alarm or other sounding device to provide an alarm that will be audible in all sleeping areas of the dwelling.

[F] 907.2.22 Airport traffic control towers.

An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be provided in airport control towers in accordance with Sections 907.2.22.1 and 907.2.22.2.

Exception: Audible appliances shall not be installed within the control tower cab.

[F] 907.2.22.1 Airport traffic control towers with multiple exits and automatic sprinklers.

Airport traffic control towers with multiple exits and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be provided with smoke detectors in all of the following locations:

1.	Airport traffic control cab.

2.	Electrical and mechanical equipment rooms.

3.	Airport terminal radar and electronics rooms.

4.	Outside each opening into interior exit stairways.

5.	Along the single means of egress permitted from observation levels.

6.	Outside each opening into the single means of egress permitted from observation levels.

[F] 907.2.22.2 Other airport traffic control towers.

Airport traffic control towers with a single exit or where sprinklers are not installed throughout shall be provided with smoke detectors in all of the following locations:

1.	Airport traffic control cab.

2.	Electrical and mechanical equipment rooms.

3.	Airport terminal radar and electronics rooms.

4.	Office spaces incidental to the tower operation.

5.	Lounges for employees, including sanitary facilities.

6.	Means of egress.

7.	Accessible utility shafts.

[F] 907.2.23 Battery rooms.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed in areas containing stationary storage battery systems as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.24 Capacitor energy storage systems.

An automatic smoke detection system shall be installed in areas containing capacitor energy storage systems as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.2.25 Group S.

A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group S public and self-storage occupancies three stories or greater in height for interior corridors and interior common areas. Visible notification appliances are not required within storage units.

Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow.

[F] 907.3 Fire safety functions.

Automatic fire detectors utilized for the purpose of performing fire safety functions shall be connected to the building’s fire alarm control unit where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Detectors shall, upon actuation, perform the intended function and activate the alarm notification appliances or activate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. In buildings not equipped with a fire alarm system, the automatic fire detector shall be powered by normal electrical service and, upon actuation, perform the intended function. The detectors shall be located in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors.

Smoke detectors installed in ducts shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity present in the duct. Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control unit when a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location and shall perform the intended fire safety function in accordance with this code and the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. In facilities that are required to be monitored by a supervising station, duct smoke detectors shall report only as a supervisory signal and not as a fire alarm. They shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection.

Exceptions:

1.	The supervisory signal at a constantly attended location is not required where duct smoke detectors activate the building's alarm notification appliances.

2.	In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an approved location. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be identified as air duct detector trouble.

[F] 907.3.2 Delayed egress locks.

Where delayed egress locks are installed on means of egress doors in accordance with Section 1010.2.13, an automatic smoke or heat detection system shall be installed as required by that section.

[F] 907.3.3 Elevator emergency operation.

Automatic fire detectors installed for elevator emergency operation shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of ASME A17.1/CSA B44 and NFPA 72.

[F] 907.3.4 Wiring.

The wiring to the auxiliary devices and equipment used to accomplish the fire safety functions shall be monitored for integrity in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 907.4 Initiating devices.

Where a fire alarm system is required by another section of this code, occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be initiated by one or more of the following. Initiating devices shall be installed in accordance with Sections 907.4.1 through 907.4.3.1.

1.	Manual fire alarm boxes.

2.	Automatic fire detectors.

3.	Automatic sprinkler system waterflow devices.

4.	Automatic fire-extinguishing systems.

[F] 907.4.1 Protection of fire alarm control unit.

In areas that are not continuously occupied, a single smoke detector shall be provided at the location of each fire alarm control unit, notification appliance circuit power extenders, and supervising station transmitting equipment.

Exception: Where ambient conditions prohibit installation of a smoke detector, a heat detector shall be permitted.

[F] 907.4.2 Manual fire alarm boxes.

Where a manual fire alarm system is required by another section of this code, it shall be activated by fire alarm boxes installed in accordance with Sections 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.6.

[F] 907.4.2.1 Location.

Manual fire alarm boxes shall be located not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the entrance to each exit. In buildings not protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, additional manual fire alarm boxes shall be located so that the exit access travel distance to the nearest box does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm).

[F] 907.4.2.2 Height.

The height of the manual fire alarm boxes shall be not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) and not more than 48 inches (1372 mm) measured vertically, from the floor level to the activating handle or lever of the box.

[F] 907.4.2.3 Color.

Manual fire alarm boxes shall be red in color.

[F] 907.4.2.4 Signs.

Where fire alarm systems are not monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with Section 907.6.6, an approved permanent sign shall be installed adjacent to each manual fire alarm box that reads: WHEN ALARM SOUNDS CALL FIRE DEPARTMENT.

Exception: Where the manufacturer has permanently provided this information on the manual fire alarm box.

[F] 907.4.2.5 Protective covers.

The fire code official is authorized to require the installation of listed manual fire alarm box protective covers to prevent malicious false alarms or to provide the manual fire alarm box with protection from physical damage. The protective cover shall be transparent or red in color with a transparent face to permit visibility of the manual fire alarm box. Each cover shall include proper operating instructions. A protective cover that emits a local alarm signal shall not be installed unless approved. Protective covers shall not project more than that permitted by Section 1003.3.3.

[F] 907.4.2.6 Unobstructed and unobscured.

Manual fire alarm boxes shall be accessible, unobstructed, unobscured and visible at all times.

[F] 907.4.3 Automatic smoke detection.

Where an automatic smoke detection system is required it shall utilize smoke detectors unless ambient conditions prohibit such an installation. In spaces where smoke detectors cannot be utilized due to ambient conditions, approved automatic heat detectors shall be permitted.

[F] 907.4.3.1 Automatic sprinkler system.

For conditions other than specific fire safety functions noted in Section 907.3, in areas where ambient conditions prohibit the installation of smoke detectors, an automatic sprinkler system installed in such areas in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and that is connected to the fire alarm system shall be approved as automatic heat detection.

[F] 907.5 Occupant notification.

Occupant notification by fire alarms shall be in accordance with Sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.3. Occupant notification by smoke alarms in Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies shall comply with Section 907.5.2.1.3.2.

[F] 907.5.1 Alarm activation and annunciation.

Upon activation, fire alarm systems shall initiate occupant notification and shall annunciate at the fire alarm control unit, or where allowed elsewhere in Section 907, at a constantly attended location.

[F] 907.5.1.1 Presignal feature.

A presignal feature shall only be provided where approved. The presignal shall be annunciated at an approved constantly attended location having the capability to activate the occupant notification system in the event of fire or other emergency.

[F] 907.5.2 Alarm notification appliances.

Alarm notification appliances shall be provided and shall be listed for their purpose.

[F] 907.5.2.1 Audible alarms.

Audible alarm notification appliances shall be provided and emit a distinctive sound that is not to be used for any purpose other than that of a fire alarm.

Exceptions:

1.	Audible alarm notification appliances are not required in critical care areas of Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancies that are in compliance with Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.

2.	A visible alarm notification appliance installed in a nurses’ control station or other continuously attended staff location in a Group I-2 Condition 2 suite shall be an acceptable alternative to the installation of audible alarm notification appliances throughout the suite in Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancies that are in compliance with Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.

3.	Where provided, audible notification appliances located in each occupant evacuation elevator lobby in accordance with Section 3008.9.1 shall be connected to a separate notification zone for manual paging only.

[F] 907.5.2.1.1 Average sound pressure.

The audible alarm notification appliances shall provide a sound pressure level of 15 decibels (dBA) above the average ambient sound level or 5 dBA above the maximum sound level having a duration of not less than 60 seconds, whichever is greater, in every occupiable space within the building.

[F] 907.5.2.1.2 Maximum sound pressure.

The total sound pressure level produced by combining the ambient sound pressure level with all audible notification appliances operating shall not exceed 110 dBA at the minimum hearing distance from the audible appliance. Where the average ambient noise is greater than 105 dBA, visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 72 and audible alarm notification appliances shall not be required.

[F] 907.5.2.1.3 Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 and R-2 sleeping rooms.

Audible signal frequency in Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies shall be in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.1.3.1 and 907.2.1.3.2.

[F] 907.5.2.1.3.1 Fire alarm system signal.

In sleeping rooms of Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, the audible alarm activated by a fire alarm system shall be a 520-Hz low-frequency signal complying NFPA 72.

[F] 907.5.2.1.3.2 Smoke alarm signal in sleeping rooms.

In sleeping rooms of Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies that are required by Section 907.2.8 or 907.2.9 to have a fire alarm system, the audible alarm signal activated by single- or multiple-station smoke alarms in the dwelling unit or sleeping unit shall be a 520-Hz signal complying NFPA 72.

Where a sleeping room smoke alarm is unable to produce a 520-Hz signal, the 520-Hz alarm signal shall be provided by a listed notification appliance or a smoke detector with an integral 520-Hz sounder.

[F] 907.5.2.2 Emergency voice/alarm communication systems.

Emergency voice/alarm communication systems required by this code shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The operation of any automatic fire detector, sprinkler waterflow device or manual fire alarm box shall automatically sound an alert tone followed by voice instructions giving approved information and directions for a general or staged evacuation in accordance with the building’s fire safety and evacuation plans required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. In high-rise buildings, the system shall operate on at least the alarming floor, the floor above and the floor below. Speakers shall be provided throughout the building by paging zones. At a minimum, paging zones shall be provided as follows:

1.	Elevator groups.

2.	Interior exit stairways.

3.	Each floor.

4.	Areas of refuge as defined in Chapter 2.

Exception: In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound in a constantly attended area and a general occupant notification shall be broadcast over the overhead page.

[F] 907.5.2.2.1 Manual override.

A manual override for emergency voice communication shall be provided on a selective and all-call basis for all paging zones.

[F] 907.5.2.2.2 Live voice messages.

The emergency voice/alarm communication system shall have the capability to broadcast live voice messages by paging zones on a selective and all-call basis.

[F] 907.5.2.2.3 Alternate uses.

The emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be allowed to be used for other announcements, provided the manual fire alarm use takes precedence over any other use.

[F] 907.5.2.2.4 Emergency voice/alarm communication captions.

Where stadiums, arenas and grandstands have 15,000 fixed seats or more and provide audible public announcements, the emergency/voice alarm communication system shall provide prerecorded or real-time captions. Prerecorded or live emergency captions shall be from an approved location constantly attended by personnel trained to respond to an emergency.

[F] 907.5.2.2.5 Standby emergency power.

Emergency voice/alarm communications systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702.

[F] 907.5.2.3 Visible alarms.

Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.3.1 through 907.5.2.3.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Visible alarm notification appliances are not required in alterations, except where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, or a new fire alarm system is installed.

2.	Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in exits as defined in Chapter 2.

3.	Visible alarm notification appliances shall not be required in elevator cars.

4.	Visual alarm notification appliances are not required in critical care areas of Group I-2 Condition 2 occupancies that are in compliance with Section 907.2.6, Exception 2.

[F] 907.5.2.3.1 Public use areas and common use areas.

Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in public use areas and common use areas.

Exception: Where employee work areas have audible alarm coverage, the notification appliance circuits serving the employee work areas shall be initially designed with not less than 20-percent spare capacity to account for the potential of adding visible notification appliances in the future to accommodate hearing-impaired employee(s).

[F] 907.5.2.3.2 Groups I-1 and R-1.

Habitable spaces in dwelling units and sleeping units in Group I-1 and R-1 occupancies in accordance with Table 907.5.2.3.2 shall be provided with visible alarm notification. Visible alarms shall be activated by the in-room smoke alarm and the building fire alarm system.

[F] TABLE 907.5.2.3.2

VISIBLE ALARMS

NUMBER OF SLEEP
UNITS
	SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS WITH VISIBLE
ALARMS

6 to 25	2
26 to 50	4
51 to 75	7
76 to 100	9
101 to 150	12
151 to 200	14
201 to 300	17
301 to 400	20
401 to 500	22
501 to 1,000	5% of total
1,001 and over	50 plus 3 for each 100 over 1,000
[F] 907.5.2.3.3 Group R-2.

In Group R-2 occupancies required by Section 907 to have a fire alarm system, each story that contains dwelling units and sleeping units shall be provided with the capability to support visible alarm notification appliances in accordance with Chapter 11. Such capability shall accommodate wired or wireless equipment. The future capability shall include one of the following:

1.	The interconnection of the building fire alarm system with the unit smoke alarms.

2.	The replacement of audible appliances with combination audible/visible appliances.

3.	The future extension of the existing wiring from the unit smoke alarm locations to required locations for visible appliances.

[F] 907.6 Installation and monitoring.

A fire alarm system shall be installed and monitored in accordance with Sections 907.6.1 through 907.6.6.2 and NFPA 72.

[F] 907.6.1 Wiring.

Wiring shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 70 and NFPA 72. Wireless protection systems utilizing radio-frequency transmitting devices shall comply with the special requirements for supervision of low-power wireless systems in NFPA 72.

[F] 907.6.2 Power supply.

The primary and secondary power supply for the fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with NFPA 72.

Exception: Back-up power for single-station and multiple-station smoke alarms as required in Section 907.2.11.6.

[F] 907.6.3 Initiating device identification.

The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, as appropriate.

Exceptions:

1.	Fire alarm systems in single-story buildings less than 22,500 square feet (2090 m2) in area.

2.	Fire alarm systems that only include manual fire alarm boxes, waterflow initiating devices and not more than 10 additional alarm-initiating devices.

3.	Special initiating devices that do not support individual device identification.

4.	Fire alarm systems or devices that are replacing existing equipment.

[F] 907.6.3.1 Annunciation.

The initiating device status shall be annunciated at an approved on-site location.

[F] 907.6.4 Zones.

Each floor shall be zoned separately and a zone shall not exceed 22,500 square feet (2090 m2). The length of any zone shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm) in any direction.

Exception: Automatic sprinkler system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13.

[F] 907.6.4.1 Zoning indicator panel.

A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls shall be provided in an approved location. The visual zone indication shall lock in until the system is reset and shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible-alarm silencing switch.

[F] 907.6.4.2 High-rise buildings.

In high-rise buildings, a separate zone by floor shall be provided for each of the following types of alarm-initiating devices where provided:

1.	Smoke detectors.

2.	Sprinkler waterflow devices.

3.	Manual fire alarm boxes.

4.	Other approved types of automatic fire detection devices or suppression systems.

[F] 907.6.5 Access.

Access shall be provided to each fire alarm device and notification appliance for periodic inspection, maintenance and testing.

[F] 907.6.6 Monitoring.

Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the Florida Fire Prevention Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72.

Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for:

1.	Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.

2.	Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies.

3.	Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.

[F] 907.6.6.1 Transmission of alarm signals.

Transmission of alarm signals to a supervising station shall be in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 907.6.6.2 Termination of monitoring service.

Termination of fire alarm monitoring services shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 907.7 Acceptance tests and completion.

Upon completion of the installation, the fire alarm system and all fire alarm components shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 72.

[F] 907.7.1 Single- and multiple-station alarm devices.

When the installation of the alarm devices is complete, each device and interconnecting wiring for multiple-station alarm devices shall be tested in accordance with the smoke alarm provisions of NFPA 72.

[F] 907.7.2 Record of completion.

A record of completion in accordance with NFPA 72 verifying that the system has been installed and tested in accordance with the approved plans and specifications shall be provided.

[F] 907.7.3 Instructions.

Operating, testing and maintenance instructions and record drawings (“as-builts”) and equipment specifications shall be provided at an approved location.

[F] 907.8 Inspection, testing and maintenance.

The maintenance and testing schedules and procedures for fire alarm and fire detection systems shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

907.9 Accessibility.

Alarm systems required to be accessible shall comply with the applicable sections of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

SECTION 908
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
[F] 908.1 Group H occupancies.

Emergency alarms for the detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group H occupancies shall be provided in accordance with Section 415.5.

[F] 908.2 Group H-5 occupancy.

Emergency alarms for notification of an emergency condition in an HPM facility shall be provided as required in Section 415.11.4.

[F] 908.3 Fire alarm system interface.

Where an emergency alarm system is interfaced with a building's fire alarm system, the signal produced at the fire alarm control unit shall be a supervisory signal.

SECTION 909
SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEMS
[F] 909.1 Scope and purpose.

This section applies to mechanical or passive smoke control systems where they are required by other provisions of this code. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for the design, installation and acceptance testing of smoke control systems that are intended to provide a tenable environment for the evacuation or relocation of occupants. These provisions are not intended for the preservation of contents, the timely restoration of operations or for assistance in fire suppression or overhaul activities. Smoke control systems regulated by this section serve a different purpose than the smoke- and heat-venting provisions found in Section 910. Mechanical smoke control systems shall not be considered exhaust systems under Chapter 5 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

[F] 909.2 General design requirements.

Buildings, structures or parts thereof required by this code to have a smoke control system or systems shall have such systems designed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 909 and the generally accepted and well-established principles of engineering relevant to the design. The construction documents shall include sufficient information and detail to adequately describe the elements of the design necessary for the proper implementation of the smoke control systems. These documents shall be accompanied by sufficient information and analysis to demonstrate compliance with these provisions.

[F] 909.3 Special inspection and test requirements.

In addition to the ordinary inspection and test requirements that buildings, structures and parts thereof are required to undergo, smoke control systems subject to the provisions of Section 909 shall undergo special inspections and tests sufficient to verify the proper commissioning of the smoke control design in its final installed condition. The design submission accompanying the construction documents shall clearly detail procedures and methods to be used and the items subject to such inspections and tests. Such commissioning shall be in accordance with generally accepted engineering practice and, where possible, based on published standards for the particular testing involved.

[F] 909.4 Analysis.

A rational analysis supporting the types of smoke control systems to be employed, their methods of operation, the systems supporting them and the methods of construction to be utilized shall accompany the submitted construction documents and shall include, but not be limited to, the items indicated in Sections 909.4.1 through 909.4.7.

[F] 909.4.1 Stack effect.

The system shall be designed such that the maximum probable normal or reverse stack effect will not adversely interfere with the system’s capabilities. In determining the maximum probable stack effect, altitude, elevation, weather history and interior temperatures shall be used.

[F] 909.4.2 Temperature effect of fire.

Buoyancy and expansion caused by the design fire in accordance with Section 909.9 shall be analyzed. The system shall be designed such that these effects do not adversely interfere with the system’s capabilities.

[F] 909.4.3 Wind effect.

The design shall consider the adverse effects of wind. Such consideration shall be consistent with the wind-loading provisions of Chapter 16.

[F] 909.4.4 HVAC systems.

The design shall consider the effects of the heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems on both smoke and fire transport. The analysis shall include all permutations of systems status. The design shall consider the effects of the fire on the HVAC systems.

[F] 909.4.5 Climate.

The design shall consider the effects of low temperatures on systems, property and occupants. Air inlets and exhausts shall be located so as to prevent snow or ice blockage.

[F] 909.4.6 Duration of operation.

All portions of active or engineered smoke control systems shall be capable of continued operation after detection of the fire event for a period of not less than either 20 minutes or 1.5 times the calculated egress time, whichever is greater.

[F] 909.4.7 Smoke control system interaction.

The design shall consider the interaction effects of the operation of multiple smoke control systems for all design scenarios.

[F] 909.5 Smoke barrier construction.

Smoke barriers required for passive smoke control and a smoke control system using the pressurization method shall comply with Section 709. The maximum allowable leakage area shall be the aggregate area calculated using the following leakage area ratios:

1.	Walls A/Aw = 0.00100

2.	Interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways: A/Aw = 0.00035

3.	Enclosed exit access stairways and ramps and all other shafts: A/Aw = 0.00150

4.	Floors and roofs: A/AF = 0.00050

where:

A = Total leakage area, square feet (m2).

AF = Unit floor or roof area of barrier, square feet (m2).

Aw = Unit wall area of barrier, square feet (m2).

The leakage area ratios shown do not include openings due to gaps around doors and operable windows. The total leakage area of the smoke barrier shall be determined in accordance with Section 909.5.1 and tested in accordance with Section 909.5.2.

[F] 909.5.1 Total leakage area.

Total leakage area of the barrier is the product of the smoke barrier gross area multiplied by the allowable leakage area ratio, plus the area of other openings such as gaps around doors and operable windows.

[F] 909.5.2 Testing of leakage area.

Compliance with the maximum total leakage area shall be determined by achieving the minimum air pressure difference across the barrier with the system in the smoke control mode for mechanical smoke control systems utilizing the pressurization method. Compliance with the maximum total leakage area of passive smoke control systems shall be verified through methods such as door fan testing or other methods, as approved by the fire code official.

[F] 909.5.3 Opening protection.

Openings in smoke barriers shall be protected by automatic-closing devices actuated by the required controls for the mechanical smoke control system. Door openings shall be protected by fire door assemblies complying with Section 716.5.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Passive smoke control systems with automatic-closing devices actuated by spot-type smoke detectors listed for releasing service installed in accordance with Section 907.3.

2.	Fixed openings between smoke zones that are protected utilizing the airflow method.

3.	In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where a pair of opposite-swinging doors are installed across a corridor in accordance with Section 909.5.3.1, the doors shall not be required to be protected in accordance with Section 716. The doors shall be close-fitting within operational tolerances and shall not have a center mullion or undercuts in excess of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm), louvers or grilles. The doors shall have head and jamb stops and astragals or rabbets at meeting edges and, where permitted by the door manufacturer’s listing, positive-latching devices are not required.

4.	In Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where such doors are special-purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding door assemblies installed in accordance with Section 1010.3.3 and are automatic closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4.

5.	Group I-3.

6.	Openings between smoke zones with clear ceiling heights of 14 feet (4267 mm) or greater and bank-down capacity of greater than 20 minutes as determined by the design fire size.

[F] 909.5.3.1 Group I-1 Condition 2; Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities.

In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where doors are installed across a corridor, the doors shall be automatic closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4 and shall have a vision panel with fire protection-rated glazing materials in fire protection-rated frames, the area of which shall not exceed that tested.

[F] 909.5.3.2 Ducts and air transfer openings.

Ducts and air transfer openings are required to be protected with a minimum Class II, 250°F (121°C) smoke damper complying with Section 717.

[F] 909.6 Pressurization method.

The primary mechanical means of controlling smoke shall be by pressure differences across smoke barriers. Maintenance of a tenable environment is not required in the smoke control zone of fire origin.

[F] 909.6.1 Minimum pressure difference.

The minimum pressure difference across a smoke barrier shall be 0.05-inch water gage (0.0124 kPa) in fully sprinklered buildings.

In buildings permitted to be other than fully sprinklered, the smoke control system shall be designed to achieve pressure differences not less than two times the maximum calculated pressure difference produced by the design fire.

[F] 909.6.2 Maximum pressure difference.

The maximum air pressure difference across a smoke barrier shall be determined by required door-opening or closing forces. The actual force required to open exit doors when the system is in the smoke control mode shall be in accordance with Section 1010.1.3. Opening and closing forces for other doors shall be determined by standard engineering methods for the resolution of forces and reactions. The calculated force to set a side-hinged, swinging door in motion shall be determined by:

(Equation 9-1)

where:

A = Door area, square feet (m2).

d = Distance from door handle to latch edge of door, feet (m).

F = Total door opening force, pounds (N).

Fdc = Force required to overcome closing device, pounds (N).

K = Coefficient 5.2 (1.0).

W = Door width, feet (m).

ΔP= Design pressure difference, inches of water (Pa).

[F] 909.6.3 Pressurized stairways and elevator hoistways.

Where stairways or elevator hoistways are pressurized, such pressurization systems shall comply with Section 909 as smoke control systems, in addition to the requirements of Sections 909.20 of this code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 909.7 Airflow design method.

Where approved by the fire code official, smoke migration through openings fixed in a permanently open position, which are located between smoke control zones by the use of the airflow method, shall be permitted. The design airflow shall be in accordance with this section. Airflow shall be directed to limit smoke migration from the fire zone. The geometry of openings shall be considered to prevent flow reversal from turbulent effects. Smoke control systems using the airflow method shall be designed in accordance with NFPA 92.

[F] 909.7.1 Prohibited conditions.

This method shall not be employed where either the quantity of air or the velocity of the airflow will adversely affect other portions of the smoke control system, unduly intensify the fire, disrupt plume dynamics or interfere with exiting. In no case shall airflow toward the fire exceed 200 feet per minute (1.02 m/s). Where the calculated airflow exceeds this limit, the airflow method shall not be used.

[F] 909.8 Exhaust method.

Where approved by the fire code official, mechanical smoke control for large enclosed volumes, such as in atriums or malls, shall be permitted to utilize the exhaust method. Smoke control systems using the exhaust method shall be designed in accordance with NFPA 92.

[F] 909.8.1 Smoke layer.

The height of the lowest horizontal surface of the smoke layer interface shall be maintained not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above a walking surface that forms a portion of a required egress system within the smoke zone.

[F] 909.9 Design fire.

The design fire shall be based on a rational analysis performed by the registered design professional and approved by the fire code official. The design fire shall be based on the analysis in accordance with Section 909.4 and this section.

[F] 909.9.1 Factors considered.

The engineering analysis shall include the characteristics of the fuel, fuel load, effects included by the fire and whether the fire is likely to be steady or unsteady.

[F] 909.9.2 Design fire fuel.

Determination of the design fire shall include consideration of the type of fuel, fuel spacing and configuration.

[F] 909.9.3 Heat-release assumptions.

The analysis shall make use of best available data from approved sources and shall not be based on excessively stringent limitations of combustible material.

[F] 909.9.4 Sprinkler effectiveness assumptions.

A documented engineering analysis shall be provided for conditions that assume fire growth is halted at the time of sprinkler activation.

[F] 909.10 Equipment.

Equipment including, but not limited to, fans, ducts, automatic dampers and balance dampers, shall be suitable for its intended use, suitable for the probable exposure temperatures that the rational analysis indicates and as approved by the fire code official.

[F] 909.10.1 Exhaust fans.

Components of exhaust fans shall be rated and certified by the manufacturer for the probable temperature rise to which the components will be exposed. This temperature rise shall be computed by:

(Equation 9-2)

where:

c = Specific heat of smoke at smoke layer temperature, Btu/lb°F (kJ/kg · K).

m = Exhaust rate, pounds per second (kg/s).

Qc = Convective heat output of fire, Btu/s (kW).

Ta = Ambient temperature, °F (K).

Ts = Smoke temperature, °F (K).

Exception: Reduced Ts as calculated based on the assurance of adequate dilution air.

[F] 909.10.2 Ducts.

Duct materials and joints shall be capable of withstanding the probable temperatures and pressures to which they are exposed as determined in accordance with Section 909.10.1. Ducts shall be constructed and supported in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. Ducts shall be leak tested to 1.5 times the maximum design pressure in accordance with nationally accepted practices. Measured leakage shall not exceed 5 percent of design flow. Results of such testing shall be a part of the documentation procedure. Ducts shall be supported directly from fire-resistance-rated structural elements of the building by substantial, noncombustible supports.

Exception: Flexible connections, for the purpose of vibration isolation, complying with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and that are constructed of approved fire-resistance-rated materials.

[F] 909.10.3 Equipment, inlets and outlets.

Equipment shall be located so as to not expose uninvolved portions of the building to an additional fire hazard. Outside air inlets shall be located so as to minimize the potential for introducing smoke or flame into the building. Exhaust outlets shall be so located as to minimize reintroduction of smoke into the building and to limit exposure of the building or adjacent buildings to an additional fire hazard.

[F] 909.10.4 Automatic dampers.

Automatic dampers, regardless of the purpose for which they are installed within the smoke control system, shall be listed and conform to the requirements of approved, recognized standards.

[F] 909.10.5 Fans.

In addition to other requirements, belt-driven fans shall have 1.5 times the number of belts required for the design duty, with the minimum number of belts being two. Fans shall be selected for stable performance based on normal temperature and, where applicable, elevated temperature. Calculations and manufacturer’s fan curves shall be part of the documentation procedures. Fans shall be supported and restrained by noncombustible devices in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.

Motors driving fans shall not be operated beyond their nameplate horsepower (kilowatts), as determined from measurement of actual current draw, and shall have a minimum service factor of 1.15.

[F] 909.11 Standby power.

Smoke control systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702.

[F] 909.11.1 Equipment room.

The standby power source and its transfer switches shall be in a room separate from the normal power transformers and switch gears and ventilated directly to and from the exterior. The room shall be enclosed with not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 909.11.2 Power sources and power surges.

Elements of the smoke control system relying on volatile memories or the like shall be supplied with uninterruptable power sources of sufficient duration to span 15-minute primary power interruption. Elements of the smoke control system susceptible to power surges shall be suitably protected by conditioners, suppressors or other approved means.

[F] 909.12 Detection and control systems.

Fire detection systems providing control input or output signals to mechanical smoke control systems or elements thereof shall comply with the requirements of Section 907. Such systems shall be equipped with a control unit complying with UL 864 and listed as smoke control equipment.

[F] 909.12.1 Verification.

Control systems for mechanical smoke control systems shall include provisions for verification. Verification shall include positive confirmation of actuation, testing, manual override and the presence of power downstream of all disconnects. A preprogrammed weekly test sequence shall report abnormal conditions audibly, visually and by printed report. The preprogrammed weekly test shall operate all devices, equipment and components used for smoke control.

Exception: Where verification of individual components tested through the preprogrammed weekly testing sequence will interfere with, and produce unwanted effects to, normal building operation, such individual components are permitted to be bypassed from the preprogrammed weekly testing, where approved by the building official and in accordance with both of the following:

1.	Where the operation of components is bypassed from the preprogrammed weekly test, presence of power downstream of all disconnects shall be verified weekly by a listed control unit.

2.	Testing of all components bypassed from the preprogrammed weekly test shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 909.12.2 Wiring.

In addition to meeting requirements of NFPA 70, all wiring, regardless of voltage, shall be fully enclosed within continuous raceways.

[F] 909.12.3 Activation.

Smoke control systems shall be activated in accordance with this section.

[F] 909.12.3.1 Pressurization, airflow or exhaust method.

Mechanical smoke control systems using the pressurization, airflow or exhaust method shall have completely automatic control.

[F] 909.12.3.2 Passive method.

Passive smoke control systems actuated by approved spot-type detectors listed for releasing service shall be permitted.

[F] 909.12.4 Automatic control.

Where completely automatic control is required or used, the automatic-control sequences shall be initiated from an appropriately zoned automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1, manual controls that are readily accessible to the fire department and any smoke detectors required by engineering analysis.

[F] 909.13 Control air tubing.

Control air tubing shall be of sufficient size to meet the required response times. Tubing shall be flushed clean and dry prior to final connections and shall be adequately supported and protected from damage. Tubing passing through concrete or masonry shall be sleeved and protected from abrasion and electrolytic action.

[F] 909.13.1 Materials.

Control-air tubing shall be hard-drawn copper, Type L, ACR in accordance with ASTM B42, ASTM B43, ASTM B68, ASTM B88, ASTM B251 and ASTM B280. Fittings shall be wrought copper or brass, solder type in accordance with ASME B16.18 or ASME B16.22. Changes in direction shall be made with appropriate tool bends. Brass compression-type fittings shall be used at final connection to devices; other joints shall be brazed using a BCuP-5 brazing alloy with solidus above 1,100°F (593°C) and liquids below 1,500°F (816°C). Brazing flux shall be used on copper-to-brass joints only.

Exception: Nonmetallic tubing used within control panels and at the final connection to devices provided all of the following conditions are met:

1.	Tubing shall comply with the requirements of Section 602.2.1.3 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

2.	Tubing and connected devices shall be completely enclosed within a galvanized or paint-grade steel enclosure having a minimum thickness of 0.0296 inch (0.7534 mm) (No. 22 gage). Entry to the enclosure shall be by copper tubing with a protective grommet of neoprene or Teflon or by suitable brass compression to male barbed adapter.

3.	Tubing shall be identified by appropriately documented coding.

4.	Tubing shall be neatly tied and supported within the enclosure.Tubing bridging cabinets and doors or moveable devices shall be of sufficient length to avoid tension and excessive stress. Tubing shall be protected against abrasion. Tubing serving devices on doors shall be fastened along hinges.

[F] 909.13.2 Isolation from other functions.

Control tubing serving other than smoke control functions shall be isolated by automatic isolation valves or shall be an independent system.

[F] 909.13.3 Testing.

Control air tubing shall be tested at three times the operating pressure for not less than 30 minutes without any noticeable loss in gauge pressure prior to final connection to devices.

[F] 909.14 Marking and identification.

The detection and control systems shall be clearly marked at all junctions, accesses and terminations.

[F] 909.15 Control diagrams.

Identical control diagrams showing all devices in the system and identifying their location and function shall be maintained current and kept on file with the fire code official, the fire department and in the fire command center in a format and manner approved by the fire chief.

[F] 909.16 Fire fighter’s smoke control panel.

A fire fighter’s smoke control panel for fire department emergency response purposes only shall be provided and shall include manual control or override of automatic control for mechanical smoke control systems. The panel shall be located in a fire command center complying with Section 911 in high-rise buildings or buildings with smoke-protected assembly seating. In all other buildings, the fire fighter’s smoke control panel shall be installed in an approved location adjacent to the fire alarm control panel. The fire fighter’s smoke control panel shall comply with Sections 909.16.1 through 909.16.3.

[F] 909.16.1 Smoke control systems.

Fans within the building shall be shown on the fire fighter’s control panel. A clear indication of the direction of airflow and the relationship of components shall be displayed. Status indicators shall be provided for all smoke control equipment, annunciated by fan and zone, and by pilot-lamp-type indicators as follows:

1.	Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their normal status—WHITE.

2.	Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their off or closed status—RED.

3.	Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their on or open status—GREEN.

4.	Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in a fault status—YELLOW/AMBER.

[F] 909.16.2 Smoke control panel.

The fire fighter’s control panel shall provide control capability over the complete smoke control system equipment within the building as follows:

1.	ON-AUTO-OFF control over each individual piece of operating smoke control equipment that can also be controlled from other sources within the building. This includes stairway pressurization fans; smoke exhaust fans; supply, return and exhaust fans; elevator shaft fans and other operating equipment used or intended for smoke control purposes.

2.	OPEN-AUTO-CLOSE control over individual dampers relating to smoke control and that are also controlled from other sources within the building.

3.	ON-OFF or OPEN-CLOSE control over smoke control and other critical equipment associated with a fire or smoke emergency and that can only be controlled from the fire fighter’s control panel.

Exceptions:

1.	Complex systems, where approved, where the controls and indicators are combined to control and indicate all elements of a single smoke zone as a unit.

2.	Complex systems, where approved, where the control is accomplished by computer interface using approved, plain English commands.

[F] 909.16.3 Control action and priorities.

The fire-fighter’s control panel actions shall be as follows:

1.	ON-OFF and OPEN-CLOSE control actions shall have the highest priority of any control point within the building. Once issued from the fire fighter’s control panel, automatic or manual control from any other control point within the building shall not contradict the control action. Where automatic means are provided to interrupt normal, nonemergency equipment operation or produce a specific result to safeguard the building or equipment including, but not limited to, duct freezestats, duct smoke detectors, high-temperature cutouts, temperature-actuated linkage and similar devices, such means shall be capable of being overridden by the fire fighter’s control panel. The last control action as indicated by each fire fighter’s control panel switch position shall prevail. Control actions shall not require the smoke control system to assume more than one configuration at any one time.

Exception: Power disconnects required by NFPA 70.

2.	Only the AUTO position of each three-position fire-fighter’s control panel switch shall allow automatic or manual control action from other control points within the building. The AUTO position shall be the NORMAL, nonemergency, building control position. Where a fire fighter’s control panel is in the AUTO position, the actual status of the device (on, off, open, closed) shall continue to be indicated by the status indicator described in Section 909.16.1. Where directed by an automatic signal to assume an emergency condition, the NORMAL position shall become the emergency condition for that device or group of devices within the zone. Control actions shall not require the smoke control system to assume more than one configuration at any one time.

[F] 909.17 System response time.

Smoke-control system activation shall be initiated immediately after receipt of an appropriate automatic or manual activation command. Smoke control systems shall activate individual components (such as dampers and fans) in the sequence necessary to prevent physical damage to the fans, dampers, ducts and other equipment. For purposes of smoke control, the fire fighter’s control panel response time shall be the same for automatic or manual smoke control action initiated from any other building control point. The total response time, including that necessary for detection, shutdown of operating equipment and smoke control system startup, shall allow for full operational mode to be achieved before the conditions in the space exceed the design smoke condition. Upon receipt of an alarm condition at the fire alarm control panel, fans, dampers and automatic doors shall have achieved their proper operating state and final status shall be indicated at the smoke control panel within 90 seconds. The system response time for each component and their sequential relationships shall be detailed in the required rational analysis and verification of their installed condition reported in the required final report.

[F] 909.18 Acceptance testing.

Devices, equipment, components and sequences shall be individually tested. These tests, in addition to those required by other provisions of this code, shall consist of determination of function, sequence and, where applicable, capacity of their installed condition.

[F] 909.18.1 Detection devices.

Smoke or fire detectors that are a part of a smoke control system shall be tested in accordance with Chapter 9 in their installed condition. Where applicable, this testing shall include verification of airflow in both minimum and maximum conditions.

[F] 909.18.2 Ducts.

Ducts that are part of a smoke control system shall be traversed using generally accepted practices to determine actual air quantities.

[F] 909.18.3 Dampers.

Dampers shall be tested for function in their installed condition.

[F] 909.18.4 Inlets and outlets.

Inlets and outlets shall be read using generally accepted practices to determine air quantities.

[F] 909.18.5 Fans.

Fans shall be examined for correct rotation. Measurements of voltage, amperage, revolutions per minute (rpm) and belt tension shall be made.

[F] 909.18.6 Smoke barriers.

Measurements using inclined manometers or other approved calibrated measuring devices shall be made of the pressure differences across smoke barriers. Such measurements shall be conducted for each possible smoke control condition.

[F] 909.18.7 Controls.

Each smoke zone equipped with an automatic-initiation device shall be put into operation by the actuation of one such device. Each additional device within the zone shall be verified to cause the same sequence without requiring the operation of fan motors in order to prevent damage. Control sequences shall be verified throughout the system, including verification of override from the fire-fighter’s control panel and simulation of standby power conditions.

[F] 909.18.8 Testing for smoke control.

Smoke control systems shall be tested by a special inspector.

[F] 909.18.8.1 Scope of testing.

Testing shall be conducted in accordance with the following:

1.	During erection of ductwork and prior to concealment for the purposes of leakage testing and recording of device location.

2.	Prior to occupancy and after sufficient completion for the purposes of pressure-difference testing, flow measurements, and detection and control verification.

[F] 909.18.8.2 Qualifications.

Approved agencies for smoke control testing shall have expertise in fire protection engineering, mechanical engineering and certification as air balancers.

[F] 909.18.8.3 Reports.

A complete report of testing shall be prepared by the approved agency. The report shall include identification of all devices by manufacturer, nameplate data, design values, measured values and identification tag or mark. The report shall be reviewed by the responsible registered design professional and, when satisfied that the design intent has been achieved, the responsible registered design professional shall sign, seal and date the report.

[F] 909.18.8.3.1 Report filing.

A copy of the final report shall be filed with the fire code official and an identical copy shall be maintained in an approved location at the building.

[F] 909.18.9 Identification and documentation.

Charts, drawings and other documents identifying and locating each component of the smoke control system, and describing its proper function and maintenance requirements, shall be maintained on file at the building as an attachment to the report required by Section 909.18.8.3. Devices shall have an approved identifying tag or mark on them consistent with the other required documentation and shall be dated indicating the last time they were successfully tested and by whom.

[F] 909.19 System acceptance.

Buildings, or portions thereof, required by this code to comply with this section shall not be issued a certificate of occupancy until such time that the fire code official determines that the provisions of this section have been fully complied with and that the fire department has received satisfactory instruction on the operation, both automatic and manual, of the system and a written maintenance program complying with the requirements of the Florida Fire Prevention Code has been submitted and approved by the fire code official.

Exception: In buildings of phased construction, a temporary certificate of occupancy, as approved by the fire code official, shall be allowed provided that those portions of the building to be occupied meet the requirements of this section and that the remainder does not pose a significant hazard to the safety of the proposed occupants or adjacent buildings.

909.20 Smokeproof enclosures.

Where required by Section 1023.11, a smokeproof enclosure shall be constructed in accordance with this section. A smokeproof enclosure shall consist of an interior exit stairway or ramp that is enclosed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 1023 and an open exterior balcony, ventilated vestibule or pressurized stair and pressurized entrance vestibule meeting the requirements of this section. Where access to the roof is required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code, such access shall be from the smokeproof enclosure where a smokeproof enclosure is required.

909.20.1 Access.

Access to the stairway or ramp shall be by way of a vestibule or an open exterior balcony. The minimum dimension of the vestibule shall be not less than the required width of the corridor leading to the vestibule but shall not have a width of less than 44 inches (1118 mm) and shall not have a length of less than 72 inches (1829 mm) in the direction of egress travel.

909.20.2 Construction.

The smokeproof enclosure shall be separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Openings are not permitted other than the required means of egress doors. The vestibule shall be separated from the stairway or ramp by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The open exterior balcony shall be constructed in accordance with the fire-resistance rating requirements for floor assemblies.

909.20.2.1 Door closers.

Doors in a smokeproof enclosure shall be self- or automatic closing by actuation of a smoke detector in accordance with Section 716.5.9.4 and shall be installed at the floor-side entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. The actuation of the smoke detector on any door shall activate the closing devices on all doors in the smokeproof enclosure at all levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.

909.20.3 Natural ventilation alternative.

The provisions of Sections 909.20.3.1 through 909.20.3.3 shall apply to ventilation of smokeproof enclosures by natural means.

909.20.3.1 Balcony doors.

Where access to the stairway or ramp is by way of an open exterior balcony, the door assembly into the enclosure shall be a fire door assembly in accordance with Section 716.

909.20.3.2 Vestibule doors.

Where access to the stairway or ramp is by way of a vestibule, the door assembly into the vestibule shall be a fire door assembly complying with Section 716. The door assembly from the vestibule to the stairway shall have not less than a 20-minute fire protection rating complying with Section 716.

909.20.3.3 Vestibule ventilation.

Each vestibule shall have a minimum net area of 16 square feet (1.5 m2) of opening in a wall facing an outer court, yard or public way that is not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) in width.

909.20.4 Mechanical ventilation alternative.

The provisions of Sections 909.20.4.1 through 909.20.4.4 shall apply to ventilation of smokeproof enclosures by mechanical means.

909.20.4.1 Vestibule doors.

The door assembly from the building into the vestibule shall be a fire door assembly complying with Section 716.5.3. The door assembly from the vestibule to the stairway or ramp shall not have less than a 20-minute fire protection rating and shall meet the requirements for a smoke door assembly in accordance with Section 716.5.3. The door shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 105.

909.20.4.2 Vestibule ventilation.

The vestibule shall be supplied with not less than one air change per minute and the exhaust shall be not less than 150 percent of supply. Supply air shall enter and exhaust air shall discharge from the vestibule through separate, tightly constructed ducts used only for that purpose. Supply air shall enter the vestibule within 6 inches (152 mm) of the floor level. The top of the exhaust register shall be located at the top of the smoke trap but not more than 6 inches (152 mm) down from the top of the trap, and shall be entirely within the smoke trap area. Doors in the open position shall not obstruct duct openings. Duct openings with controlling dampers are permitted where necessary to meet the design requirements, but dampers are not otherwise required.

909.20.4.2.1 Engineered ventilation system.

Where a specially engineered system is used, the system shall exhaust a quantity of air equal to not less than 90 air changes per hour from any vestibule in the emergency operation mode and shall be sized to handle three vestibules simultaneously. Smoke detectors shall be located at the floor-side entrance to each vestibule and shall activate the system for the affected vestibule. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.

909.20.4.3 Smoke trap.

The vestibule ceiling shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) higher than the door opening into the vestibule to serve as a smoke and heat trap and to provide an upward-moving air column. The height shall not be decreased unless approved and justified by design and test.

909.20.4.4 Stairway or ramp shaft air movement system.

The stairway or ramp shaft shall be provided with a dampered relief opening and supplied with sufficient air to maintain a minimum positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water (25 Pa) in the shaft relative to the vestibule with all doors closed.

909.20.5 Stairway and ramp pressurization alternative.

Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the vestibule is not required, provided each interior exit stairway or ramp is pressurized to not less than 0.10 inch of water (25 Pa) and not more than 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect.

909.20.6 Pressurized stair and vestibule alternative.

The provisions of Sections 909.20.6.1 through 909.20.6.3 shall apply to smokeproof enclosures using a pressurized stair and pressurized entrance vestibule.

909.20.6.1 Vestibule doors.

The door assembly from the building into the vestibule shall be a fire door assembly complying with Section 716.5.3. The door assembly from the vestibule to the stairway shall not have less than a 20-minute fire protection rating and meet the requirements for a smoke door assembly in accordance with Section 716.5.3. The door shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 105.

909.20.6.2 Pressure difference.

The stair enclosure shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.05 inch of water gage (12.44 Pa) positive pressure relative to the vestibule with all stairway doors closed under the maximum anticipated stack pressures. The vestibule, with doors closed, shall have a minimum of 0.05 inch of water gage (12.44 Pa) positive pressure relative to the fire floor. The pressure difference across doors shall not exceed 30 pounds (133-N) maximum force to begin opening the door.

909.20.6.3 Dampered relief opening.

A controlled relief vent capable of discharging a minimum of 2,500 cubic feet per minute (1180 L/s) of air at the design pressure difference shall be located in the upper portion of the pressurized exit enclosure.

909.20.7 Ventilating equipment.

The activation of ventilating equipment required by the alternatives in Sections 909.20.4, 909.20.5 and 909.20.6 shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway and ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3.

909.20.7.1 Ventilation systems.

Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

2.	Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

3.	Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exception: Control wiring and power wiring located outside of a 2-hour fire barrier construction shall be protected using any one of the following methods:

1.	Cables used for survivability of required critical circuits shall be listed in accordance with UL 2196 and shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

2.	Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.

3.	Electrical circuit protective systems shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Electrical circuit protective systems shall be installed in accordance with their listing requirements.

909.20.7.2 Standby power.

Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702.

909.20.7.3 Acceptance and testing.

Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the building official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements.

909.21 Elevator hoistway pressurization alternative.

Where elevator hoistway pressurization is provided in lieu of required enclosed elevator lobbies, the pressurization system shall comply with Sections 909.21.1 through 909.21.11.

909.21.1 Pressurization requirements.

Elevator hoistways shall be pressurized to maintain a minimum positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water (25 Pa) and a maximum positive pressure of 0.25 inch of water (67 Pa) with respect to adjacent occupied space on all floors. This pressure shall be measured at the midpoint of each hoistway door, with all elevator cars at the floor of recall and all hoistway doors on the floor of recall open and all other hoistway doors closed. The pressure differentials shall be measured between the hoistway and the adjacent elevator landing. The opening and closing of hoistway doors at each level must be demonstrated during this test. The supply air intake shall be from an outside, uncontaminated source located a minimum distance of 20 feet (6096 mm) from any air exhaust system or outlet.

Exceptions:

1.	On floors containing only Group R occupancies, the pressure differential is permitted to be measured between the hoistway and a dwelling unit or sleeping unit.

2.	Where an elevator opens into a lobby enclosed in accordance with Section 3007.6 or 3008.6, the pressure differential is permitted to be measured between the hoistway and the space immediately outside the door(s) from the floor to the enclosed lobby.

3.	The pressure differential is permitted to be measured relative to the outdoor atmosphere on floors other than the following:

3.1.	The fire floor.

3.2.	The two floors immediately below the fire floor.

3.3.	The floor immediately above the fire floor.

4.	The minimum positive pressure of 0.10 inch of water (25 Pa) and a maximum positive pressure of 0.25 inch of water (67 Pa) with respect to occupied floors are not required at the floor of recall with the doors open.

909.21.1.1 Use of ventilation systems.

Ventilation systems, other than hoistway supply air systems, are permitted to be used to exhaust air from adjacent spaces on the fire floor, two floors immediately below and one floor immediately above the fire floor to the building’s exterior where necessary to maintain positive pressure relationships as required in Section 909.21.1 during operation of the elevator shaft pressurization system.

909.21.2 Rational analysis.

A rational analysis complying with Section 909.4 shall be submitted with the construction documents.

909.21.3 Ducts for system.

Any duct system that is part of the pressurization system shall be protected with the same fire-resistance rating as required for the elevator shaft enclosure.

909.21.4 Fan system.

The fan system provided for the pressurization system shall be as required by Sections 909.21.4.1 through 909.21.4.4.

909.21.4.1 Fire resistance.

Where located within the building, the fan system that provides the pressurization shall be protected with the same fire-resistance rating required for the elevator shaft enclosure.

909.21.4.2 Smoke detection.

The fan system shall be equipped with a smoke detector that will automatically shut down the fan system when smoke is detected within the system.

909.21.4.3 Separate systems.

A separate fan system shall be used for each elevator hoistway.

909.21.4.4 Fan capacity.

The supply fan shall be either adjustable with a capacity of not less than 1,000 cfm (0.4719 m3/s) per door, or that specified by a registered design professional to meet the requirements of a designed pressurization system.

909.21.5 Standby power.

The pressurization system shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702.

909.21.6 Activation of pressurization system.

The elevator pressurization system shall be activated upon activation of either the building fire alarm system or the elevator lobby smoke detectors. Where both a building fire alarm system and elevator lobby smoke detectors are present, each shall be independently capable of activating the pressurization system.

909.21.7 Testing.

Testing for performance shall be required in accordance with Section 909.18.8. System acceptance shall be in accordance with Section 909.19.

909.21.8 Marking and identification.

Detection and control systems shall be marked in accordance with Section 909.14.

909.21.9 Control diagrams.

Control diagrams shall be provided in accordance with Section 909.15.

909.21.10 Control panel.

A control panel complying with Section 909.16 shall be provided.

909.21.11 System response time.

Hoistway pressurization systems shall comply with the requirements for smoke control system response time in Section 909.17.

SECTION 910
SMOKE AND HEAT REMOVAL
[F] 910.1 General.

Where required by this code, smoke and heat vents or mechanical smoke removal systems shall conform to the requirements of this section.

[F] 910.2 Where required.

Smoke and heat vents or a mechanical smoke removal system shall be installed as required by Sections 910.2.1 and 910.2.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Frozen food warehouses used solely for storage of Class I and II commodities where protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.

2.	Smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers.

3.	Smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m · s)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers.

910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1.

Smoke and heat vents installed in accordance with Section 910.3 or a mechanical smoke removal system installed in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed in buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more than 50,000 square feet (4645 m2) of undivided area. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 where the upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal system in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed.

Exception: Group S-1 aircraft repair hangars.

[F] 910.2.2 High-piled combustible storage.

Smoke and heat removal required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code for buildings and portions thereof containing high-piled combustible storage shall be installed in accordance with Section 910.3 in unsprinklered buildings. In buildings and portions thereof containing high-piled combustible storage equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, a smoke and heat removal system shall be installed in accordance with Section 910.3 or 910.4. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where the upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal system in accordance with Section 910.4 shall be installed.

[F] 910.3 Smoke and heat vents.

The design and installation of smoke and heat vents shall be in accordance with Sections 910.3.1 through 910.3.3.

[F] 910.3.1 Listing and labeling.

Smoke and heat vents shall be listed and labeled to indicate compliance with UL 793 or FM 4430.

[F] 910.3.2 Smoke and heat vent locations.

Smoke and heat vents shall be located 20 feet (6096 mm) or more from adjacent lot lines and fire walls and 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from fire barriers. Vents shall be uniformly located within the roof in the areas of the building where the vents are required to be installed by Section 910.2 with consideration given to roof pitch, sprinkler location and structural members.

910.3.3 Smoke and heat vents area.

The required aggregate area of smoke and heat vents shall be calculated as follows:

For buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1:

(Equation 9-3)

where:

AVR = The required aggregate vent area (ft2).

V = Volume (ft3) of the area that requires smoke removal.

For unsprinklered buildings:

(Equation 9-4)

where:

AVR = The required aggregate vent area (ft2).

AFA = The area of the floor in the area that requires smoke removal.

910.3.4 Vent operation.

Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means.

910.3.5 Fusible link temperature rating.

Where vents are installed in areas provided with automatic fire sprinklers and the vents operate by fusible link, the fusible link shall have a temperature rating of 360° F (182° C).

[F] 910.4 Mechanical smoke removal systems.

Mechanical smoke removal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections 910.4.1 through 910.4.7.

910.4.1 Automatic sprinklers required.

The building shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

910.4.2 Exhaust fan construction.

Exhaust fans that are part of a mechanical smoke removal system shall be rated for operation at 221°F (105°C). Exhaust fan motors shall be located outside of the exhaust fan air stream.

910.4.3 System design criteria.

The mechanical smoke removal system shall be sized to exhaust the building at a minimum rate of two air changes per hour based upon the volume of the building or portion thereof without contents. The capacity of each exhaust fan shall not exceed 30,000 cubic feet per minute (14.2 m3/s).

910.4.3.1 Makeup air.

Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust.

910.4.4 Activation.

The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated by manual controls only.

910.4.5 Manual control location.

Manual controls shall be located so as to be accessible to the fire service from an exterior door of the building and protected against interior fire exposure by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 910.4.6 Control wiring.

Wiring for operation and control of mechanical smoke removal systems shall be connected ahead of the main disconnect in accordance with Section 701.12E of NFPA 70 and be protected against interior fire exposure to temperatures in excess of 1,000°F (538°C) for a period of not less than 15 minutes.

[F] 910.4.7 Controls.

Where building air-handling and mechanical smoke removal systems are combined or where independent building air-handling systems are provided, fans shall automatically shut down in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Mechanical. The manual controls provided for the smoke removal system shall have the capability to override the automatic shutdown of fans that are part of the smoke removal system.

910.5 Maintenance.

Smoke and heat vents and mechanical smoke removal systems shall be maintained in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 911
FIRE COMMAND CENTER
[F] 911.1 General.

Where required by other sections of this code and in buildings classified as high-rise buildings by this code, a fire command center for fire department operations shall be provided and shall comply with Sections 911.1.1 through 911.1.6.

[F] 911.1.1 Location and access.

The location and accessibility of the fire command center shall be approved by the fire chief.

[F] 911.1.2 Separation.

The fire command center shall be separated from the remainder of the building by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

[F] 911.1.3 Size.

The room shall be not less than 200 square feet (19 m2) with a minimum dimension of 10 feet (3048 mm).

[F] 911.1.4 Layout approval.

A layout of the fire command center and all features required by this section to be contained therein shall be submitted for approval prior to installation.

[F] 911.1.5 Storage.

Storage unrelated to operation of the fire command center shall be prohibited.

[F] 911.1.6 Required features.

The fire command center shall comply with NFPA 72 and shall contain all of the following features:

1.	The emergency voice/alarm communication system control unit.

2.	The fire department communications system.

3.	Fire detection and alarm system annunciator.

4.	Annunciator unit visually indicating the location of the elevators and whether they are operational.

5.	Status indicators and controls for air distribution systems.

6.	The fire fighter’s control panel required by Section 909.16 for smoke control systems installed in the building.

7.	Controls for unlocking interior exit stairway doors simultaneously.

8.	Sprinkler valve and waterflow detector display panels.

9.	Emergency and standby power status indicators.

10.	A telephone for fire department use with controlled access to the public telephone system.

11.	Fire pump status indicators.

12.	Schematic building plans indicating the typical floor plan and detailing the building core, means of egress, fire protection systems, fire fighter air replenishment system, fire-fighting equipment and fire department access and the location of fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions.

13.	An approved Building Information Card that contains, but is not limited to, the following information:

13.1.	General building information that includes: property name, address, the number of floors in the building above and below grade, use and occupancy classification (for mixed uses, identify the different types of occupancies on each floor), and the estimated building population during the day, night and weekend.

13.2.	Building emergency contact information that includes: a list of the building’s emergency contacts including but not limited to building manager and building engineer and their respective work phone number, cell phone number, e-mail address.

13.3.	Building construction information that includes: the type of building construction including but not limited to floors, walls, columns, and roof assembly.

13.4.	Exit access and exit stairway information that includes: number of exit access and exit stairways in the building, each exit access and exit stairway designation and floors served, location where each exit access and exit stairway discharges, interior exit stairways that are pressurized, exit stairways provided with emergency lighting, each exit stairway that allows reentry, exit stairways providing roof access; elevator information that includes: number of elevator banks, elevator bank designation, elevator car numbers and respective floors that they serve; location of elevator machine rooms, control rooms and control spaces; location of sky lobby, location of freight elevator banks.

13.5.	Building services and system information that includes: location of mechanical rooms, location of building management system, location and capacity of all fuel oil tanks, location of emergency generator, location of natural gas service.

13.6.	Fire protection system information that includes: location of standpipes, location of fire pump room, location of fire department connections, floors protected by automatic sprinklers, location of different types of automatic sprinkler systems installed including, but not limited to, dry, wet and pre-action.

13.7.	Hazardous material information that includes: location of hazardous material, quantity of hazardous material.

14.	Work table.

15.	Generator supervision devices, manual start and transfer features.

16.	Public address system, where specifically required by other sections of this code.

17.	Elevator fire recall switch in accordance with ASME A17.1/BSA 44.

18.	Elevator emergency or standby power selector switch(es), where emergency or standby power is provided.

SECTION 912
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
[F] 912.1 Installation.

Fire department connections shall be installed in accordance with the NFPA standard applicable to the system design and shall comply with Sections 912.2 through 912.6.

[F] 912.2 Location.

With respect to hydrants, driveways, buildings and landscaping, fire department connections shall be so located that fire apparatus and hose connected to supply the system will not obstruct access to the buildings for other fire apparatus. The location of fire department connections shall be approved by the fire chief.

[F] 912.2.1 Visible location.

Fire department connections shall be located on the street side of buildings, fully visible and recognizable from the street or nearest point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the fire chief.

[F] 912.2.2 Existing buildings.

On existing buildings, wherever the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such sign shall have the letters “FDC” not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high and words in letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate the location. Such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code official.

[F] 912.3 Fire hose threads.

Fire hose threads used in connection with standpipe systems shall be approved and shall be compatible with fire department hose threads.

[F] 912.4 Access.

Immediate access to fire department connections shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes, trees, walls or any other fixed or moveable object. Access to fire department connections shall be approved by the fire chief.

Exception: Fences, where provided with an access gate equipped with a sign complying with the legend requirements of this section and a means of emergency operation. The gate and the means of emergency operation shall be approved by the fire chief and maintained operational at all times.

[F] 912.4.1 Locking fire department connection caps.

The fire code official is authorized to require locking caps on fire department connections for water-based fire protection systems where the responding fire department carries appropriate key wrenches for removal.

[F] 912.4.2 Clear space around connections.

A working space of not less than 36 inches (762 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78 inches (1981 mm) in height shall be provided and maintained in front of and to the sides of wall-mounted fire department connections and around the circumference of free-standing fire department connections, except as otherwise required or approved by the fire chief.

[F] 912.4.3 Physical protection.

Where fire department connections are subject to impact by a motor vehicle, vehicle impact protection shall be provided in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 912.5 Signs.

A metal sign with raised letters not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in size shall be mounted on all fire department connections serving automatic sprinklers, standpipes or fire pump connections. Such signs shall read: AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS or STANDPIPES or TEST CONNECTION or a combination thereof as applicable. Where the fire department connection does not serve the entire building, a sign shall be provided indicating the portions of the building served.

[P] 912.6 Backflow protection.

The potable water supply to automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be protected against backflow as required by the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

SECTION 913
FIRE PUMPS
[F] 913.1 General.

Where provided, fire pumps for fire protection systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 20.

Exception: Pumps for automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 or Section P2904 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

[F] 913.2 Protection against interruption of service.

The fire pump, driver and controller shall be protected in accordance with NFPA 20 against possible interruption of service through damage caused by explosion, fire, flood, rodents, insects, windstorm, freezing, vandalism and other adverse conditions.

913.2.1 Protection of fire pump rooms.

Fire pumps shall be located in rooms that are separated from all other areas of the building by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exceptions:

1.	In other than high-rise buildings, separation by 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, shall be permitted in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2.	Separation is not required for fire pumps physically separated in accordance with NFPA 20.

[F] 913.2.2 Circuits supplying fire pumps.

Cables used for survivability of circuits supplying fire pumps shall be protected using one of the following methods:

1.	Cables used for survivability of required critical circuits shall be listed in accordance with UL 2196 and shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.	Electrical circuit protective systems shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Electrical circuit protective systems shall be installed in accordance with their listing requirements.

3.	Construction having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

4.	The cable or raceway is encased in a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) of concrete.

Exception: This section shall not apply to cables, or portions of cables, located within a fire pump room or generator room which is separated from the remainder of the occupancy with fire-resistance-rated construction.

[F] 913.3 Temperature of pump room.

Suitable means shall be provided for maintaining the temperature of a pump room or pump house, where required, above 40°F (5°C).

[F] 913.3.1 Engine manufacturer’s recommendation.

Temperature of the pump room, pump house or area where engines are installed shall never be less than the minimum recommended by the engine manufacturer. The engine manufacturer’s recommendations for oil heaters shall be followed.

[F] 913.4 Valve supervision.

Where provided, the fire pump suction, discharge and bypass valves, and isolation valves on the backflow prevention device or assembly shall be supervised open by one of the following methods:

1.	Central-station, proprietary or remote-station signaling service.

2.	Local signaling service that will cause the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended location.

3.	Locking valves open.

4.	Sealing of valves and approved weekly recorded inspection where valves are located within fenced enclosures under the control of the owner.

[F] 913.4.1 Test outlet valve supervision.

Fire pump test outlet valves shall be supervised in the closed position.

[F] 913.5 Acceptance test.

Acceptance testing shall be done in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 20.

SECTION 914
EMERGENCY RESPONDER SAFETY FEATURES
[F] 914.1 Shaftway markings.

Vertical shafts shall be identified as required by Sections 914.1.1 and 914.1.2.

[F] 914.1.1 Exterior access to shaftways.

Outside openings accessible to the fire department and that open directly on a hoistway or shaftway communicating between two or more floors in a building shall be plainly marked with the word “SHAFTWAY” in red letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high on a white background. Such warning signs shall be placed so as to be readily discernible from the outside of the building.

[F] 914.1.2 Interior access to shaftways.

Door or window openings to a hoistway or shaftway from the interior of the building shall be plainly marked with the word “SHAFTWAY” in red letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high on a white background. Such warning signs shall be placed so as to be readily discernible.

Exception: Markings shall not be required on shaftway openings that are readily discernible as openings onto a shaftway by the construction or arrangement.

[F] 914.2 Equipment room identification.

Fire protection equipment shall be identified in an approved manner. Rooms containing controls for air-conditioning systems, sprinkler risers and valves or other fire detection, suppression or control elements shall be identified for the use of the fire department. Approved signs required to identify fire protection equipment and equipment location shall be constructed of durable materials, permanently installed and readily visible.

SECTION 915
CARBON MONOXIDE PROTECTION
915.1 Carbon monoxide protection.

Every separate building or an addition to an existing building for which a permit for new construction is issued and having a fossil-fuel-burning heater or appliance, a fireplace, an attached garage, or other feature, fixture, or element that emits carbon monoxide as a byproduct of combustion shall have an operational carbon monoxide alarm installed within 10 feet (3050 mm) of each room used for sleeping purposes in the new building or addition, or at such other locations as required by this code.

Exceptions:

1.	An approved operational carbon monoxide detector shall only be required to be installed inside or directly outside of each room or area where a fossilfuel-burning heater, engine or appliance is located within a hospital, inpatient hospice facility or skilled nursing home facility licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration, or a new state correctional institution. The carbon monoxide detector shall be connected to the fire-alarm system of the hospital, inpatient hospice facility or nursing home facility as a supervisory signal.

2.	This section shall not apply to existing buildings that are undergoing alterations or repairs unless the alteration is an addition as defined in Section 915.1.3.

915.1.1 Carbon monoxide alarm.

The requirements of Section 915.1 shall be satisfied by providing for one of the following alarm installations:

1.	A hard-wired carbon monoxide alarm.

2.	A battery-powered carbon monoxide alarm.

3.	A hard-wired combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarm.

4.	A battery-powered combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarm.

915.1.2 Combination alarms.

Combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

915.1.3

Addition shall mean an extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or height of a building or structure.

SECTION 916
GAS DETECTION SYSTEMS
[F] 916.1 Gas detection systems.

Gas detection systems required by this code shall comply with Sections 916.2 through 916.11.

[F] 916.2 Permits.

Permits shall be required as set forth in the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

[F] 916.2.1 Construction documents.

Documentation of the gas detection system design and equipment to be used that demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this code shall be provided with the application for permit.

[F] 916.3 Equipment.

Gas detection system equipment shall be designed for use with the gases being detected and shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.

[F] 916.4 Power connections.

Gas detection systems shall be permanently connected to the building electrical power supply or shall be permitted to be cord connected to an unswitched receptacle using an approved restraining means that secures the plug to the receptacle.

[F] 916.5 Emergency and standby power.

Standby or emergency power shall be provided or the gas detection system shall initiate a trouble signal at an approved location if the power supply is interrupted.

[F] 916.6 Sensor locations.

Sensors shall be installed in approved locations where leaking gases are expected to accumulate.

[F] 916.7 Gas sampling.

Gas sampling shall be performed continuously. Sample analysis shall be processed immediately after sampling, except as follows:

1.	For HPM gases, sample analysis shall be performed at intervals not exceeding 30 minutes.

2.	For toxic gases, sample analysis shall be performed at intervals not exceeding 5 minutes in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

3.	Where a less frequent or delayed sampling interval is approved.

[G] 916.8 System activation.

A gas detection alarm shall be initiated where any sensor detects a concentration of gas exceeding the following thresholds:

1.	For flammable gases, a gas concentration exceeding 25 percent of the lower flammability limit (LFL).

2.	For nonflammable gases, a gas concentration exceeding one-half of the IDLH, unless a different threshold is specified by the section of this code requiring a gas detection system.

Upon activation of a gas detection alarm, alarm signals or other required responses shall be as specified by the section of this code requiring a gas detection system. Audible and visible alarm signals associated with a gas detection alarm shall be distinct from fire alarm and carbon monoxide alarm signals.

[F] 916.9 Signage.

Signs shall be provided adjacent to gas detection system alarm signaling devices that advise occupants of the nature of the signals and actions to take in response to the signal.

[F] 916.10 Fire alarm system connections.

Gas sensors and gas detection systems shall not be connected to fire alarm systems unless approved and connected in accordance with the fire alarm equipment manufacturer’s instructions.

[F] 916.11 Inspection, testing and sensor calibration.

Gas detection systems and sensors shall be inspected, tested and calibrated in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION 917
EMERGENCY RESPONDER RADIO COVERAGE
[F] 917.1 General.

Emergency responder radio coverage shall be provided in all new buildings in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-copyright]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Building Code, Building, 8th Edition (2023)




First Printing: July 2023

Second Printing: October 2024




ISBN: 978-1-960701-10-7 (loose-leaf edition)
ISBN: 978-1-960701-11-4 (PDF download)




COPYRIGHT © 2023
by
INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC.




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This Florida Building Code, Building, 8th Edition (2023) contains substantial copyrighted materials from the Florida Building Code, Building, 7th Edition (2020) and the 2021 International Building Code®, second printing, which are copyrighted works owned by the International Code Council, Inc. (“ICC”). Without separate written permission from the copyright owner, no part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation, electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example, and not limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage and/or retrieval system). For information on use rights and permissions, please contact: ICC Publications, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478; 1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233); https://www.iccsafe.org/about/periodicals-and-newsroom/icc-logo-license/.

Trademarks: “International Code Council,” the “International Code Council” logo, “ICC,” the “ICC” logo, “International Building Code,” “IBC” and other names and trademarks appearing in this publication are registered trademarks of the International Code Council, Inc., and/or its licensors (as applicable), and may not be used without permission.


PRINTED IN THE USA

T030685

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-index]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDEX
A
ACCESS OPENINGS
Attic
1209.2
Crawl space
1209.1
Doors
712
Fire damper
716
Fire department
402.7.5
Mechanical appliances
1209.3
Refuse/laundry chutes
708.13.3
ACCESSIBILITY
101.4.8, 1009, Chapter 11, Appendix E
Airports
412.3.5, E110
Assembly
1108.2
Bus stops
E108
Detention and correctional facilities
E104.1
Egress
(see ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS)
1009
Elevators
3001.3
Employee work areas
907.5.2.31
Existing buildings
1009.1
Gaming tables and machines
E105.3
Laundry
E105.2
Live/work unit
508.5.9
Platform
E103.1
Ramps
1012
Route
1003.3.4
Scoping
1101, E101
Signage
1009.8 through 1009.11
Transient lodging
E104.2
ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS
1009
Areas of refuge (see AREA OF REFUGE)
Assembly
1009.1, 1029.8
Existing building
1009.1
Exterior area for assisted rescue
(see EXTERIOR AREA FOR ASSISTED RESCUE)
Horizontal exit (see HORIZONTAL EXIT)
Mezzanine
1009.1
Required
1009.1
Signage
3002.3
ACCESSORY OCCUPANCIES
303.1.2, 303.1.4, 305.1.1, 312.1, 508.2
ADDITION
101.4.7, D103.1
Means of egress
3302.1, 3310
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
ADOBE CONSTRUCTION
202, 2109.3
AEROSOLS
202, 307, 311.2, 414.1.2.1, 414.2.5, 907.2.16
AGGREGATE
202
Ballast
1504.8
AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS
(see GROUP U)
312.1, 1103.2.4, Appendix C
AIR CONDITIONING
(see MECHANICAL)
2801.1, 3005.2
AIR INTAKES (see YARDS OR COURTS)
1206.3.2
AIRCRAFT HANGARS
412.4
Aircraft paint hangars
412.6, 507.10
Basements
412.4.2
Construction
412.4.1, 412.4.5, 412.6.2
Fire area
412.4.6.2
Fire suppression system
412.4.6, 412.6.5
Heliports and helistops
412.5, 905.3.6, 906.1, 1605.4
Residential
412.5, 907.2.21
Unlimited height and area
504.1, 507.10
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
412.7
AIRCRAFT-RELATED OCCUPANCIES
412, E110
Airport traffic control towers
412.3, 907.2.22
Traffic control towers
412.3
Alarms and detection
412.3.4, 412.3.5, 907.2.22
Construction type
412.3.1, 412.3.2
Egress
412.3.2, 412.3.3, 412.3.4
AISLE
1018, 1029.9, 1029.13
Aisle accessways
1018.4, 1029.12
Assembly seating
1018.2, 1029.6
Bleachers
1029.1.1
Business
1018.3
Construction
1029.11
Converging
1029.9.3
Egress
1018, 1029
Folding and telescopic seating
1029.1.1
Grandstands
1029.1.1
Mercantile
1018.3, 1018.4
Obstructions
1029.9.6
Tables
1029.13.1
Tents
3103.4
Transitions
1029.10
Width
1029.9
ALARM SYSTEMS, EMERGENCY
908
ALARMS, FIRE
(see FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS)
ALARMS, VISIBLE
907.5.2.3
Common areas
907.5.2.3.1
Employee work areas
907.5.2.3.1
Group I-1
907.5.2.3.2
Group R-1
907.5.2.3.2
Group R-2
907.5.2.3.3
Public areas
907.5.2.3.1
ALARMS, VOICE
907.5.2.2
Amusement buildings, special
411.6, 907.2.12.3
Covered and open mall buildings
402.7.4, 907.2.20,
Emergency power
2702.2.4
High-rise buildings
403.4.4, 907.2.13
Occupant evacuation elevators
3008.9
Underground buildings
405.8.2, 907.2.19
ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN
202
Load combinations
1605.2
Masonry design
2107
Wood design
2301.2, 2306
ALTERATIONS
101.4.7, D103.1
Means of egress
3302.1, 3310.2
ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICES
1011.14
Construction
1011.14.2
Equipment platform
505.3
Heliports
412.8.3
Technical production areas
410.6.3.4
ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, DESIGN AND METHODS
104.11
ALUMINUM
1404.5.1, 1604.3.5, Chapter 20
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES
422
Alarm and detection
907.2.2.1
Smoke compartment
422.2, 422.3
AMUSEMENT BUILDING, SPECIAL
411
Alarm and detection
411.3, 411.5, 907.2.12
Classification
411.1
Emergency voice/alarm communications system
411.6, 907.2.12.3
Exit marking
411.7, 411.7.1
Interior finish
411.8
Sprinklers protection
411.4
AMUSEMENT PARK STRUCTURES
303
ANCHOR STORE (see COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
402
Construction type
402.4.3
Means of egress
402.8.4.1
Occupant load
402.8.2.3
Separation
402.4.2.2, 402.4.2.3
Sprinkler protection
402.5
ANCHORAGE
1604.8
Concrete
1901.3
Decks
1604.8.3
Seismic anchorage for masonry chimneys
2113.4
Seismic anchorage for masonry fireplaces
2111.5
Walls
1604.8.2
APARTMENT HOUSES
310.4
Inspection
110.9
Sound Transmission
1207
APPROVED AGENCY
202, 1703.1
ARCHITECT (see definition for REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL)
ARCHITECTURAL TRIM
603.1, 1406.2.2, D102.2.7
AREA, BUILDING
Chapter 5, 506
Accessory uses
508.2
Aircraft hangars, residential
412.5.5
Covered and open mall building
402.4.1
Enclosed parking garage
406.6.1, 510.3
Equipment platforms
505.3
Incidental uses
509.3
Limitations
503, 506
Membrane structures
3102.4
Mezzanines
505.2.1
Mixed construction types
3102.6
Mixed occupancy
508.2.3, 508.3.2, 508.4.2
Modifications
506, 510
Open mall building
402.4.1
Open parking garage
406.5.4, 406.5.4.1, 406.5.5, 510.2, 510.3, 510.4, 510.7, 510.8, 510.9
Private garages and carports
406.3.1
Unlimited area
503.1.1, 503.1.3, 504.1.1, 506.1.1, 506.2, 507
AREA FOR ASSISTED RESCUE, EXTERIOR
(see EXTERIOR AREAS FOR ASSISTED RESCUE)
AREA OF REFUGE
(see ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS)
ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY (GROUP A)
303, 1029
Alarms and detection
907.2.1
Area
503, 506, 507, 508
Bleachers (see BLEACHERS)
Folding and telescopic seating (see BLEACHERS)
Grandstands (see GRANDSTANDS)
Group-specific provisions
A-1
303.2
A-2
303.3
A-3
303.4
A-4
303.5
A-5
303.6
Motion picture theater
409, 507.12
Special amusement buildings
411
Stages and platforms
410
Height
503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1, 1607.13.3
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.2, 1029.9, 1029.10
Assembly spaces
1029
Exit signs
1013.1
Guards
1015.2, 1029.16
Main exit
1029.2
Outdoors
1005.3.1, 1005.3.2, 1006.3, 1019.3, 1027, 1029.6.2
Panic hardware
1010.1.10, 1010.4.1
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3, 1006.3.2, 1029.7
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
508.2
Education
303.1.3
Live/work units
508.5
Mall buildings
402
Other occupancies
303.1.1, 303.1.2, 303.1.3
Parking below/above
510.7, 510.9
Religious facilities
303.1.4
Special mixed
510.2
Motion picture theaters
409, 507.11
Occupancy exceptions
303.1.1, 303.1.2, 303.1.3, 303.1.4, 305.1.1, 305.2.1
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Seating, fixed (see SEATING, FIXED)
Seating, smoke-protected
1029.6.2
Sprinkler protection
410, 504.3, 506.2, 507.3, 507.4, 507.6, 507.7, 507.12, 903.2.1
Stages and platforms
410, 905.3.4
Standpipes
905.3.2, 905.3.4, 905.5.1
Unlimited area
507.4, 507.4.1, 507.6, 507.7, 507.12
ASSISTED LIVING (see GROUP I-1)
308.3, 310.6
Sixteen or fewer residents (see Group R-4)
308.3.1, 308.3.2, 310.5.1
ATMOSPHERIC ICE LOADS
1614
ATRIUM
404
Alarms and detection
404.4, 907.2.14
Enclosure
404.6, 707.3.6
Interior finish
404.8
Smoke control
404.5, 909
Sprinkler protection
404.3
Standby power
404.7
Travel distance
404.9, 1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Use
404.2
ATTIC
Access
1209.2
Combustible storage
413.2
Draftstopping
718.4
Insulation
719
Live load
Table 1607.1
Unusable space fire protection
711.2.6
Ventilation
1203.2
AUDITORIUM
303, 305.1.1
Foyers and lobbies
1029.4
Interior balconies
1029.5
Motion picture projection rooms
409
Stages and platforms
410
AUTOMOBILE PARKING GARAGE
(see GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE PARKING)
406
AWNINGS
3105
Design and construction
3105.3
Drainage, water
3201.4
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.2.3, 3202.3.1, 3202.4
Fire district
D102.2.8
Live load
Table 1607.1, 1607.13.2.1, 1607.13.4
Materials
3105.4
Motor vehicle service stations
406.7.2
Permanent
D102.2.8
Plastic
2606.10
B
BALCONIES
Assembly
1029.5
Construction, exterior
1406.3
Guards
1015.2
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
1021, 1029.5
Open mall building
402.4.3, 402.5
Projection
705.2, 1406.3
Public right-of-way encroachments
3202.3.2, 3202.3.3
Travel distance
1017.2.1
BARBECUES
2801
BARRIERS
Fire (see FIRE BARRIER)
Pedestrian protection
3306
Smoke (see SMOKE BARRIER)
Vehicle
406.4.3, 1602.1, 1607.9.3
BASEMENT
Aircraft hangars
412.4.2
Area modification
506.1.3
Considered a story
202
Emergency escape
1030.1
Exits
106.3.2.2
Flood loads
1612.2, 1612.5
Height modifications for
510.5
Prohibited
415, 415.11.6.2, 418.1
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
Sprinkler protection
903.2.11.1
Waterproofing and dampproofing
1805
BASEMENT WALLS
Soil loads
1610.1
Waterproofing and dampproofing
1805
BATH AND BATHING ROOMS
(see TOILET AND TOILET ROOMS)
101.4.3, 105.2, Chapter 29
BAY AND ORIEL WINDOWS
1406.4
Public right-of-way encroachments
3202.3.2, 3202.3.3
BLEACHERS
303.6, 1029.1.1
Egress
1029.1.1
Live load
Table 1607.1
Occupant load
1004.7
Separation
1029.1.1.1
BLOCK (see CONCRETE BLOCK AND GLASS UNIT MASONRY)
BOARD OF APPEALS
Appendix B
Alternate members
B101.2.1
Application for appeal
B101.1
Board decision
B101.4
Membership of board
B101.2
Notice of meeting
B101.3
Qualifications
113.3, B101.2.2
BOILER ROOM
Exits
1006.2.2.1
BOLTS
2204.2
Anchor rods
1908, 1909, 2204.2
BONDING, MASONRY
2204.3
BRACED WALL LINE
202
BRACED WALL PANEL
202
BRICK (see MASONRY)
BUILDING
Area (see AREA, BUILDING)
502.1, 503, 505, 506, 507, 508, 510
Demolition
3303
Existing
101.4.7
Fire walls
706.1
Height (see HEIGHT, BUILDING)
502.1, 503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Occupancy classification
Chapter 3
Party walls
706.1.1
Safeguards during construction
Chapter 33
Special amusement
411.4
Threshold
202
BUILDING OFFICIAL
Approval
202
Qualifications
A101.1
Records
104.7
Termination
A101.4
BUILT-UP ROOFS
1507.10
BUSINESS OCCUPANCY (GROUP B)
303.1.1, 303.1.2, 304
Alarms and detection
907.2.2
Ambulatory care facilities
304, 422
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Height
503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.3
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.2, 508.3, 508.4
Accessory
303.1.2, 508.2
Ambulatory care facilities
422
Assembly
303.1.2
Educational
303.1, 304.1
Live/work units
508.5
Mall buildings
402
Parking below/above
510.7, 510.8, 510.9
Special mixed
510.2
Occupancy exceptions
303.1.1, 303.1.2
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Sprinkler protection
903.2.2
Unlimited area
507.4, 507.5
C
CABLES, STEEL STRUCTURAL
2208
CALCULATED FIRE RESISTANCE
(see FIRE RESISTANCE, CALCULATED)
CANOPIES
3105
Design and construction
3105.3
Drainage, water
3201.4
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.3.1
Fire district
D102.2.8
Live load
Table 1607.1, 1607.13.2.1, 1607.13.4
Materials
3105.4
Motor vehicle service stations
406.7.2
Permanent
D102.2.8
Plastic
2606.10
CARBON MONOXIDE
ALARMS AND DETECTION
915
CARE FACILITIES (see HEALTH CARE)
CARE PROVIDER STATIONS
407.2.2
CARE SUITES
202, 407.4.4
CARPET
Floor covering
804.2
Textile ceiling finish
803.6
Textile wall coverings
803.5
CATWALKS
(see TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS)
Construction
410.3.2
Live loads
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
410.6.3
Sprinkler protection
410.7
CEILING
Acoustical
808
Height
406.4.2, 409.2, 909.20.4.3, 1003.2, 1011.3, 1010.5.2, 1205.2.2, 1208.2
Interior finish
803
Penetration of fire-resistant assemblies
713.8, 716.2, 716.6
Suspended acoustical
808.1.1
CELLULOSE NITRATE FILM
409.1, 903.2.5.3
CERAMIC TILE
Mortar
2103.2.3
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
106.2, 111
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY
101.4.7, D103.2
CHILD CARE (see DAY CARE)
305.2, 308.6, 310.5.1
CHILDREN’S PLAY STRUCTURES
424
Covered and open mall building
402.6.3
CHIMNEYS
202
Factory-built
718.2.5
Flashing
1503.6
Masonry
2111, 2112, 2113
Protection from adjacent construction
3307.1
CHURCHES
(see RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACES OF)
CIRCULAR STAIRWAYS
(see CURVED STAIRWAYS)
CLAY ROOF TILE
1507.3
Testing
1504.2
CLINIC
Hospital
[see INSTITUTIONAL (GROUP I-2)]
308.4
Outpatient
(see AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES)
202, 304.1, 422
COAL POCKETS
426.1.6
CODES
101.2, 101.4, 102.2, 102.4, 102.6, Chapter 35
COLD STORAGE
(see FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION)
COLD-FORMED STEEL
202, 2210
Light-frame construction
2211
COMBUSTIBLE DUSTS
307.4, 414.5.1, 426.1
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
307.1, 307.4, 307.5, 414.2.5, 414.5.3, 415.9.2, 415.10.1, 418.6
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
Concealed spaces
413.2, 718.5
Exterior side of exterior wall
1406
High-pile stock or rack storage
413.1, 910.2.2
Type I and Type II
603, 805
COMBUSTIBLE PROJECTIONS
705.2, 1406.3
COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE
413, 910.2.2
COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL
1006.2.1
COMPARTMENTATION
Ambulatory care facilities
422.2, 422.3
Group I-2
407.5, 407.7
Group I-3
408.6
Underground buildings
405.4, 405.5.2
COMPLIANCE ALTERNATIVES
101.4.8
COMPRESSED GAS
307.2, 415.11.8
CONCEALED SPACES
413.2, 718
CONCRETE
Chapter 19
ACI 318 modifications
1901.2, 1903.1, 1905
Anchorage
1901.3
Calculated fire resistance
721.2
Construction documents
1901.5
Durability
1904
Footings
1809
Foundation walls
1807.1.5, 1808.8
Materials
1903
Plain, structural
1906
Reinforced gypsum concrete
2514
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
Roof tile
1507.3, 1504.2
Shotcrete
1908
Slab, minimum
1907
Specifications
1903
Wood support
2304.13
CONCRETE MASONRY
Calculated fire resistance
721.3
Construction
2104
Design
2101.2, 2108, 2109
Materials
2103.1
Wood support
2304.13
CONCRETE ROOF TILE
1507.3
Wind resistance
1504.2, 1609.6.3
CONDOMINIUM (see APARTMENT HOUSES)
CONDUIT, PENETRATION PROTECTION
713, 1023.5
CONFLICTS IN CODE
102
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES
202, 310
CONSTRUCTION
(see SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION)
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
107, 202, 1603
Alarms and detection
907.1.1
Concrete construction
1901.5
Design load-bearing capacity
1803.6
Fire-resistant joint systems
714
Flood
1603.1.7
Floor live load
1603.1.1
Geotechnical
1603.1.6
Means of egress
107.2.3
Penetrations
713
Permit application
105.1
Retention
107.5
Review
107.3
Roof assemblies
1503
Roof live load
1603.1.2
Roof snow load
1603.1.3
Seismic
1603.1.5
Site plan
107.2.6
Special loads
1603.1.8
Temporary structures
3103.2
Wind load
1603.1.4
CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
Shotcrete
1908.7
CONSTRUCTION TYPES
Chapter 6
Aircraft paint hangers
412.6.2
Classification
602
Combustible material in
Type I and Type II construction
603, 805
Covered and open mall buildings
402.4.1
Fire district
D102.2.3
Fire resistance
Table 601, Table 705.5
High-rise
403.2
Type I
Table 601, 602.2, 603
Type II
Table 601, 602.2, 603
Type III
Table 601, 602.3
Type IV
Table 601, 602.4
Type V
Table 601, 602.5
Underground buildings
405.2
CONTRACTOR’S
RESPONSIBILITIES
901.5
CONTROL AREA
414.2, 707.3.8
Fire-resistance rating
414.2.4
Maximum allowed quantities
414.2.2
Number
414.2.3
CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME
CONSTRUCTION
202, 2301.2, 2308
Additional seismic requirements
2308.6.6, 2308.6.8, 2308.6.10
Braced wall lines
2308.6
Connections and fasteners
2308.1.2
Design of elements
2308.8
Floor joists
2308.4.2
Foundation plates or sills
2308.3
Girders
2308.7
Limitations
2308.2
Roof and ceiling framing
2308.7
Wall framing
2308.5
CONVEYING SYSTEMS
3004
CORNICES
Definition
202
Draftstopping
718
Live load
Table 1607.1
Masonry
2104.1.2
Projection
705.2, 1406.3
Public right-of-way encroachments
3202.3.2, 3202.3.3
CORRIDOR
(see CORRIDOR PROTECTION, EXIT ACCESS,
FIRE PARTITIONS and SERVICE CORRIDORS)
1020
Air movement
1020.6
Continuity
1020.7
Covered and open mall buildings
402.8.1, 402.8.6
Dead end
1020.5
Encroachment
1020.4
Elevation change
1003.5
Group I-2
407.2, 407.3, 407.4.1, 407.4.3
Hazardous
415.11
Headroom
1003.2, 1003.3
HPM service
903.2.5.2
Live load
Table 1607.1
Walls
709, 1020.1
Width/capacity
1003.3.4, 1003.6, 1005.2, 1005.7, 1020.2, 1020.4
CORRIDOR PROTECTION, EXIT ACCESS
Construction, fire protection
709, Table 1020.2, 1020.7
Doors
715
Glazing
715
Group I-2
407.3
Interior finish
Table 803.11, 804.4
Opening protection
715, 716.5.4
Ventilation
1020.6, 1020.6.1
CORROSIVES
307.2, 307.6, Table 414.2.5(1), 414.3, 415.10.3, Table 415.11.1.1.1
COURTS (see YARDS OR COURTS)
1206
COVERED AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS
402
Alarms and detection
402.7.4, 907.2.20, 2702.2
Children’s play structures
402.6.3, 424
Construction type
402.4
Fire department
402.3, 402.7.5
Interior finish
402.6.1
Kiosk
402.6.2
Means of egress
402.8
Occupant load
402.8.3
Open mall construction
402.4.3
Perimeter line
402.1.2
Separation
402.4.2
Signs
402.6.4
Smoke control
402.7.2
Sprinkler protection
402.5
Standby power
402.7.3, 2702.2.14
Standpipe system
402.7.1, 905.3.3
Travel distance
402.8.5, 1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
COVERED WALKWAY
(see PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY)
3104, 3306.7
CRAWL SPACE
Access
1209.1
Drainage
1805.1.2
Unusable space fire protection
711.2.6
Ventilation
1203.4
CRIPPLE WALL
202
CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER
602.4.2
CRYOGENIC
Table 307.1, Table 414.5.1, Table 415.11.1.1.1
D
DAMPERS (see FIRE DAMPERS
AND SMOKE DAMPERS)
716.2 through 716.5
DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING
1805
Required
1805.2, 1805.3
Subsoil drainage system
1805.4
DAY CARE
305.2, 308.6, 310.5
Adult care
308.6
Child care
308.6, 310.5
Egress
308.6, Table 1004.5, 1006.2.2.5
DAY SURGERY CENTER
(see AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES)
DEAD END
1020.5
DEAD LOAD
202, 1606
Foundation design load
1808.3
DECK
Anchorage
1604.8.3
Live loads
Table 1607.1
DEFLECTIONS
1604.3.1
Framing supporting glass
2403.3
Preconstruction load tests
1709.3.1
Wood diaphragms
2305
Wood shear walls
2305
DEMOLITION
3303
DESIGN STRENGTH
202
Conformance to standards
1706.1
New materials
1706.2
DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM
202
DIAPHRAGMS
202
Analysis
1604.4
Ceilings
2508.5
Wood
2305, 2306.2
DOORS
1010
Access-controlled
1010.2.14
Atrium enclosures
404.6
Configuration
1007
Dwelling unit separations
406.3.3.1, 412.5.1
Emergency escape
1030.1
Fabrication (HPM) areas
415.11.1.2
Fire
(see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
715.4, 1023.4
Glazing
715.4, 715.6, 1405.13
Hazardous storage
415.11.6.7
Hardware
(see LOCKS AND LATCHES)
1005.7.1, 1010.1.9, 1010.1.10
I-2 occupancies
407.3.1
I-3 occupancies
408.3, 408.4, 408.8.4
Landings
1010.1.4, 1010.1.5
Operation
1010.1.3, 1010.1.9, 1010.1.10
Panic and fire exit hardware
1010.1.10
Power-operated
1010.3.2
Revolving
1010.3.1
Security grilles
402.8.8, 1010.3.4
Side swinging
1010.1.2
Smoke
710.5
Special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors
1010.3.3
Stairways
1010.1.9.12
Stairways, high-rise
403.5.3
Structural testing, exterior
1709.5
Thresholds
1003.5, 1010.1.5, 1010.1.7
Vestibule
1010.1.8
Width
1010.1.1, 1010.1.1.1
DRAFTSTOPPING
Attics
718.4
Floor-ceiling assemblies
718.3
DRINKING FOUNTAINS
1109.5, 2902.5, 2902.6
DRY CLEANING PLANTS
415.9.3
DRYING ROOMS
417
DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS
(see MECHANICAL)
DUMBWAITERS
713.14
DWELLING UNITS
202
Alarms and detection
420.6, 907.2.8, 907.2.9, 907.2.11
Area
1208.3, 1208.4
Group R
310
Live/work units (see LIVE/WORK UNITS)
Scoping
101.2
Separation
420.2, 420.3
Sound transmission
1207
Sprinkler protection
420.5, 903.2.8
E
EARTHQUAKE LOADS (see SEISMIC)
1613
EARTHQUAKE
RECORDING EQUIPMENT
Appendix L
EAVES (see COMBUSTIBLE PROJECTIONS AND CORNICES)
EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP E)
305
Alarms and detection
907.2.3
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Height
503, 504, 505, 508
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.5
Corridors
1020.1, 1020.3
Panic hardware
1010.1.10
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
303.1, 508.2
Assembly
303.1.3
Day care
305.2, 308.5, 310.1
Education for students above the 12th grade
304
Gyms (see GYMNASIUMS)
303.1.3
Libraries (see LIBRARIES)
303.4
Religious facilities
305.2
Stages and platforms
410
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Sprinkler protection
903.2.3
Unlimited area
507.11
EGRESS (see MEANS OF EGRESS)
Chapter 10
ELECTRICAL
105.2, 112, Chapter 27, Appendix K
ELEVATOR
Chapter 30
Accessibility
3001.3
Car size
403.6.1, 3001.3, 3002.4
Construction
713.14, 1607.10.1
Conveying systems
3004
Emergency operations
3002.3, 3002.5, 3003, 3007.1, 3008.1.4
Fire service access
403.6.1, 3007
Glass
2409, 3002.8
High-rise
403.2.3, 403.4.8, 403.6
Hoistway enclosures
403.2.3, 713.14, 1023.4, 1024.5, 3002, 3007.5, 3008.5
Hoistway lighting
3007.5.2
Hoistway pressurization
909.21
Keys
3003.3
Lobby
3006, 3007.6, 3008.6
Machine rooms
Table 1607.1, 3005
Means of egress
403.6, 1003.7, 3008
Number of elevator cars in hoistway
3002.2
Occupant evacuation elevators
403.6.2, 3008
Personnel and material hoists
3004.4
Roof access
1011.12.2
Shaft enclosure
713, 3006
Signs
914, 1009.10, 3002.3, 3007.6.5, 3008.6.5
Stairway to elevator equipment
1011.12.1
Standards
3001
Standby power
2702.2.2, 3007.8, 3008.8
System monitoring
3007.7, 3008.7
Underground
405.4.3
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS
Accessible means of egress
1009.8
Alarms (see FIRE ALARMS)
Elevators, occupant evacuation
3008.6.6
Fire command center
403.4.6, 911, 3007.7, 3008.6.6, 3008.7
Radio coverage
403.4.5, 916
EMERGENCY EGRESS OPENINGS
1030
Required
Table 1006.3.2(2), 1030.1
Window wells
1030.5
EMERGENCY LIGHTING
1008.3, 1205.5
EMERGENCY POWER
2702.1, 2702.4
Exit signs
1013.6.3, 2702.2.5, 2702.2.12
Group I-2
2702.2.8
Group I-3
408.4.2, 2702.2.9
Hazardous
415.11.11, 2702.2.10, 2702.2.14
High-rise
403.4.8, 2702.2.11
Means of egress illumination
1008.3, 2702.2.12
Semiconductor fabrication
415.11.11, 2702.2.15
Underground buildings
405.9, 2702.2.19
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS
Additional exit stairway
403.5.2
Elevators
403.6, 3002.4, 3003, 3007, 3008
Fire command center
403.4.6, 911, 3007.7, 3008.6.6, 3008.7
Mall access
402.7.5
Radio coverage
403.4.4, 916
Roof access
1011.12
Safety features
914
EMPIRICAL DESIGN OF MASONRY
2109
General
2109.1
Special inspection
1705.4
EMPLOYEE
Accessibility for work areas
907.5.2.3.1
Qualifications
A101
Termination of employment
A101.4
ENCROACHMENTS INTO THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 32
END-JOINTED LUMBER
2303.1.1.2
Relocated structures
101.4.7, D103.3
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
101.4.6, 110.3.8, Chapter 13
ENGINEER (see definition for
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL)
EQUIPMENT PLATFORM
505.3
EQUIVALENT OPENING FACTOR
Figure 705.7
ESCALATORS
3004
Floor opening protection
711
Means of egress
1003.7
ESSENTIAL FACILITIES
(see RISK CATEGORY)
202, Table 1604.5
EXCAVATION, GRADING AND FILL
1804, 3304
EXISTING BUILDING
101.4.7, 102.6
Additions
D103.1
Alteration
D103.1
Change of occupancy
D103.2
Historic
101.4.7
Relocated structures
D103.3
Repairs
101.4.7
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
EXIT
(see MEANS OF EGRESS)
1022 through 1027
Basement
1006.3.2.2
Boiler rooms
1006.2
Configuration
1007
Construction
713.2, 1019, 1023.2
Doorways
1007
Dwellings
1006.3.2
Enclosure
707.3, 1023.2
Fire resistance
707.3, 1019, 1023.2
Furnace rooms
1006.2.2.1
Group H
415.11.3.3, 415.11.5.6
Group I-2
407.4
Group I-3
408.3
High rise
403.5, 403.6, 1025
Horizontal
707.3.5, 1026
Incinerator rooms
1006.2.2.1
Interior finish
Table 803.11, 804
Luminous
403.5.5, 411.7.1, 1025
Mall buildings
402.8
Mezzanines
505, 1004.1.1.2
Number, minimum
402.8.3, 403.5, 1006.2, 1006
Occupant load
402.8.2, 1004.1.1
Passageway
1024
Ramps, exterior
1027
Ramp, interior
1023
Refrigerated rooms or spaces
1006.2
Refrigeration machinery rooms
1006.2
Signs
1013
Stairways, exterior
1027
Stairway, interior
1023
Stories
1004, 1006.3, 1017.3.1
Travel distance
402.8.3, 402.8.5, 402.8.6, 404.9, 407.4.2, 408.6.1, 408.8.1, 410.6.3.2, 411.4, 1006.3.2, 1016.2.1, 1017, 1029.7, 1029.8
Underground buildings
405.7
EXIT ACCESS (see MEANS OF EGRESS)
1016 through 1021
Aisles
1018
Balconies
1017.2.1, 1021
Common path
1016.2.1
Corridors
1020
Doors
1005.7, 1006.2, 1007, 1010, 1022.2
Intervening space
1016.2
Path of egress travel, common
1016.2.1
Ramps
1019
Seating at tables
1029.13
Single exit
1006.2, 1006.3.2
Stages
410.6.2
Stairway
1019
Travel distance
402.8.3, 402.8.5, 402.8.6, 404.9, 408.6.1, 408.8.1, 410.6.3.2, 411.4, 1006.2, 1016.2.1, 1017, 1006.3.2, 1029.7
EXIT DISCHARGE
(see MEANS OF EGRESS)
1028
Atrium
404.11
Courts
1028.4
Horizontal exit
1028.2
Lobbies
1028.2
Marquees
3106.4
Public way
1028.5
Termination
1023.3
Vestibules
1028.2
EXIT PASSAGEWAY
(see MEANS OF EGRESS)
402.8.6.1, 707.3.4, 1024
Construction
1019, 1024.3
Discharge
1024.4, 1028.1
Elevators within
1024.5, 3002.7
Fire-resistant construction
1024.3
High-rise
403.5
Openings
1024.5
Penetrations
1024.6
Pressurization
909.6, 909.20.5
Smokeproof
403.5.4, 405.7.2, 909.20
Width
1024.2
Ventilation
1024.7
EXIT SIGNS
1013
Accessibility
1013.4
Floor level exit signs
1013.2
Group R-1
1013.2
Illumination
1013.3, 1013.5, 1013.6
Required
1013.1
Special amusement buildings
411.7
EXPLOSIVES
202, Table 414.5.1, Table 415.6.5
Detached building
415.6.2, 415.8
Explosion control
415.7
EXPOSURE CATEGORY
(see WIND LOAD)
1609.4
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND
FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS)
1408
Special inspection
1705.16
EXTERIOR WALLS
(see WALLS, EXTERIOR)
Table 601, 602, 705, Chapter 14
F
FACTORY OCCUPANCY (GROUP F)
306
Alarm and detection
907.2.4
Area
503, 503.1.1, 505, 506, 507, 508
Equipment platforms
505.3
Groups
Low-hazard occupancy
306.3
Moderate-hazard occupancy
306.2
Height
503, 504, 505, 508
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of Egress
Aisles
1018.5
Dead end corridor
1020.5
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1006.2.1, 1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1017.2.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.2, 508.3, 508.4
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Sprinkler protection
903.2.4
Unlimited area
507.3, 507.4, 507.5
FARM BUILDINGS
Appendix C
FEES, PERMIT
109
Refunds
Reserved
Related fees
Reserved
Work commencing before issuance
109.4
FENCES
312.1
FIBERBOARD
202, 2303.1.6
Shear wall
Table 2306.3(2)
FILL MATERIAL
1804, 3304
FINGER-JOINTED LUMBER
(see END-JOINTED LUMBER)
FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS
Aerosol storage
907.2.16
Aircraft hangars, residential
412.5.3, 907.2.21
Airport traffic control towers
412.3.5, 907.2.22
Ambulatory care facilities
422.5, 907.2.2.1
Assembly
907.2.1
Atriums
404.4, 907.2.14
Audible alarm
907.5.2.1
Battery room
907.2.23
Children’s play structure
424.3
Construction documents
907.1.1
Covered and open mall building
402.6.2, 402.7, 907.2.20
Education
907.2.3
Emergency alarm system
908
Factory
907.2.4
Group H
907.2.5
Group I
907.2.6, 907.5.2.3.2
Group M
907.2.7
Group R
420.6, 907.2.8, 907.2.9, 907.2.10, 907.2.11, 907.5.2.3.2, 907.5.2.3.3
Group S
906, 907
High-rise
403.4.1, 403.4.2, 907.2.13
Live/work
508.5.6
Lumber mills
907.2.17
Occupancy requirements
907.2
Special amusement buildings
411.3, 411.5, 907.2.12
Underground buildings
405.6, 907.2.18, 907.2.19
Visible alarm
907.5.2.3
FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL
907.4.2
FIRE AREA
202, 901.7
Ambulatory care facilities
903.2.2, 907.2.2
Assembly
903.2.1
Education
903.2.3
Enclosed parking garages
903.2.10
Factory
903.2.4
Institutional
903.2.6
Mercantile
903.2.7
Residential
903.2.8
Storage
903.2.9, 903.2.10
FIRE BARRIERS
202, 707
Continuity
707.5, 713.5
Exterior walls
Table 705.5, 707.4, 713.6
Fire-resistance rating of walls
Table 601, Table 705.5, 603, 703, 707.3, 713.4
Glazing, rated
716.6
Incidental
509.4
Inspection
110.3
Joints
707.8, 713.9, 715, 2508.5
Marking
703.7
Materials
707.2, 713.3
Opening protection
707.6, 707.10, 713.7, 713.10, 714.3, 716, 717.5.2
Penetrations
707.7, 713.8
Shaft enclosure
713.1
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars
412.4.4
Atriums
404.3, 404.6
Covered and open mall buildings
402.4.2,
Fire pumps
403.3.4, 901.8, 913.2.1
Flammable finishes
416.2
Group H-2
415.9.1.2, 426.1.2
Group H-3 and H-4
415.10
Group H-5
415.11.1.2, 415.11.1.5, 415.11.6.1, 415.11.7.4
Group I-3
408.5, 408.7
Hazardous materials
414.2
High-rise
403.2.1.2, 403.2.3, 403.3, 403.4.8.1
Organic coating
418.4, 418.5, 418.6
Stages and platforms
410.5.1, 410.5.2
FIRE COMMAND CENTER
403.4.6, 911, 3007.7, 3008.6.6, 3008.7
FIRE DAMPERS
717.1.2 through 717.5
FIRE DEPARTMENT
(see EMERGENCY RESPONDERS)
FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM (see FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS)
FIRE DISTRICT
Appendix D
FIRE DOOR
(see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
716, 1023.4
FIRE ESCAPE
412.8.3
FIRE EXTINGUISHERS, PORTABLE
906, 3309
FIRE EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
416.5, 417.4, 903, 904
FIRE PARTITION
202, 709
Continuity
708.4
Elevator lobby
3006.3
Exterior walls
Table 705.5, 709.5
Fire-resistance rating
Table 601, 603 Table 705.5, 703, 708.3
Glazing, rated
716.6
Inspection
110.3.6
Joint treatment gypsum
2508.4
Joints
708.8, 715
Marking
703.7
Materials
708.2
Opening protection
709.6, 714.3, 716, 717.5.4
Penetrations
708.7, 708.9, 714, 717
Special provisions
Covered and open mall buildings
402.4.2.1
Group I-3
408.7
Group I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3
420.2
FIRE PREVENTION
101.4.5
FIRE PROTECTION
Explosion control
414.5.1, 415.6, 421.7, 426.1.4
Fire extinguishers, portable
906
Glazing, rated
716.2
Smoke and heat removal
910
Smoke control systems
909
Sprinkler systems, automatic
903
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Chapter 9
FIRE PUMPS
403.3.4, 901.8, 913, 914.2
FIRE RESISTANCE
Calculated
722
Conditions of restraint
703.2.1.3
Ducts and air transfer openings
717
Exterior walls
Table 705.5, 705.5, 708.5
Fire district
D102.2.5
High-rise
403.2
Joint systems
715
Multiple use fire assemblies
701.2
Prescriptive
721
Ratings
Chapter 6, 703, 705.5, 707.3.10
Roof assemblies
1505
Structural members
704
Tests
703
Thermal and sound insulating materials
720.1
FIRE RESISTANCE, CALCULATED
722
Clay brick and tile masonry
722.4
Concrete assemblies
722.2
Concrete masonry
722.3
Steel assemblies
722.5
Wood assemblies
722.6
FIRE-RETARDANT-TREATED WOOD
202, 2303.2
Awnings
3105.3
Balconies
1406.3
Canopies
3105.3
Concealed spaces
718.5
Fastening
2304.10.5
Fire wall vertical continuity
706.6
Partitions
603
Platforms
410.4
Projections
705.2.3
Roof construction
Table 601, 705.11, 706.6, 1505
Shakes and shingles
1505.6
Type I and II construction
602, 603
Type III construction
602.3
Type IV construction
602.4
Veneer
1405.5
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE
202, Table 705.5, 702
Exterior walls
1406.2.1.1.1, 1406.2.1.1.2
FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATORS
403.6.1, 3007
FIRE SHUTTER
(see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
716.5, 716.5.10, 716.5.11
FIRE WALLS
706
Aircraft
412.4.6.2
Combustible framing
706.7
Continuity
706.5, 706.6
Exterior walls
Table 705.5, 706.5.1
Fire-resistance rating
703, 706.4
Glazing, rated
716.6
Inspection
110.3.6
Joints
706.10, 715
Marking
703.6
Materials
706.3
Opening protection
706.8, 706.11, 714.3, 716, 717.5.1
Penetration
706.9, 714.3
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars
412.4.6.2
Covered and open mall buildings
402.4.2.2
Group H-5
415.11.1.6
Structural stability
706.2
FIRE WINDOWS (see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
FIREBLOCKING
718.2
Chimneys
718.2.5.1, 2113.20
Fireplaces
2111.13
Wood construction
718.2.1, 718.2.7, 1406.2.3
Wood stairways
718.2.4
FIREPLACES, FACTORY-BUILT
2111.14.1
FIREPLACES, MASONRY
202
Combustibles
2111.12
Drawings
2111.2
General provisions
2111
Hearth extension
2111.10, 2111.11
Steel units
2111.6.1
FIREWORKS
202, 307.2, 307.3, 307.5
FLAMESPREAD
802, 803.1.1, Table 803.11
FLAMMABLE FINISHES
307.1, 416
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
307.4, 307.5, 406, 412, 414, 415
FLAMMABLE SOLIDS
307.5, 415
FLASHING
Roof
1503.2, 1503.6, 1507.2.9, 1507.3.9, 1507.5.7, 1507.7.7, 1511.6
Wall, veneer
1405.4, 1405.12.7
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
202, 1612.3
Coastal A zone
202
Coastal high hazard area
202
Flood insurance rate map
202
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
Existing
101.4.7
Flood elevation
107.2.6.1, 1612
Flood loads
1603.1, 1603.1.7, 1612, 3001.2, 3102.7
Flood resistance
1403.6, 1403.7
Grading and fill
1804.5, 1805.1.2.1
Interior finishes
801.1
Modifications
104.10.1
Site plan
107.2.6
Ventilation, under floor
1203.3.4
FLOOR/CEILING (see FLOOR CONSTRUCTION)
FLOOR CONSTRUCTION
(see FLOOR CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
Draftstopping
718.3
Finishes
804, 805, 1003.4, 1210.1
Fire resistance
Table 601, 711
Loads (see FLOOR LOADS)
Materials
Chapter 6
Penetration of fire-resistant assemblies
711, 714.4, 717.2, 717.6
FLOOR CONSTRUCTION, WOOD
Beams and girders
2304.12.1.1
Diaphragms
2305.1
Fastening schedule
2304.10.1
Framing
Table 602.4, 602.4.2, 602.4.4, 2304.4
Sheathing
2304.8
FLOOR LEVEL
1003.5, 1010.1.4
FLOOR LOADS
Construction documents
107.2
Live
1603.1.1, 1607
Posting
106.1
FLOOR OPENING PROTECTION
(see VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION)
FOAM PLASTICS
Attics
720.1, 2603.4.1.6
Cladding attachment
2603.11, 2603.12
Cold storage
2603.3, 2603.4.1.2, 2603.5
Concealed
603
Covered mall and open mall buildings
402.6.2, 402.6.4.5
Crawl space
2603.4.1.6
Doors
2603.4.1.7 through 2603.4.1.9
Exterior wall covering
806.5
Exterior walls of multistory buildings
1404.13, 2603.5
Interior finish
801.2.2, 2603.10, 2604
Label/identification
2603.2
Metal composite materials (MCM)
1407.13
Roofing
2603.4.1.5
Siding backer board
2603.4.1.10
Stages and platform scenery
410.3.6
Surface burning characteristics
2603.3
Termites, protection from
2603.9
Thermal barrier requirements
2603.5.2
Trim
806.5, 2604.2
Type I and II construction
603.1(2), 603.1(3)
Walk-in coolers
2603.4.1.3
Wind resistance
2603.10
FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING

1029.1.1
Egress
1029.1.1
Live load
Table 1607.1
Occupant load
1004.7
Separation
1029.1.1.1
FOOD COURT
202
Occupant load
402.8.2.4
Separation
402.4.2
FOOTBOARDS
1029.17.2
FOUNDATION (see FOUNDATION, DEEP
and FOUNDATION, SHALLOW)
Chapter 18
Basement
1610, 1805.1.1, 1806.3, 1807
Concrete
1808.8, 1809.8, 1810.3.2.1
Dampproofing
1805.2
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.1
Formwork
3304.1
Geotechnical investigation
(see SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS)
1803
Inspection
110.3
Load-bearing value
1806, 1808, 1810
Masonry
1808.9
Pedestrian protection
3306.9
Pier (see FOUNDATION, SHALLOW)
Pile (see FOUNDATION, DEEP)
Protection from adjacent construction
3303.5, 3307.1
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
Steel
1809.11, 1810.3.2.3, 1810.3.5.3
Timber
1809.12, 1810.3.2.4
Waterproofing
1805.3
FOUNDATION, DEEP
202, 1810
Drilled shaft
202
Geotechnical investigation
1803.5.5
Grade beams
1810.3.12
Helical pile
202, 1810.3.1.5, Table 1810.3.2.6, 1810.3.3.1.9, 1810.3.5.3.3, 1810.4.11
Micropile
202, Table 1808.8.1, Table 1810.3.2.6, 1810.3.5.2.3, 1810.3.10, 1810.4.10
Piles
Table 1808.8.1, 1809.12, 1810, 1810.3.1.4
FOUNDATION, SHALLOW
202, 1809
Pier and curtain wall
1809.10
Slab-on-grade
1808.6.2
Strip footing
1808.8, 1809
FOYERS
Assembly occupancy
1029.4, 1029.9.5
Corridors
1020.7
Covered and open mall building
402.1
FRAME INSPECTION
110.3.4
FRATERNITIES
310.4
FROST PROTECTION
1809.5
FURNACE ROOMS
1006.2.2.1
G
GALLERIES
(see TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS)
GARAGE, AUTOMOBILE PARKING
(see PARKING GARAGES)
GARAGE, REPAIR
406.8
Floor surface
406.8.3
Gas detection system
406.8.2, 908.5
Sprinkler protection
406.8, 903.2.9.1
Ventilation
406.8.1
GARAGES, TRUCK AND BUS
Live load
1607.8
Sprinkler protection
903.2.10.1
GARAGES AND CARPORTS, PRIVATE
Area limitations
406.3.1
Classification
406.3.1
Parking surfaces
406.3, 406.4
Separation
406.3.2
GAS
101.4.1, 105.2, 112
Accessibility
1109.14
Gas detection system
406.8.2, 415.11.8, 421.6, 908
Hydrogen cutoff room
421.6
Motor fuel-dispensing
406.7
GATES
1010.4
Vehicular
3110
GIFT SHOPS
407.2.4
GIRDERS
Fire resistance
Table 601
Materials
Chapter 6
Wood construction
2304.12.1.1
GLASS (see GLAZING)
GLASS BLOCK (see GLASS UNIT MASONRY)
GLASS UNIT MASONRY
202, 2110
Atrium enclosure
404.6
Fire resistance
2110.1.1
Hazardous locations
2406.1.3
GLAZING
Athletic facilities
2408
Atrium enclosure
404.6
Doors
705.8, 709.5, 710.5, 716, 1405.13, 1709.1
Elevator hoistway and car
2409
Fire doors
716.5.5.1, 716.5.8
Fire-resistant walls
716.5.3.2
Fire windows
716.5
Group I-3
408.7
Guards
1015.2.1, 2406.4.4, 2407
Handrail
1011.11, 2407
Identification
2403.1, 2406.3
Impact loads
2406.1, 2407.1.4.2, 2408.2.1, 2408.3
Impact resistant
1609.1.2
Jalousies
2403.5
Label/identification
716.3.1, 716.3.2, 716.5.7.1, 716.5.8.3, 716.6.8
Loads
2404
Louvered windows
2403.5
Opening protection
716.2
Replacement
2401.2
Safety
716.5.8.4, 716.6.3, 2406
Security
408.7
Skylights
2405
Sloped
2404.2, 2405
Supports
2403.2
Swimming pools
2406.4
Testing
1709.5, 2406.1.1, 2408.2.1
Veneer
1405.12
Vertical
2404.1
Walkways
2409.1
GRADE, LUMBER (see LUMBER)
202
GRADE PLANE
202
GRAIN ELEVATORS
426.1.5
GRANDSTANDS
303.1, 1029.1.1
Egress
1029.1.1
Exit sign
1013.1
Live load
Table 1607.1
Occupant load
1004.4
Separation
1029.1.1.1
GREENHOUSES
312.1
Area
503, 506, 507, 508
Deflections
Table 1604.3
Live load
1607.13.2.1
Membrane structure
3102.1
Plastic
2606.11
Sloped glazing
2405
Wind load
1609.1.2
GRIDIRON (see TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS)
GRINDING ROOMS
426.1.2
GROSS LEASABLE AREA
(see COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
202, 402.3, 402.8.2
GROUT
714.4.1
GUARDS
1015
Assembly seating
1029.1.1, 1029.16
Equipment platform
505.3
Exceptions
1015.2
Glazing
1015.2.1, 2406.4.4, 2407
Height
1015.3
Loads
1607.9
Mechanical equipment
1015.6
Opening limitations
1015.4
Parking garage
406.4.1
Ramps
1012.9
Residential
1015.3
Roof access
1015.7
Screen porches
1015.5
Stairs
1015.2
Vehicle barrier
406.4.2, 1607.9.3
Windows
1015.8
GUTTERS
1503.4.3
GYMNASIUMS
303.1
Group E
303.1.3
Live load
Table 1607.1
Occupant load
1004.1
GYPSUM
Chapter 25
Aggregate, exposed
2513
Board
202, Chapter 25
Ceiling diaphragms
2508.5
Concrete, reinforced
2514
Construction
2508
Draftstopping
718.3.1
Exterior soffit
Table 2506.2
Fastening
Table 2306.3(3), 2508.1
Fire resistance
719, 722.2.1.4, 722.6.2
Fire-resistant joint treatment
2508.5
Inspection
2503
Lath
2507, 2510
Lathing and furring for cement plaster
719, 2510
Lathing and plastering
2507
Materials
2506
Panel products
202, Chapter 25
Plaster, exterior
2512
Plaster, interior
2511
Shear wall construction
2505
Showers and water closets
2509
Stucco
2510
Veneer base
2507.2
Veneer plaster
2507.2
Vertical and horizontal assemblies
2504
Wallboard
Table 2506.2
Water-resistant backing board
2506.2, 2509.2
H
HANDRAILS
1014
Alternating tread devices
1011.14
Assembly aisles
1029.15
Construction
1014.4, 1014.5, 1014.6
Extensions
1014.6
Glazing
2407
Graspability
1014.3
Guards
1015.3
Height
1014.2
Loads
1607.9
Location
1014.1, 1014.7, 1014.8, 1014.9
Ramps
1012.8
Stairs
1011.11
HARDBOARD
202, 1404.3.2, 2303.1.7
HARDWARE
(see DOORS and LOCKS AND LATCHES)
HARDWOOD
Fastening
2304.10
Quality
2303.3
Veneer
1404.3.2
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
307, 414, 415
Control areas
414.2
Explosion control
414.5.1, Table 414.5.1, 415.8, 415.11.6.5, 426.1.4
Special provisions
415.7
Sprinkler protection
Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.2.5(2), 415.4, 415.11.12, 903.2.5
Ventilation
414.3, 414.5.2, 415.8.11.3, 415.9.1.7, 415.11.1.6, 415.11.1.8.1, 415.11.3.2, 415.11.6.8, 415.11.7.4, 415.11.8, 415.11.11, 1203.6
Weather protection
414.6.1
HAZARDOUS OCCUPANCY (GROUP H),
(see HAZARDOUS MATERIALS)
307, 414, 415
Alarm and detection
415.3, 415.5, 415.11.2, 415.11.4, 415.11.6.9, 415.11.9, 901.6.3, 907.2.5, 908.1, 908.2
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Dispensing
414.5, 414.6, 415.6
Gas detection systems
415.11.8
Group provisions
H-1 (detonation)
307.3, 415.6.1.1, 415.6.2 415.7, 415.7.1
H-2 (deflagration)
307.4, 415.8, 415.9
H-3 (physical hazard)
307.5, 415.8, 415.10
H-4 (health hazard)
307.6, 415.10
H-5 (semiconductor
307.7, 415.11
Height
Table 412.7, Table 414.2.5(2), 415.7, 415.8.1, 415.9.1.1, 426.1.1, 503, 504, 505, 508
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
416.2.1, 416.3.1, Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Location on property
414.6.1.2, 415.6
Low hazard (See Factory – Group F-2 and Storage – Group S-2)
Means of egress
Aisles
107.5
Corridors
415.11.2
One means of egress
Table 1006.2.1, Table 1006.3.2
Panic hardware
1010.1.10
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
Table 1017.2, 1016.2.1, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
508.2
Moderate hazard (See Factory – Group F-1 and Storage – Group S-1)
Multiple hazards
307.8
Occupancy exceptions
307.1
Plumbing fixtures
Chapter 29
Prohibited locations
508.5.2
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Smoke and heat removal
910.2
Special provisions—General
Detached buildings
415.6.2, 415.8
Dry cleaning (see DRY CLEANING PLANTS)
Equipment platforms
505.3
Fire district
D102.2.2
Fire separation distance
415.6
Grain elevators
426.1, 426.1.5
Grinding rooms
426.1.2
Separation from other occupancies
415.6.1, 508.2.4, 508.3.3, 508.4
Special provisions based on materials
Combustible liquids
Table 307.1(1), 307.4, 307.5, 414.2.5, 414.5.3, 415.9.2
Corrosives
307.6, Table 414.2.5(1), 414.3, 415.10.3, Table 415.11.1.1.1
Cryogenic
Table 307.1(1), Table 414.5.1, Table 415.11.1.1.1
Explosives
202, 307.3, 307.3.1, Table 415.6.2
Flammable liquids
307.4, 307.5, 415.9.1
Flammable solids
307.5, 415.11.1.1.1
Health-hazard materials
202, Table 414.2.5(1), 415.6, Table 415.11.1.1.1, 415.11.7.1, 415.11.8.2
Irritants
Table 414.2.5(1), Table 415.11.1.1.1
Liquid, highly toxic and toxic
307.6, Table 414.2.5(1), 415.8.3, 415.9.3, Table 415.11.1.1.1, 908.3
Organic peroxides
Table 414.5.1, 415.6.1, 415.8.4, Table 415.11.1.1.1, 418
Oxidizers, liquid and solid
Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.5.1, 415.8.4, Table 415.11.1.1.1,
Pyrophoric materials
307.4, Table 307.1(1), Table 414.5.1, 415.7.1, 415.8.4, Table 415.11.1.1.1
Sensitizers
Table 415.11.1.1.1
Solids, highly toxic and toxic
307.6, Table 414.2.5(1), 415.10.4, Table 415.11.1.1.1, 908.3
Unstable materials
307.3, Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.5.1, 415.5.4, Table 415.11.1.1.1
Water-reactive materials
Table 414.5.1, 415.8.3, 415.8.4, 415.8.5, 415.11, Table 415.11.1.1.1
Sprinkler protection
415.2, 415.11.7.4, 415.11.10, 415.11.11.1, 415.11.12, 705.8.1, 903.2.5
Standby, emergency power
2702.2.8, 2702.2.13, 2702.2.14
Storage
413, 414.1, 414.2.5, 414.5, 414.6, 415.6, Table 415.6.2, 415.7.1, 415.9.1, 426.1
Unlimited area
507.8
HEAD JOINT, MASONRY
202
HEADROOM
406.4.1, 505.1, 1003.2, 1003.3, 1010.1.1, 1010.1.1.1, 1011.3, 1012.5.2, 1208.2
HEALTH CARE
(see INSTITUTIONAL I-1 AND INSTITUTIONAL I-2)
Ambulatory care facilities
202, 422
Clinics, outpatient
304.1
Hospitals
308.4
HEALTH-HAZARD MATERIALS
307.2, Table 414.2.5(1), 415.2, 415.11.1.1.1
HEAT VENTS
910
HEATING (see MECHANICAL)
101.4.2
Aircraft hangars
412.4.4
Fire pump rooms
913.3
Fireplace
2111
Masonry heaters
2112
Parking garages
406.4
Repair garages
406.8
HEIGHT, BUILDING
503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Limitations
503
Mixed construction types
510
Modifications
504
Roof structures
504.3
HELIPORT
Definition
202
Live loads
1607.6
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE
413, 907.2.15, 910.2.2
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS
403
Alarms and detection
403.4.1, 403.4.2, 907.2.13
Application
403.1
Construction
403.2
Elevators
403.6, 1009.2.1, 3007, 3008
Emergency power
403.4.8, 2702.2.10
Emergency systems
403.4
Fire command station
403.4.6
Fire department communication
403.4.3, 403.4.4
Fire service elevators
403.6.1, 3007
Occupant evacuation elevators
403.6.2, 3008
Smoke removal
403.4.7
Smokeproof enclosure
403.5.4, 1023.11
Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM)
403.2.4
Sprinkler protection
403.3, 903.2.11.3
Stairways
403.5
Standby power
403.4.7, 2702.2.2, 2702.2.10
Structural integrity
403.2.3, 1615
Super high-rise (over 420 feet)
403.2.1, 403.2.3, 403.2.4, 403.3.1, 403.5.2
Voice alarm
403.4.3, 907.2.13
Zones
907.6.3, 907.6.4
HISTORIC BUILDINGS
101.4.7
HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY
711
Continuity
711.2.2, 711.2.3, 713.11, 713.12
Fire-resistance rating
602, 603, 703, 704.4.2, 707.3.10, 711.2.4
Glazing, rated
716.6
Group I-1
420.3
Group R
420.3
Incidental
509.4
Insulation
720, 807, 808
Joints
715, 2508.5
Non-fire-resistance rating
711.3
Opening protection
712, 714.4, 716, 717.6
Shaft enclosure
713.1
Special provisions
Aircraft hangars
412.4.4
Atrium
404.3, 404.6
Covered and open mall buildings
402.4.2.3, 402.8.7
Fire pumps
913.2.1
Flammable finishes
416.2
Group H-2
415.9.1.1, 415.9.1.2
Groups H-3 and H-4
415.10.2
Group H-5
415.11.1.2, 415.11.6.1
Group I-2
407.5.3
Groups I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3
420.3
Hazardous materials
414.2
High-rise
403.2.1, 403.3, 403.4.7.1
Hydrogen fuel gas
421.4
Organic coating
418.4, 418.5, 418.6
Stages and platforms
410.4, 410.5.1
HORIZONTAL EXIT
1026
Doors
1026.3
Exit discharge
1028.2
Fire resistance
1026.2
Institutional I-2 occupancy
407.4, 1026.1
Institutional I-3 occupancy
408.2, 1026.1
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREAS)
HORIZONTAL FIRE SEPARATION
(see HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY)
HOSE CONNECTIONS
(see STANDPIPES, REQUIRED)
HOSPITAL
(see INSTITUTIONAL GROUP I-2)
308.4, 407
HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS
(see WIND LOADS)
202
HURRICANE SHELTER (see STORM SHELTER)
HURRICANE SHUTTERS
1609.1.2
HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOMS
421, Table 509.1
HYPERBARIC FACILITIES
425
I
ICE-SENSITIVE STRUCTURE
Atmospheric ice loads
1614.1
Definition
202
IDENTIFICATION, REQUIREMENTS FOR
Fire barriers
703.6
Fire partitions
703.6
Fire wall
703.6
Glazing
2403.1, 2406.3
Inspection certificate
1702.1
Labeling
1703.5
Preservative-treated wood
2303.1.9.1
Smoke barrier
703.6
Smoke partition
703.6
Steel
2203.1
IMPACT LOAD
202, 1603.1.1, 1607.10
INCIDENTAL USES
Area
509.3
Occupancy classification
509.2
Separation and protection
509.4
INCINERATOR ROOMS
Table 509.1, 1006.2.2.2
INDUSTRIAL (see FACTORY OCCUPANCY)
INSPECTIONS
110
Approval required
110.6
EIFS
110.3.9
Energy efficiency
110.3.8
Fees
109
Fire-extinguishing systems
904.4
Fire-resistant materials
110.3.9
Fire-resistant penetrations
110.3.7
Footing or foundation
110.3.9
Lath or gypsum board
110.3.5, 2503
Liability
104.8
Masonry
110.3.9
Preliminary
110.2
Required
110.3
Smoke control
107.3.5, 909.18.8, 1705.18
Soils
110.3.9
Special (see SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS)
110.3.9
Sprinkler protection
903.5
Welding
110.3.9, 2204.1
Wind
110.3.9
Wood
110.3.9
INSTITUTIONAL I-1
[see INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I) and
RESIDENTIAL (GROUP R-4)]
308.3, 420
Alarm and detection
420.6, 907.2.6.1, 907.2.10, 907.2.11.2, 907.5.2.3.2
Combustible decorations
806.1
Emergency escape and rescue
1030
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.5
Corridors
1020.1
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1017.2, 1006.3.2
Occupancy exceptions
308.3.1 through 308.3.4
Separation, unit
420.2, 420.3
Sprinkler protection
420.5, 903.2.6, 903.3.2
INSTITUTIONAL I-2
[see INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)]
308.4, 407
Accessibility
E106.4.6
Alarms and detection
407.8, 407.9, 907.2.6.2
Care suites
407.4.4
Combustible decorations
806.1
Electrical systems
407.11, 2702.1.7, 2702.2.7
Hyperbaric facilities
425
Means of egress
407.4
Aisles
1018.5
Corridors
407.2, 407.3, 407.4, 1020.3
Doors
407.3.1, 1010.1.9.8, 1010.2
Exterior exit stairway
1027.2
Hardware
1010.1.9.4, 1010.1.9.5
Stairway, exit access
1019.3
Travel distance
407.4
Occupancy exceptions
308.4.1 through 308.4.2
Separation
410
Smoke barriers
407.5
Smoke compartment
407.2.1, 407.2.3, 407.5
Smoke partitions
407.3
Sprinkler protection
407.7, 903.2.6, 903.3.2
Yards
407.10
INSTITUTIONAL I-3
[see INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)]
308.5, 408
Accessibility
E104.2.2, E106.4.8
Alarm and detection
408.10, 907.2.6.3
Combustible decorations
806.1
Means of egress
408.2, 408.3, 408.4
Aisles
1018.5
Doors
408.4, 1010.1.1, 1010.1.2
Exit discharge
408.3.6
Exit sign exemption
1013.1
Hardware
408.4, 1010.1.9.2, 1010.1.9.3, 1010.1.9.4, 1010.1.9.8, 1010.2.14
Stairway, exit access
1019.3
Travel distance
408.6.1, 408.8.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Security glazing
408.7
Separation
408.5, 408.8
Smoke barrier
408.6
Smoke compartment
408.4.1, 408.6, 408.9
Sprinkler protection
408.11, 903.2.6
Standby/emergency power
2702.2.9
INSTITUTIONAL I-4
[see INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)]
308.6
Alarms and detection
907.2.6
Corridor rating
1020.1
Educational
303.1.3, 305.1
Means of egress
Day care
1006.2.2.5
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Occupancy exceptions
308.6.1, 308.6.2, 308.6.3, 308.6.4
Sprinkler protection
903.2.6
INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP I)
308
Accessory
508.2
Adult care
308.6
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Child care
303.1.3, 308.6.4, 310.1
Group specific provisions
Group I-1 (see INSTITUTIONAL I-1)
308.2
Group I-2 (see INSTITUTIONAL I-2)
308.4, 407
Group I-3 (see INSTITUTIONAL I-3)
308.5, 408
Group I-4 (see INSTITUTIONAL I-4)
306.1, 310.5.1
Height
503, 504, 505, 508
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Corridors
1020.3
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
407, 1006.3.2, 1016.2.1, 1017.2,
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Occupancy exceptions
303.1.1, 303.1.2, 308.3.3, 308.3.4, 308.4.2, 308.6.1 through 308.6.4, 310.5.1
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5
Standby, emergency power
2702.2
INSULATION
Concealed
720.2
Duct insulation
720.1
Exposed
720.3
Fiberboard
720.1, 1508.1.1, 2303.1.6.2, 2303.1.6.3
Foam plastic (see FOAM PLASTICS)
720.1
Loose fill
720.4, 720.6
Pipe insulation
720.1, 720.7
Reflective plastic core
2614
Roof
720.5, 1508
Sound
720, 807, 1207
Thermal
720, 807, 1508
INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT
Lighting
1205
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
Sound transmission
1207
Space dimensions
1208
Temperature control
1204
Ventilation
409.3, 414.3, 415.9.1.7, 1203.5
Yards or courts
1206.2, 1206.3
INTERIOR FINISHES
Chapter 8
Acoustical ceiling systems
807, 808
Application
803.12, 804.4
Atriums
404.8
Children’s play structures
424
Covered and open mall buildings
402.6
Decorative materials
801.4, 806
Floor finish
804, 805
Foam plastic insulation
2603.3, 2603.4
Foam plastic trim
806.5, 2604.2
Insulation
807
Light-transmitting plastics
2606
Signs
402.6.4, 2611
Trim
806.7, 806.8
Wall and ceiling finishes
803
Wet location
1210
INTERPRETATION, CODE
104.1
J
JAILS (see INSTITUTIONAL I-3)
308.5, 408
JOINT
Gypsum board
2508.4
Shotcrete
1908.7
Waterproofing
1805.3.3
JOINTS, FIRE-RESISTANT SYSTEMS
715
K
KIOSKS
402.6.2
KITCHENS
303.3, 306.2
Dimensions
1208
Means of egress
1016.2
Occupant load
Table 1004.5
Sinks
2902.1
L
LABORATORIES
Classification of
304.1
Hazardous materials
414, 415
Incidental uses
Table 509.1
LADDERS
Boiler, incinerator and furnace rooms
1006.2.2.1
Construction
1011.15, 1011.16, 1014.2, 1014.6, 1015.3, 1015.4
Emergency escape window wells
1030.5.2
Group I-3
408.3.5, 1011.15, 1011.16
Heliport
412.8.3
Refrigeration machinery room
1006.2.2.2
Ship’s ladders
1011.14
Stage
410.6.3.4
LAMINATED TIMBER,
STRUCTURAL GLUED
602.4, 2303.1, 2303.1.3, 2304.12.2.4, 2306.1
LANDINGS
Doors
1010.1.5
Ramp
1012.6
Stair
1011.6
LATH, METAL OR WIRE
Table 2507.2
LAUNDRIES
304.1, 306.2, Table 509.1
LAUNDRY CHUTE
713.13, 903.2.11.2
LEGAL
Federal and state authority
102.2
Registered design professional
107.1, Reserved
Right of entry
Reserved
LIBRARIES
Classification, other than school
303.1.3, 303.4
Classification, school
303.1.3, 305.1
Live load
Table 1607.1
LIGHT, REQUIRED
1205
Artificial
1205.3
Emergency (see EMERGENCY LIGHTING)
Means of egress
1008.2
Natural
1205.2
Stairways
1205.4
Yards and courts
1206
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION
Definition
202
Cold-formed steel
2211
LIGHTS, PLASTIC CEILING DIFFUSERS
2606.7
LINEN CHUTE
713.13, 903.2.11.2
LINTEL
Fire resistance
704.11
Masonry, wood support
2304.13
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Table 414.5.1, 415.9.2
LIVE LOADS
202, 1607
Construction documents
107.2, 1603.1.1
Posting of
106.1
LIVE/WORK UNITS
Separation
508.1
LOAD AND RESISTANCE
FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD)
1602.1
Factored load
202
Limit state
202
Load combinations
1605.2
Load factor
202
Resistance factor
202
Wood design
2301.2, 2307
LOAD COMBINATIONS
1605
Allowable stress design
1605.2
Load and resistance factor design
1605.2
Strength design
1605.2
LOADS
106, 202
Atmospheric ice
1614
Combinations
1605
Dead
202, 1606
Factored load
202, 1604.2
Flood
1603.1.7, 1612
Impact
202, 1607.10
Live
508.5.8, 1603.1.1, 1607
Load effects
202, 1604.4
Nominal load
202, 1604.2
Occupant (see OCCUPANT LOAD)
1004.1
Rain
1611
Seismic
1603.1.5, 1613
Snow
1603.1.3, 1608
Soil lateral
1610
Wind
1603.1.4, 1609
LOBBIES
Assembly occupancy
1029.4
Elevator
405.4.3, 3006, 3007.6, 3008.6
Exit discharge
1028.2
Underground buildings
405.4.3
LOCKS AND LATCHES
1010.1.9, 1010.1.10
Access-controlled egress
1010.2.14
Delayed egress locks
1010.1.9.8
Electromagnetically locked
1010.1.9.10
Group I-2
407.4.1.1, 1010.2.14
Group I-3
408.4, 1010.1.9.9
Group R-4
1010.1
High-rise
403.5.3
Toilet rooms
2902.3.5
LUMBER
General provisions
Chapter 23
Quality standards
2303
M
MAINTENANCE
Means of egress
1001.3, 3310.2
Property
101.4.4
MALL
(see COVERED AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX
907.4.2
MANUFACTURED HOMES
Flood resistant
G501
MARQUEES
202, 3106, H113
Drainage, water
3201.4
Construction
3106.5
Live load
Table 1607.1, 1607.13
Prohibited location
3106.4
Roof construction
3106.3
MASONRY
Adhered veneer
1405.10
Anchorage
1604.8.2
Anchored veneer
1405.6
Architectural cast stone
2103.1
Autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC)
202
Calculated fire resistance
Table 721.1
Chimneys
2113
Construction
2104
Corbelled
2104.1.2
Dampproofing
1805.2.2
Design, methods
2101.2, 2107, 2108
Fire resistance, calculated
722.3.2, 722.3.4
Fireplaces
2111
Floor anchorage
1604.8.2
Foundation walls
1807.1.5
Glass unit
2110
Heaters
2112
Joint reinforcement
2103.4
Materials
2103
Penetrations
714
Quality assurance
2105
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
Roof anchorage
1604.8.1
Seismic provisions
2106
Serviceability
1604.3.4
Support
2304.13
Surface bonding
2103.2.2
Veneer
1405.6, 1405.10, 2101.2.1, 2308.6.10
Wall anchorage
1604.8.2
Waterproofing
1805.3.2
Wythe
202
MATERIALS
Alternates
104.11
Aluminum
Chapter 20
Concrete
Chapter 19
Glass and glazing
Chapter 24
Gypsum
Chapter 25
Masonry
Chapter 21
Noncombustible
703.5
Plastic
Chapter 26
Steel
Chapter 22
Testing (see TESTING)
1707
Wood
Chapter 23
MEANS OF EGRESS
Chapter 10
Accessible
1009, 2702.2.2
Aircraft related
412.3.2, 412.3.3, 412.3.4, 412.5.2, 412.7.1
Alternating tread device
505.3, 1006.2.2.1, 1006.2.2.2, 1011.14
Ambulatory care facilities
422.3.1, 422.3.3
Assembly
1009.1, 1029
Atrium
404.9, 404.10, 707.3.6
Capacity
1005.3
Ceiling height
1003.2
Child care facilities (see Day care facilities)
Construction drawings
107.2.3
Configuration
1007
Convergence
1005.6
Covered and open mall buildings
402.8
Day care facilities
308.6, 310.5.1, Table 1004.5, 1006.2.2.4
Distribution
1005.5
Doors
1005.7, 1006.2, 1010, 1022.2, 2702.2.11
During construction
3303.3, 3310
Elevation change
1003.5
Elevators
403.5.2, 403.6.1, 1003.7, 1009, 3008
Emergency escape and rescue
1030
Encroachment
1005.7
Equipment platform
505.3
Escalators
1003.7
Existing buildings
1009.1, 3310
Exit (see EXIT)
1022 through 1027
Exit access
(see EXIT ACCESS)
1016 through 1021
Exit discharge (see EXIT DISCHARGE)
1028
Exit enclosures
1023.2
Exit passageway
(see EXIT PASSAGWAY)
1024
Exit signs
1013, 2702.2.5
Fire escapes
412.8.3
Floor surface
804, 1003.4
Gates
1010.4
Group I-2
407.2, 407.3, 407.4, 1019.3
Group I-3
408.2, 408.3, 408.4, 408.6, 408.8, 1019.3
Guards
1015
Handrails
1014
Hazardous materials
414.6.1.2, 415.11.2, 415.11.6.6
Headroom
1003.2, 1003.3
Heliports
412.8.3
High-hazard Group H
415.11.2
High-rise
403.5, 403.6
Illumination
1008, 2702.2.4
Interior finish
803.11, 804
Ladders (see LADDERS)
Live loads
Table 1607.1
Live/work units
508.5.3
Mezzanines
505.2.2, 505.2.3, 1004.2.2, 1009.1
Moving walk
1003.7
Number
1006
Occupant load
1004.1, 1004.2
Parking
406.5.7
Protruding objects
1003.3, 1005.7
Ramps
1012, 1027
Scoping
101.3, 105.2.2, 108.2, 1001.1
Seating, fixed
1009.1, 1029
Special amusement
411.7
Stages
410.3.3, 410.6
Stairways
403.5, 404.6, 1005.3.1, 1011, 1023.2, 1027
Temporary structures
3103.4
Travel distance (see TRAVEL DISTANCE)
1016.2.1, 1017
Turnstile
1010.5
Underground buildings
405.5.1, 405.7
Width
1005.1, 1005.2, 1005.4, 1011.2, 1012.5.1, 1020.3, 1029.6, 1029.8
MECHANICAL (see AIR CONDITIONING, HEATING,
REFRIGERATION, AND VENTILATION)
101.4.2
Access
1011.12, 1209.3
Air transfer openings
705.10, 706.11, 707.10, 708.9, 709.8, 711.7, 713.10, 714.1.1, 717
Chimneys (see CHIMNEYS)
Code
Chapter 28
Disconnected
3303.6
Ducts
704.8, 705.10, 706.11, 707.10, 712.1.6, 712.1.10.3, 713.10, 708.9, 709.8, 710.8, 714.1.1, 717
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.3.2
Equipment on roof
1510, 1511.2
Equipment platforms
505.3
Factory-built fireplace
2111.14.1
Fireplaces
2111
Incidental use room
Table 509.1
Motion picture projection room
409.3
Permit required
105.1, 105.2
Roof access
1011.12
Smoke control systems
909
Systems
202, Chapter 28
MECHANICALLY
LAMINATED DECKING
2304.9.3
MEMBRANE ROOF COVERINGS
1507.11, 1507.12, 1507.13
MEMBRANE STRUCTURES
2702.2.13, 3102
MENTAL HOSPITALS (see INSTITUTIONAL I-2)
MERCANTILE OCCUPANCY (GROUP M)
309
Alarm and detection
907.2.7
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Covered and open mall buildings
402
Hazardous material display and storage
414.2.5
Height
503, 504, 505, 508
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.3, 1018.4
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
402.8, 1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
508.2
Live/work units
508.5
Mall buildings
402
Parking below/above
510.7, 510.8, 510.9
Special mixed
510.2
Occupancy exceptions
307.1.1
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Sprinkler protection
903.2.7
Standpipes
905.3.3
Unlimited area
507.5, 507.4, 507.13
METAL
Aluminum
Chapter 20
Roof coverings
1504.3.2, 1507.5
Steel
Chapter 22
Veneer
1404.5
MEZZANINES
505
Area limitations
505.2.1, 505.3.1
Egress
505.2.2, 505.2.3, 1004.6, 1009.1
Equipment platforms
505.3
Guards
505.3.3, 1015.1
Height
505.2, 1003.2
Occupant load
1004.2.2
Stairways
712.1.11, 1011.14, 1023.2
MIRRORS
1010.1, 2406.1
MIXED OCCUPANCY
(see OCCUPANCY SEPARATION)
MODIFICATIONS
Reserved
MOISTURE PROTECTION
1210, 1403.2, 1503
MONASTERIES
310.4
MORTAR
202
Ceramic tile
2103.2.3
Dampproofing
1805.2.2
Fire resistance
714.3, 714.4.1
Glass unit masonry
2110.1.1
Masonry
2103.2
Rodentproofing
Appendix F
MOTELS
310.3, 310.4
MOTION PICTURE PROJECTION ROOMS
409
Construction
409.2
Exhaust air
409.3.2, 409.3.3
Lighting control
409.4
Projection room
409.3
Supply air
409.3.1
Ventilation
409.3
MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING SYSTEM
406.5
Accessibility
1109.14
MOTOR VEHICLE FACILITIES
304, 311, 406.7
MOVING, BUILDINGS
101.4.7, D103.3
MOVING WALKS
3004.2
Means of egress
1003.7
N
NAILING
202, 2303.6, 2304, 2304.10
NONCOMBUSTIBLE BUILDING MATERIAL

703.5
NURSES STATIONS
(See CARE PROVIDER STATIONS)
NURSING HOMES
(see INSTITUTIONAL, GROUP I-2)
308.4, 407
O
OCCUPANCY
Accessory
508.2
Certificates (see CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY)
Change (see CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY)
Floor loads
Table 1607.1
Special
Chapter 4
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION
302
Covered and open mall buildings
402
HPM
415.11
Mixed
508, 510
Special
Chapter 4
OCCUPANCY SEPARATION
Accessory
508.2
Aircraft related
412.5.1
Covered mall and open mall building
402.4.2
Mixed occupancy
508, 510, 707.3.9
Private parking garages
406.3, Table 508.4
Repair garages
406.8
Required fire resistance
Table 508.4, 510
OCCUPANT EVACUATION ELEVATORS
403.5.2, 403.6.2, 3008
OCCUPANT LOAD
Certificate of occupancy
111
Covered and open mall building
402.8.2
Cumulative
1004.2
Determination of
1004.1, 1004.6
Increased
1004.5.1
Outdoors
1004.7
Seating, fixed
1004.5
Signs
1004.9
OFFICE BUILDINGS
(See GROUP B OCCUPANCIES)
Classification
304
Live loads
Table 1607.1, 1607.5
OPEN MALL BUILDINGS
(see COVERED AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
OPENING PROTECTION,
EXTERIOR WALLS
705.8
OPENING PROTECTION, FLOORS
(see VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION)
OPENING PROTECTIVES
705.8, 706.8, 707.6, 708.6, 709.5, 712.1.13, 713.7, 716
Automatic-closing devices
909.5.3
Fire door and shutter assemblies
705.8.2, 712.1.13.1, 716.5
Fire windows
716.6
Glass unit masonry (see GLASS UNIT MASONRY)
2110.1.1
Glazing
716.6
ORGANIC COATINGS
418
ORGANIC PEROXIDES
307.4, 307.5
OXIDIZERS, LIQUID AND SOLID
307.3, 307.4, 307.5
P
PANIC HARDWARE
1010.1.10
PARAPET, EXTERIOR WALL
705.11, 2109.3.4.3
Construction
705.11.1
Fire wall
706.6
Height
705.11.1
PARKING, ACCESSIBLE
1106, 1111.1
PARKING GARAGES
406.4, 406.5, 406.6
Accessibility
1105.1.1, 1106.1, 1106.7.4, 1111.1
Barriers, vehicle
202, 406.4.2, 1607.9.3
Classification
311, 406.3.1, 406.4
Construction type
406.5.1, Table 601
Enclosed
(see PARKING GARAGE, ENCLOSED)
406.6
Gates
3110
Guards
406.4.1, 2407.1.3
Height, clear
406.4.2
Live loads
Table 1607.1, 1607.11.1.3
Means of egress
1006.3, 1006.2.2.6, 1019
Occupancy separation
508, 510
Open (see PARKING GARAGE, OPEN)
406.5
Special provisions
510
Sprinkler protection
903.2.10
Underground
405
Vertical openings
712.1.10
PARKING GARAGES, ENCLOSED
406.6
Area and height [see STORAGE OCCUPANCY (GROUP S)]
406.6.1
Means of egress
1003.2, 1006.3.2, 1012.1
Ventilation
406.6.2
PARKING GARAGES, OPEN
202, 406.5
Area and height [see STORAGE OCCUPANCY (GROUP S)]
406.5, Table 406.5.4
Construction type
406.5.1
Means of egress
406.5.7, 1003.2, Table 1006.2.1, 1006.3, 1012.1, 1017.3, 1019, 1020.1, 1028.2
Mixed occupancy
406.5.3
Standpipes
406.5.8
Ventilation
406.5.10
PARTICLEBOARD
202
Draftstopping
718.3.1
Moisture protection
1403.2, 1405.2
Quality
2303.1.8
Veneer
1405.5
PARTITIONS
Fabric partition
202, 1607.15.1
Fire (see FIRE PARTITION)
Live loads
1607.5, 1607.15
Materials
602.4.6, 603
Occupancy, specific
708.1
Smoke (see SMOKE PARTITION)
Toilets
1210
PARTY WALLS
(see FIRE WALLS)
706.1.1, Table 716.6
PASSAGEWAY, EXIT (see EXIT)
1024.1
PASSENGER STATIONS
303.4
PATIO COVERS
2606.10, Appendix I
PEDESTRIAN
Protection at construction site
3303.2, 3306
Walkways and tunnels
3104, 3202.3.4
PENETRATION-FIRESTOP SYSTEM
Fire-rated walls
714.5.2
Fire-rated horizontal assemblies
714.4.2
PENETRATIONS
714, 717
Fire-resistant assemblies
Exterior wall
705
Fire barrier
707.7, 707.10
Fire partition
708.7, 708.9
Fire wall
706.9, 706.11
Horizontal assemblies
714.4
Shaft enclosures
712.1, 713.1, 713.8, 713.10
Smoke barriers
709.6, 709.8
Smoke partitions
710.6, 710.7
Special inspection
1705.17
Walls
713.4, 714.3
Nonfire-resistant assemblies
714.5
PERFORMANCE CATEGORY
Definition
202
Wood structural panels
2302
PERLITE
Table 721.1(1), Table 2507.2
PERMITS
105
Application for
105.1, 105.3
Drawings and specifications
107.2.1
Expiration
105.4.1.2
Fees
109
Placement of permit
105.7
Plan review
107.3
Suspension or revocation
105.6
Time limitations
105.3.2
PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL SYSTEMS
202
Fire classification
1505.8, 1505.9
Panels/modules
1512
Photovoltaic module
202
Photovoltaic panel
202
Roof live loads
1607.13.5
Rooftop mounted
1510.7
PIER FOUNDATIONS
(see FOUNDATION, SHALLOW)
PILE FOUNDATIONS (see FOUNDATION, DEEP)
PIPES
Embedded in fire protection
704.8
Insulation covering
720.1, 720.7
Penetration protection
714, 1023.5
Under platform
410.4
PLAIN CONCRETE (see CONCRETE)
1906
PLAN REVIEW
107.3
PLASTER
Fire-resistance requirements
719
Gypsum
719.1, 719.2
Portland cement
719.5, Table 2507.2, Table 2511.1.1
PLASTIC
Chapter 26
Approval for use
2606.2
Composites
2612
Core insulation, reflective plastic
2614
Decking
1410, 2612
Fiber-reinforced polymer
2613
Finish and trim, interior
2604
Light-transmitting panels
2401.1, 2607
Roof panels
2609
Signs
402.6.4, 2611, D102.2.10, H107.1.1
Thermal barrier
2603.4
Veneer
1404.8, 2605, D102.2.11
Walls, exterior
2603.4.1.4, 2603.5
PLASTIC, FOAM
Children’s play structures
424.2
Insulation (see FOAM PLASTICS)
2603
Interior finish
803.4, 2603.9
Malls
402.6.2, 402.6.4.5
Stages and platforms
410.3.6
PLASTIC, LIGHT-TRANSMITTING
Awnings and patio covers
2606.10
Bathroom accessories
2606.9
Exterior wall panels
2607
Fiber-reinforced polymer
2613.4
Fiberglass-reinforced polymer
2613.4
Glazing
2608
Greenhouses
2606.11
Light-diffusing systems
2606.7
Roof panels
2609
Signs, interior
2611
Skylight
2610
Solar collectors
2606.12
Structural requirements
2606.5
Unprotected openings
2608.1, 2608.2
Veneer, exterior
603, 2605
Wall panels
2607
PLATFORM (see STAGES AND PLATFORMS)
410
Construction
410.4
Temporary
410.4.1
PLATFORM, EQUIPMENT (see EQUIPMENT PLATFORM)
PLATFORM LIFTS, WHEELCHAIR
Accessible means of egress
2702.2.2
PLUMBING (see TOILET AND TOILET ROOMS)
101.4.3, 105.2, Chapter 29
Aircraft hangars, residential
412.5.4
Facilities, minimum
2902, 3305.1
Fixtures
Table 2902.1
Room requirements
1210, 2606.9
PLYWOOD (see WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS)
202
Preservative-treated
2303.1.9.1
PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE
721
PRESERVATIVE-TREATED WOOD
202
Fastenings
2304.10.5
Quality
2303.1.9
Required
1403.6, 2304.12
Shakes, roof covering
1507.9.6
PROJECTION ROOMS
Motion picture
409
PROJECTIONS, COMBUSTIBLE
705.2.3, 1406.3
PROPERTY LINE (see FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE)
705.3
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
101.4.4
PROSCENIUM
Opening protection
410.3.5
Wall
410.3.4
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (see INSTITUTIONAL I-2)
308.4
PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM
(see EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS)
Covered and open mall buildings
402.7, 907.2.20, 2702.2.4
Special amusement buildings
411.6
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 32, Chapter 33
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Encroachments
Chapter 32
PYROPHORIC MATERIALS
Table 307.1(1), 307.4
R
RAILING (see GUARDS AND HANDRAILS)
RAMPS
1012
Assembly occupancy
1029
Construction
1012.2 through 1012.5.3, 1012.7, 1012.10
Exit
1023
Exit access
1019
Exterior
1027
Guards
1012.9, 1015, 1607.9
Handrails
1012.8, 1014, 1607.9
Interior
1012.2
Landings
1012.6
Parking garage
406.4
Slope
1012.2
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Children’s play structure
402.6.3, 424
Special amusement buildings
(see AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS, SPECIAL)
REFERENCED STANDARDS
Chapter 35
Applicability
102.3, 102.4
Fire resistance
703.2
List
Chapter 35
Organizations
Chapter 35
REFORMATORIES
308.5
REFRIGERATION (see MECHANICAL)
101.4.2
Machinery room
1006.2.2.2
REFUGE AREAS (see HORIZONTAL EXIT,
SMOKE COMPARTMENTS, STORM SHELTERS)
407.5.1, 408.6.2, 420.4.1, 422.3.2, 423.1.1, 423.3, 423.4, 1026.4
REFUSE CHUTE
713.13
REINFORCED CONCRETE (see CONCRETE)
General
1901.2
REINFORCEMENT
Concrete
1908.4
Masonry
2103.4
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACES OF
Alarms and detection
907.2.1
Balcony
1029.5
Classification
303.1.4, 303.4, 305.1.1, 305.2.1, 308.6.2
Door operations
1010.1.9
Egress
1029
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Unlimited area
507.6, 507.7
RELOCATING, BUILDING
101.4.8, D103.3
REPAIRS, BUILDING
101.4.8, 202
Flood
1612.1, 1612.2
Minor
105.2.2
Permit required
105.1
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY (GROUP R)
310
Accessibility
E104.2
Alarm and detection
907.5.2.3.2, 907.5.2.3.3, 907.2.8, 907.2.9, 907.2.10, 907.2.11
Area
503, 505, 506, 508, 510
Draftstopping
718.3.2, 718.4.2
Group provisions
Group R-1 (transient)
310.3
Group R-2 (apartment)
310.4
Group R-3 (two dwellings per building)
310.5
Group R-4 (group homes)
310.6
Height
503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live load
Table 1607.1
Live/work units
508.5
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.5
Corridors
1020.1, 1020.3
Doors
1010.1.1
Emergency escape and rescue
1030.1
Exit signs
1013.1, 1013.2
Single exits
1006.3.2,
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
508.2, G801.1
Live/work units
508.5
Parking, private
406.3
Parking below/above
510.4, 510.7, 510.9
Special mixed
510.2
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Risk category
Table 1604.5.1
Special provisions
510.2, 510.5, 510.6
Separation
508.5, 420, 508.2.4, 508.3.3
Sprinkler protection
903.2.8, 903.3.2
RETAINING WALLS
1807.2, 2304.12.2.9
Seismic
1803.5.12
REVIEWING STANDS
(see BLEACHERS AND GRANDSTANDS)
RISERS, STAIR (see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
Alternating tread device
1011.14
Assembly
1011.5.2, 1029.6, 1029.7, 1029.9, 1029.13
Closed
1011.5.5.3
General
1011.5
Spiral
1011.10
Uniformity
1011.5.4
RISK CATEGORY (Structural Design)
202, 1604.5
Multiple occupancies
1604.5.1
RODENTPROOFING
Appendix F
ROLL ROOFING
1507.6
ROOF ACCESS
1011.12
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND
ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
202
Cooling towers
1510.4
Drainage
1503.4, 3201.4
Fire classification
1505
Fire district
D102.2.9
Height modifications
504.3
Impact resistance
1504.7
Insulation
1508
Materials
1506
Mechanical equipment screen
1510.6
Parapet walls
1503.3, 1503.6
Penthouses
1510.2
Photovoltaic panels and modules
1510.7, 1512.1
Radiant barrier
202
Roof ventilation
202
Tanks
1510.3
Towers, spires, domes and cupolas
1510.5
Weather protection
1503
Wind resistance
1504.1, 1609.6
ROOF CONSTRUCTION
Construction walkways
3306.7
Coverings (see ROOF COVERINGS)
1609.6.2
Deck
1609.6.1
Draftstopping
718.4
Fire resistance
Table 601
Fireblocking
718.2
Live loads
Table 1607.1, 1607.13
Materials
Chapter 6
Penetration of fire-resistant assemblies
714
Protection from adjacent construction
3307.1
Rain loads
1611
Roof structures
504.3, 1509, D102.2.9
Signs, roof mounted
H110
Slope, minimum
Chapter 15
Snow load
1608
Trusses
2211.3, 2303.4
Wood (see ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD
602.4, 602.5
Anchorage to walls
1604.8.2
Attic access
1209.2
Diaphragms
2305.1, 2306.2
Fastening requirements
2304.10
Fire-retardant-treated
Table 601
Framing
2304.11.3
Rafters
2306.1.1
Sheathing
2304.7
Trusses
2303.4
Ventilation, attic
1203.2
ROOF COVERINGS
1507
Asphalt shingles
1507.2
Built up
1507.10
Clay tile
1507.3
Concrete tile
1507.3
Fire district
D102.2.4
Fire resistance
602, 603, 1505
Flashing
1503.2, 1503.6, 1507.2.9, 1507.3.9, 1507.5.7, 1507.7.7, 1510.6
Impact resistance
1504.7
Insulation
1508
Liquid-applied coating
1507.15
Membrane
3102
Metal roof panels
1507.4
Metal roof shingles
1507.5
Modified bitumen
1507.11
Photovoltaic shingles
1507.17
Plastics, light-transmitting panels
2609
Roof replacement
202, 1511.3
Reroofing
202, 1511
Roll
1507.6
Roof recover
202
Single-ply
202, 1507.12
Slate shingles
1507.7
Sprayed polyurethane foam
1507.14
Thermoplastic single-ply
1507.13
Wind loads
1504.1, 1609.6
Wood shakes
1507.9
Wood shingles
1507.8
ROOF DECK
202
ROOF DRAINAGE
1503.4
Scuppers
202, 1503.4.2
ROOF REPLACEMENT/RECOVERING
1511.3
ROOF STRUCTURE (see ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES)
ROOM DIMENSIONS
1208
ROOMING HOUSE (see BOARDING HOUSE)
310
S
SAFEGUARDS
DURING CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 33
Adjoining property protection
3307
Construction
3302
Demolition
3303
Excavations
1804.1
Fire extinguishers
3309
Means of egress
3310
Protection of pedestrians
3306
Sanitary facilities
3305
Site work
3304
Sprinkler protection
3312
Standpipes
3308.1.1, 3311
Temporary use of streets, alleys and
public property
3308
SAFETY GLAZING
716.5.8.4, 2406
SCHOOLS (see EDUCATIONAL OCCUPANCY)
SEATING
Tables
1029.9
SEATING, FIXED
1029
Aisles
1029.9, 1029.13
Bleachers (see BLEACHERS)
Grandstands (see GRANDSTANDS)
Guards
1029.16
Live load
Table 1607.1
Occupant load
1004
Stability
1029.14
Temporary
108
SECURITY GLAZING
408.7
SECURITY GRILLES
402.8.8, 1010.3.4
SEISMIC
1613
Construction documents
107, 1603.1.5
Earthquake recording equipment
Appendix L
Fire resistance
704.12
Geotechnical investigation
1803.5.11, 1803.5.12
Glazing
2404
Loads
1613
Mapped acceleration parameters
1613.3.1, Figures 1613.3.1(1) through1613.3.1(8)
Masonry
2106
Membrane structure
3102.7
Seismic design category
202
Seismic detailing
1604.10
Site class
202
Site coefficients
202
Steel
2205.2, 2206.2
Wood
2305
SERVICE SINKS
Table 2902.1
SERVICE STATION
(see MOTOR FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES)
SHAFT (see SHAFT ENCLOSURE
AND VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION)
202
SHAFT ENCLOSURE
(see VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION)
713
Continuity
713.5, 713.11, 713.12
Elevators
713.14
Exceptions
713.2, 1019, 1023,
Exterior walls
713.6
Fire-resistance rating
707.3.1, 713.4
Group I-3
408.5
High-rise buildings
403.2.1.2, 403.2.3, 403.3.1.1, 403.5
Joints
713.9, 715
Materials
713.3
Opening protection
713.8, 713.10, 714, 717.5.3
Penetrations
712.1, 713.1, 713.8, 713.10
Refuse and laundry chutes
713.13
Required
713.1
SHEAR WALL
Gypsum board and plaster
2505
Masonry
202
Wood
202, 2305.1, 2306.3
SHEATHING
Clearance from earth
2304.12.1.2
Fastening
2304.10
Fiberboard
Table 2306.3(2)
Floor
2304.8
Gypsum
Table 2506.2, 2508
Moisture protection
2304.12.1.2
Roof
2304.8
Wall
2304.6
Wood structural panels
2303.1.5, 2211.3
SHOPPING CENTERS
(see COVERED AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS)
SHOTCRETE
1908
SHUTTERS, FIRE
(see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
716.5
SIDEWALKS
Live loads
Table 1607.1
SIGNS
3107, Appendix H
Accessibility
1013.4
Animated devices
H108
Construction
H105, H107
Covered and open mall building
402.6.4
Doors
1010.1.9.2, 1010.2.14, 1010.1.9.8
Electrical
H106
Elevators
3002.3, 3007.6.5, 3008.6.5
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.3.1
Exit
1013, 2702.2.5
Floor loads
106.1
Ground
H109
Height limitation
H109.1, H112.4
Illumination
H106.1
Luminous
403.5.5, 1013.5, 1025
Marquee
H113
Obstruction
1003.3.2, 1003.3.3, H103
Occupant load, assembly
1004
Parking spaces
1111.1
Plastic
2611, D102.2.10
Portable
H114
Projecting
H112
Protruding objects
1003.3
Roof
H110
Stairway identification
1023.8, 1023.9
Standpipe control valve
905.7.1
Toilet room
2902.4, 2902.4.1
Walls
703.6, H111
SITE DRAWINGS
107.2.6
SITE WORK
3304
SKYLIGHTS
2405, 3106.3
Light, required
1205.2
Loads
2404
Plastic
2610
Protection from adjacent construction
3307.1
Vertical opening protective
712.1.15
SLAB ON GROUND, CONCRETE
1907, 2304.12.1.4
SLATE SHINGLES
1507.7
SLEEPING UNITS
202
Group I
308
Group R
310
Scoping
101.2
Separation
420.2, 420.3
SLOPE (see ROOF CONSTRUCTION)
SMOKE ALARMS
Bathrooms
907.2.11.4
Cooking appliances
907.2.11.3
Live/work unit
508.5.6, 907.2.11.2
Multiple-station
907.2.11
Residential aircraft hangars
412.5.3, 412.5.4, 907.2.21
Residential occupancies
420.5, 907.2.11.1, 907.2.11.2
Single-station
907.2.11
SMOKE BARRIERS
202
Construction
407.4.3, 709.4, 909.5
Doors
709.5, 716.5.3, 909.5.3
Fire-resistance rating
703, 709.3
Glazing, rated
716.6
Inspection
110.3.7
Joints
709.7, 715
Marking
703.7
Materials
709.2
Opening protection
709.5, 714.3, 716, 717.5.5, 909.5.3
Penetrations
709.6, 714
Smoke control
909.5
Special provisions
Ambulatory care facilities
422.2, 422.3, 709.5
Group I-1
420.4, 709.5
Group I-2
407.5
Group I-3
408.6, 408.7
Underground
405.4.2, 405.4.3
SMOKE COMPARTMENT
407, 408, 422
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREA)
SMOKE CONTROL
909
Amusement buildings, special
411.1
Atrium buildings
404.5
Covered and open mall building
402.7.2
Group I-3
408.9
High-rise (smoke removal)
403.4.7, 1023.11
Stages
410.3.7.2
Standby power systems
909.11, 909.20.7.2, 2702.2.15
Underground buildings
405.5
SMOKE DAMPERS
717.2 through 717.5
SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM
(see FIRE ALARM AND SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEMS)
907
SMOKE DETECTORS
Covered and open mall building
402.8.6.1, 907.2.20
High-rise buildings
403.4.1, 907.2.13
HPM
415.11.10.3
Institutional I-2
407.9
Smoke-activated doors
716.5.9.4
Special amusement buildings
411.5
Underground buildings
907.2.18
SMOKE DEVELOPMENT
802, 803.1.1, Table 803.11
SMOKE EXHAUST SYSTEMS
Underground buildings
405.5, 907.2.18, 909.2
SMOKE PARTITIONS
710
Continuity
710.4
Doors
710.5
Ducts and air transfer openings
710.8
Fire-resistance rating
710.3
Inspection
110.3.6
Joints
710.7
Marking
703.7
Materials
710.2
Opening protection
710.5, 717.5.7
Penetrations
710.6
Special provisions
Atriums
404.6
Group I-2
407.3
SMOKE REMOVAL (High rise)
403.4.7
SMOKE VENTS
410.3.7.1, 910
SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURES
403.5.4, 1023.11
Design
909.20
SNOW LOAD
1608
Glazing
2404
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS
(see FOUNDATION)
Chapter 18
Depth of footings
1809.4
Excavation, grading and fill
1804, 3304, J106, J107
Expansive
1803.5.3, 1808.6
Flood hazard
1808.4
Footings and foundations
1808
Footings on or adjacent to slopes
1808.7, 3304.1.3
Foundation walls
1807.1.5, 3304.1.4
Geotechnical investigation
1803
Grading
1804.4, Appendix J
Load-bearing values
1806
Soil boring and sampling
1803.4
Soil lateral load
1610
SORORITIES
310.4
SOUND-INSULATING MATERIALS
(see INSULATION)
720
SOUND TRANSMISSION
1207
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 31
Automatic vehicular gates
3110
Awnings and canopies
(see AWNINGS and CANOPIES)
3105
Marquees (see MARQUEES)
3106
Membrane structures
(see MEMBRANE STRUCTURES)
3102
Pedestrian walkways and tunnels (see WALKWAYS
and TUNNELED WALKWAYS)
3104
Photovoltaic panels and modules
3111
Signs (see SIGNS)
3107
Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices
(see SWIMMING POOL)
3109
Telecommunication and broadcast towers
(see TOWERS)
3108
Temporary structures
(see TEMPORARY STRUCTURES)
3103
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS
(see INSPECTIONS)
110.3.9, Chapter 17
Alternative test procedure
1707
Approvals
1703
Design strengths of materials
1706
General
1701
In-situ load tests
1708
Preconstruction load tests
1709
SPIRAL STAIRWAYS
1011.10
Construction
1011.2, 1011.3, 1011.10
Exceptions
1011.5.2, 1011.5.3, 1011.5.5.3, 1011.10
Group I-3
408.3.4
Live/work
508.5.5
Stages
410.6.3.4
SPORTS ACTIVITY, AREA OF
(see RECREATIONAL FACILITIES)
202
SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS
202, 1702.1
Application
704.13
Steel column calculated fire resistance
722.5.2.2
SPRINKLER SYSTEM, AUTOMATIC
903, 3312
Exempt locations
903.3.1.1.1, 903.3.1.1.2
Fire department location
912
Limited area sprinkler systems
903.3.8
Signs
914.2
Substitute for fire rating
Table 601(4)
SPRINKLER SYSTEM, REQUIRED
903
Aircraft related
412.4.6, 412.6.5
Ambulatory care facilities
422.4, 903.2.2
Amusement buildings, special
411.4
Assembly
903.2.1, 1029.6.2.3
Atrium
404.3
Basements
903.2.11.1
Building area
506.2
Children’s play structures
424.3
Combustible storage
413
Commercial kitchen
903.2.11.5
Construction
903.2.12
Covered and open mall building
402.5
Drying rooms
417.4
Education
903.2.3
Exempt locations
903.3.1.1.1, 903.3.1.1.2
Factory
903.2.4
Fire areas
707.3.10
Hazardous materials
Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.2.5(2), 903.2.11.4
Hazardous occupancies
415.4, 415.11.7.4, 415.11.12, 705.8.1, 903.2.5
Height increase
Table 504.3
High-rise buildings
403.3, 903.2.11.3
Incidental uses
Table 509.1
Institutional
407.7, 408.11, 420.5, 903.2.6, 903.3.2
Laundry chutes, refuse chutes,
termination rooms and
incinerator rooms
713.13, 903.2.11.2
Live/work units
508.5.6, 903.2.8
Mercantile
903.2.7
Mezzanines
505.2.1, 505.2.3, 505.3.2
Multistory buildings
903.2.11.3
Parking garages
406.6.3, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.10.1
Residential
420.5, 903.2.8, 903.3.2
Special amusement buildings
411.4
Spray finishing booth
416.5
Stages
410.7
Storage
903.2.9, 903.2.10
Supervision
(see SPRINKLER SYSTEM, SUPERVISION)
903.4
Underground buildings
405.3, 903.2.11.1
Unlimited area
507
SPRINKLER SYSTEM, SUPERVISION
903.4
Service
901.6
Underground buildings
405.3
STAGES AND PLATFORMS
303, 410
Dressing rooms
410.5
Fire barrier wall
410.5.1, 410.5.2
Floor finish and floor covering
410.3, 410.4, 804.4, 805.1
Horizontal assembly
410.5.1, 410.5.2
Means of egress
410.6
Platform, temporary
410.4.1
Platform construction
410.4, 603.1(12)
Proscenium curtain
410.3.5
Proscenium wall
410.3.4
Roof vents
410.3.7.1
Scenery
410.3.6
Smoke control
410.3.7.2
Sprinkler protection
410.7
Stage construction
410.3, 603.1(12)
Standpipes
410.8, 905.3.4
Technical production areas
202, 410.3.2, 410.6.3
Ventilation
410.3.7
STAIRWAY
(see ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICES,
SPIRAL STAIRWAYS, STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION and
STAIRWAY ENCLOSURE)
STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION
Alternating tread
1011.14
Circular (see Curved)
Construction
1011.7
Curved
1011.4, 1011.9
Discharge barrier
1023.8
During construction
3310.1
Elevators
1011.12.1, 1023.4, 1023.10, 3002.7
Enclosure under
1011.7.3, 1011.7.4
Exit access
1019
Exterior exit
1027, 1028.2
Fireblocking
718.2.4
Guards
1015.2, 1015.3, 1607.8
Handrails
1011.11, 1014, 1607.8
Headroom
1011.3
Interior exit
1022
Illumination
1008.2, 1205.4, 1205.5
Ladders
408.3.5, 410.6.3.4, 1011.15, 1011.16
Landings
1011.6, 1011.8
Live load
Table 1607.1, 1607.9
Luminous
403.5.5, 411.7.1, 1025
Roof access
1011.12
Seismic anchorage
2308.4.7
Spiral (see SPIRAL STAIRWAYS)
408.3.4, 410.6.3.4, 508.5.5, 1011.10
Stepped aisles
1029.13.2
Transitions
1029.9.7, 1029.9.8, 1029.10
Travel distance
1017.3.1
Treads and risers
1011.4, 1011.5
Width/capacity
1005.3.1, 1011.2
Winders
1011.4, 1011.5, 1011.10
STAIRWAY ENCLOSURE
713.1, 1019, 1023
Construction
1019, 1023.2
Discharge
1023.3.1, 1028.2
Doors
716.5.9, 1010.2.15
Elevators within
1023.4, 3002.7
Exit access
1019
Exterior walls
705.2, 707.4, 708.5, 713.6, 1023.2, 1027.6
Fire-resistant construction
1019.3, 1023.2
Group I-2
1019.4
Group I-3
408.3.8, 1019.4
High-rise
403.5
Penetrations
1023.5
Pressurization
909.6, 909.20.5, 1023.11
Smokeproof
403.5.4, 405.7.2, 909.20, 1023.11
Space below, use
1011.7.3
Ventilation
1023.6
STANDARDS (see REFERENCED STANDARDS)
STANDBY POWER
2702.1, 2702.2, 2702.4
Atriums
404.7, 2702
Covered and open mall buildings
402.7.3, 2702.2.4
Elevators
2702.2.2, 3003.1, 3007.8, 3008.8
Hazardous occupancy
414.5.2, 415.11.11, 421.8, 2702.2.9, 2702.2.14
High-rise
403.4.8, 2702.2.10
Horizontal sliding doors
1010.3.3, 2702.2
Membrane structures
2702.2.13, 3102.8.2
Platform lifts
2702.2.2
Smoke control
909.11, 2702.2.16
Smokeproof enclosure
909.20.7.2, 2702.2
Special purpose horizontal sliding,
accordion or folding doors
1010.3.3, 2702.2.11
Underground buildings
405.8, 2702.2.18
STANDPIPE AND HOSE SYSTEMS
(see STANDPIPES, REQUIRED)
905, 3106.4, 3308.1.1, 3311
Cabinet locks
905.7.2
Dry
905.8
Hose connection location
905.1, 905.4 through 905.6, 912
STANDPIPES, REQUIRED
Assembly
905.3.1, 905.3.2, 905.3.4
Covered and open mall buildings
402.7.1, 905.3.3
During construction
905.10, 3311
Elevators, fire service access
3007.9
Helistops
905.3.6
Marinas
905.3.7
Parking garages
406.5.8
Roof gardens and landscaped roofs
905.3.8
Stages
410.8, 905.3.4
Underground buildings
405.9, 905.3.5
STATE LAW
102.2
STEEL
Chapter 22
Bolting
2204.2
Cable structures
2208
Calculated fire resistance
722.5
Cold-formed
202, 2210, 2211
Composite structural steel and concrete
2206
Conditions of restraint
703.2.1.3
Decks
2210.1.1
Identification and protection
2203
Joists
202, 2207
Open web joist
2207
Parapet walls
1503.3, 1503.6
Seismic provisions
2205.2, 2206.2, 2207.1.1, 2210.2
Storage racks
2209
Structural steel
2205
Welding
2204.1
STONE VENEER
1405.7
Slab-type
1405.8
STOP WORK ORDERS
115
STORAGE OCCUPANCY (GROUP S)
311
Area
406.5.4, 406.5.5, 406.6.1, 503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Equipment platforms
505.2
Group provisions
Hazard storage, low, Group S-2
311.3
Hazard storage, moderate, Group S-1
311.2
Hazardous material display and storage
414.2.5
Height
406.5.4, 406.6.1, 503, 504, 505, 508, 510
Incidental uses
509
Interior finishes
Table 803.11, 804
Live loads
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Aisles
1018.5
Stairway, exit access
1019
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.2, 1017.2.2, 1006.3.2
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Accessory
508.2
Parking above/below
510.3, 510.4, 510.7, 510.8, 510.9
Special mixed
510.2
Plumbing fixtures
2902
Special provisions
Aircraft related occupancies
412
High-piled combustible
413
Parking garages
406
Sprinkler protection
903.2.10
Unlimited area
507.3, 507.4, 507.5
STORM SHELTER
423
Emergency operation facilities
423.3
Education
423.4
Refuge area (see REFUGE AREA)
STRENGTH
Design requirements
1604.2
Masonry
202
Nominal
202
Required
202
STRENGTH DESIGN
202, 1604.1
Factored load
202
Limit state
202
Load combinations
1605.2
Load factor
202
Masonry
2108
STRUCTURAL DESIGN
Chapter 16
Aluminum
Chapter 20
Concrete
Chapter 19
Foundations
Chapter 18
Masonry
Chapter 21
Steel
Chapter 22
Wood
Chapter 23
STUCCO
2512
SUSCEPTIBLE BAY
Definition
202
Ponding instability
1611.2
SWIMMING POOL
3109
Flood provisions
G801.5
Glass
2406.4
T
TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS
410.3.2, 410.6.3
TELEPHONE EXCHANGES
304
TELESCOPIC SEATING
(see FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING)
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
3103
Certificate of occupancy
108.3
Conformance
108.2, 3103.1.1
Construction documents
3103.2
Encroachment, public rights-of-way
3202.3
Flood provisions
G901
Means of egress
3103.4
Permit
108.1, 3103.1.2
Power, temporary
108.3
Termination of approval
108.4
TENANT SEPARATION
Covered and open mall building
402.4.2.1, 708.1
TENTS (see TEMPORARY STRUCTURES)
TERMITES, PROTECTION FROM
2304.12
TERRA COTTA
1405.9
TESTING
Automatic fire-extinguishing systems
904.4
Automatic water mist systems
904.11.3
Building official required
104.11.1
Carbon dioxide systems
904.8
Clean agent system
904.10
Dry chemical systems
904.6
Emergency and standby power
2702.4
Fire-resistant materials
703.2
Fire alarm systems
907.7, 907.8
Fire pumps
913.5
Foam systems
904.7
Glazing
2406, 2408.2.1
Halon systems
904.9
Personnel and material hoists
3004.4
Sound transmission
1207
Smoke control
909.3, 909.5.2, 909.10.2, 909.12.1, 909.13.3, 909.18, 909.20.7.3, 909.21.7
Soils
1803
Sprinkler protection
903.5
Structural
(see SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS)
Wet chemical systems
904.5
THEATERS
[see ASSEMBLY OCCUPANCY (GROUP A,
PROJECTION ROOMS and STAGES AND PLATFORMS)]
303.2
THERMAL BARRIER, FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION
2603.4, 2603.5.2
THERMAL-INSULATING MATERIALS
(see INSULATION)
719
TILE
202
Ceramic (see CERAMIC TILE)
Fire resistance, clay or shale
721.1
TOILETS and TOILET ROOMS
Chapter 29, 3305
Accessible
1109.3, 1607.9.2
Construction/finish materials
1210
Door locking
1109.2.1.7, 2902.3.5
Family or assisted-use
2902.1.2, 2902.2.1
Fixture count
Table 2902.1
Grab bar live loads
1607.9.2
Location
2902.3.1, 2902.3.2, 2902.3.3, 2903.3.6
Partitions
1210.3
Privacy
1210.3
Public facilities
2902.3
Signs
2902.4, 2902.4.1
Ventilation
1203.5.2.1
TORNADO SHELTER (see STORM SHELTER)
TOWERS
Airport traffic control
412.3
Cooling
1510.4
Location and access
3108.2
Radio
3108
Television
3108
TOXIC MATERIALS
[see HIGH-HAZARD OCCUPANCY (GROUP H)]
Classification
307.6, 414, 415
Gas detection system
415.11.8, 421.6, 908.3
TRAVEL DISTANCE
Assembly seating
1029.7
Atrium
404.9
Balcony, exterior
1017.2.1
Care suites (Group I-2)
407.4.2, 407.4.4
Common path of travel
1016.2.1
Drinking fountains
2902.5
Exit access
1017.2
Mall
402.8.5, 402.8.6
Measurement
1017.3
Refrigeration machinery/refrigerated rooms
1006.2.2.2, 1006.2.2.3
Smoke compartments (Group I-2 and I-3)
407.5, 408.6, 408.9
Special amusement building
411.4
Stories with one exit
1006.3.2
Toilet facilities
2902.3.2, 2902.3.3
TREADS, STAIR (see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
Concentrated live load
Table 1607.1
TREATED WOOD
202
Fire-retardant-treated wood
2303.2
Pressure-treated wood
2303.1.9
Stress adjustments
2306.1.3
TRUSSES
Cold-formed steel
2211.3
Fire resistance
704.5
Materials
Chapter 6
Metal-plate-connected wood
2303.4.6
Wood
2303.4
TSUNAMI-GENERATED FLOOD HAZARD
Appendix M
TUNNELED WALKWAY
3104, 3202.1
TURNSTILES
1010.5
U
UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS
405
Alarms and detection
405.6
Compartmentation
405.4
Construction type
405.2
Elevators
405.4.3
Emergency power loads
405.8, 2702.2.16
Means of egress
405.7
Smoke barrier
405.4.2, 405.4.3
Smoke exhaust/control
405.5
Smokeproof enclosure
405.7.2, 1023.11
Sprinkler protection
405.3
Standby power
405.8, 2702.2.16
Standpipe system
405.9, 905.3.5
UNDERLAYMENT
202, Table 1507.1.1.1, 1507.3.3, 1507.5.3, 1507.6.3, 1507.7.3, 1507.8.3, 1507.9.3, 1507.17.3
Application
1507.2.8, 1507.3.3, 1507.5.3.1
UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS
507
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
(see STRUCTURES, UNSAFE)
115
Appeals
113, Appendix B
Revocation of permit
105.6
Stop work orders
115
Utilities disconnection
112.3
UNSTABLE MATERIALS
307.3, Table 414.2.5(1), Table 414.5.1, Table 415.6.2, 415.7.1, 415.9
UNUSABLE SPACE
711.2.6
USE AND OCCUPANCY
Chapter 3
Accessory
508.2
Incidental uses
509, Table 509.1
Mixed
508.3, 508.4
Special
Chapter 4
UTILITIES
112
Service connection
112.1
Service disconnection
112.3
Temporary connection
112.2
UTILITY AND MISCELLANEOUS OCCUPANCY
(GROUP U)
312
Agricultural buildings
Appendix C
Area
503, 505, 506, 507, 508
Flood provisions
G1001
Height
503, 504, 508
Incidental uses
509
Live loads
Table 1607.1
Means of egress
Exit signs
1013.1
Stairway, exit access
1019
Mixed occupancies
508.3, 508.4
Special provisions
Private garages and carports
406.3
Residential aircraft hangers
412.5
Sprinkler protection
903.2.11
Travel distance
1016.2.1, 1017.1, 1006.3.2
V
VALUATION OR VALUE (see FEES, PERMIT)
109.3
VEHICLE BARRIER SYSTEMS
202, 406.4.2, 1607.9.3
VEHICLE SHOW ROOMS
304
VEHICULAR FUELING
406.7
VEHICULAR GATES
3110
VEHICULAR REPAIR
406.8
VENEER
Cement plaster
1405.15
Fastening
1405.17
Fiber-cement siding
1405.16
Glazing
1405.12
Masonry, adhered
1405.10, 2101.2.1, 2103.2.4
Masonry, anchored
1405.6, 2101.2.1
Metal
1405.11
Plastic
2605
Slab-type
1405.8
Stone
1405.7
Terra cotta
1405.9
Vinyl
1405.14
Wood
1405.5
VENTILATION (see MECHANICAL)
101.4.2
Attic
1203.2, 1503.5
Aircraft paint hangars
412.6.6
Bathrooms
1203.5.2.1
Crawl space
1203.3
Exhaust, hazardous
1203.6
Exhaust, HPM
415.11.11.2
Exit enclosure
1023.6
Fabrication areas, HPM
415.11.1.6
Hazardous
414.3, 415.9.1.7, 415.11.1.6, 415.11.6.8, 415.11.7.4, 415.11.8, 415.11.10.3
High-rise stairways
1023.11
HPM service corridors
415.11.3.2
Live/work unit
508.5.10
Mechanical
1203.1
Natural
1203.5
Parking
406.5.2, 406.5.5, 406.5.10, 406.6.2
Projection rooms
409.3
Repair garages
406.8.2
Roof
1203.2
Smoke exhaust
910
Smoke removal, high-rise buildings
403.4.7
Smokeproof enclosures
909.20.3, 909.20.4, 909.20.7, 1023.11
Spray rooms and spaces
416.2.2, 416.3
Stages
410.3.5, 410.3.7
Under-floor ventilation
1203.4
VENTS, PENETRATION PROTECTION
714
VERMICULITE, FIRE RESISTANT
721
VERTICAL OPENING PROTECTION
Atriums
404.6
Duct penetrations
717.1
Elevators
713.14, 3007.6.1, 3008.6.1
Exceptions
1022.1
Group I-3
408.5
High-rise
403.2.1.2, 403.2.3, 403.5.1
Live/work units
508.5.6
Open parking garages
406.5.9
Permitted vertical openings
712
Shaft enclosure
713, 1019, 1023.2
VESTIBULES, EXIT DISCHARGE
1028.2
VINYL
Expanded
802, 803.7, 803.8
Rigid
1405.14
VOICE ALARM (see ALARMS, VOICE)
W
WALKWAY
3104
During construction
3306
Encroachment, public right-of-way
3202.3.4
Fire resistance
Table 601
Live load
Table 1607.1
Materials per construction type
Chapter 6
Opening protection
716, 717
WALL, EXTERIOR
705
Bearing
Chapter 6
Coverings
1405
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS)
1408
Exterior structural members
704.10
Fire district
D102.1, D102.2.6
Fire-resistance ratings
703, Table 705.5, 705.5, 706.5.1, 707.4, 1403.4
Flashing, veneered walls
1405.4, 1405.10.1
Foam plastic insulation
2603.4.1.4, 2603.5
Glazing, rated
715.6
Joints
705.9, 714
Light-transmitting plastic panels
2607
Materials
705.4, 1406
Metal Composite Materials (MCM)
1407
Nonbearing
Chapter 6
Opening protection
705.8, 705.10, 716.5.6
Parapets
705.11
Projections
705.2
Structural stability
705.6
Vapor retarders
1405.3
Veneer (see VENEER)
Weather resistance
1403.2, 1405.2, 1407.6, 1408.4
Weather-resistant barriers
1405.2
WALL, FIRE (see FIRE WALLS)
WALL, FOUNDATION (see FOUNDATION)
WALL, INTERIOR
Finishes
803, 1210.2
Opening protection
716, 717
WALL, INTERIOR NONBEARING (see PARTITIONS)
WALL, MASONRY
202
Wood contact
2304.12.1.3, 2304.12.1.5
WALL, PARAPET
705.11, 1503.3, 1503.6, 2109.3.4.3
WALL, PARTY (see FIRE WALLS)
WALL, PENETRATIONS
714.3
WALL, RETAINING (see RETAINING WALL)
WALL, VENEERED (see VENEER)
Chapter 14
WALL, WOOD CONSTRUCTION
Fastening schedule
Table 2304.10.1
Framing
2304.3
Shear walls
2305.1, 2306.3
Sheathing (see SHEATHING)
WATER-REACTIVE MATERIALS
Table 307.1(1), 307.4, 307.5. 415.8.4
WEATHER PROTECTION
Exterior walls
1405.2
Roofs
1503
WELDING
2204.1
WIND LOAD
1609
Construction documents
107, 1603.1.4
Exposure category
1609.4
Glazing
1609.1.2, 2404
Hurricane-prone regions
202
Nominal design wind speed
1609.3.1
Roofs
1504.1, 1609.6
Seismic detailing required
1604.10
Ultimate design wind speed
1609.3
Wind-borne debris region
202
Wind tunnel testing
1504.2.1.2, 1609.1.1
WINDERS, STAIR
(see STAIRWAY CONSTRUCTION)
WINDOW
Emergency egress
1030
Exterior, structural testing
1709.5
Fire (see OPENING PROTECTIVES)
716.5.10, 716.5.11
Glass (see GLAZING)
1405.13
Guards
1015.8
Required light
1205.2
Wells
1030.5
WIRES, PENETRATION PROTECTION
714
WOOD
Chapter 23
Allowable stress design
2306
Calculated fire resistance
722.6
Connectors and fasteners
2304.10
Contacting concrete, masonry or earth
2304.12.1.3, 2304.12.2.1, 2304.12.2.2, 2304.12.2.7
Decay, protection against
2304.12
Diaphragms
2305.1, 2305.2, 2306.2
Draftstopping
718.3, 718.4
End-jointed lumber
2303.1.1.2
Fiberboard
2303.1.5, Table 2306.3(2)
Fire-retardant treated
2303.2
Fireblocking
718.2
Floor and roof framing (see FLOOR CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
2304.4
Floor sheathing
2304.8
Foundation
1807.1.4
Grade, lumber
2303.1.1
Hardboard
2303.1.7
Heavy timber construction
602.4, 2304.11
Hurricane shutters
1609.1.2
I-joist
2303.1.2
Lateral force-resisting systems
2305
Load and resistance factor design
2307
Moisture content
2303.1.9.2, 2303.2.6
Nails and staples
2303.6
Plywood, hardwood
2303.3
Preservative treated
1403.5, 1403.6, 2303.1.9
Roof framing
(see ROOF CONSTRUCTION, WOOD)
2304.4
Roof sheathing
2304.8
Seismic provisions
2305, 2306
Shear walls
2305, 2306.3
Standards and quality, minimum
2303
Structural panels
202, 2303.1.5
Supporting concrete or masonry
2304.13
Termite, protection against
2304.12
Trusses
2303.4
Veneer
Chapter 14
Wall framing
(see WALL, WOOD CONSTRUCTION)
2304.3
Wall sheathing, exterior
2304.6
WOOD SHINGLES AND SHAKES
1507.8, 1507.9
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS
(see WOOD)
202, 2303.1.5
Decorative
2303.3
Diaphragms
2305.2, 2306.2
Fastening
2304.10
Fire-retardant-treated
2303.2
Performance category
202
Quality
2303.1.5
Roof sheathing
2304.8
Seismic shear panels
2305.1
Shear walls
2306.3
Sheathing
2304.6.1
Standards
2306.1
Subfloors
804.4
Veneer
1405.5
Y
YARDS OR COURTS
1206
Exit discharge
1028.4
Group I-2
407.10
Group I-3
408.3.6, 408.6.2
Light, natural
1205
Motor fuel-dispensing facilities
406.7
Occupant load
1004
Parking garage, open
406.5.5
Unlimited area building
507.2, 507.2.1

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[building-preface]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREFACE
History

The State of Florida first mandated statewide building codes during the 1970s at the beginning of the modern construction boom. The first law required all municipalities and counties to adopt and enforce one of the four state-recognized model codes known as the “state minimum building codes.” During the early 1990s a series of natural disasters, together with the increasing complexity of building construction regulation in vastly changed markets, led to a comprehensive review of the state building code system. The study revealed that building code adoption and enforcement was inconsistent throughout the state and those local codes thought to be the strongest proved inadequate when tested by major hurricane events. The consequences of the building codes system failure were devastation to lives and economies and a statewide property insurance crisis. The response was a reform of the state building construction regulatory system that placed emphasis on uniformity and accountability.

The 1998 Florida Legislature amended Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, Building Construction Standards, to create a single state building code that is enforced by local governments. As of March 1, 2002, the Florida Building Code, which is developed and maintained by the Florida Building Commission, supersedes all local building codes. The Florida Building Code is updated every three years and may be amended in the interim in accordance with criteria set out in Section 553.73, Florida Statutes.

Scope

The Florida Building Code is based on national model building codes and national consensus standards, in addition to Florida-specific provisions. The code incorporates all building construction-related regulations for public and private buildings in the State of Florida other than those specifically exempted by Section 553.73, Florida Statutes. It has been harmonized with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which is developed and maintained by the Department of Financial Services, Office of the State Fire Marshal, to establish unified and consistent standards.

The model codes used for the Florida Building Code, 8th Edition (2023) include: the 2021 editions of the International Building Code®; the International Plumbing Code®; the International Mechanical Code®; the International Fuel Gas Code®; the International Residential Code®; the International Existing Building Code®; the International Energy Conservation Code®; the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition; or substantive criteria from ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2019. State and local codes adopted and incorporated into the code include the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, and special hurricane protection standards for the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone.

The code is composed of nine main volumes: the Florida Building Code, Building, which also includes state regulations for licensed facilities; the Florida Building Code, Plumbing; the Florida Building Code, Mechanical; the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; the Florida Building Code, Existing Building; the Florida Building Code, Residential; the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation; the Florida Building Code, Accessibility and the Florida Building Code, Test Protocols for High-Velocity Hurricane Zones. Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building, adopts the National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, by reference.

Under certain strictly defined conditions, local governments may amend technical requirements to be more stringent than the code. All local technical amendments to the Florida Building Code must be adopted in accordance with the requirements of Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes, and reported to the Florida Building Commission, then posted on www.floridabuilding.org in legislative format for 30 days prior to being enforced. Local amendments to the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code may be obtained from the Florida Building Commission website, or from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation or the Florida Department of Financial Services, Office of the State Fire Marshal, respectively.

Adoption and Maintenance

An updated edition of the Florida Building Code is adopted triennially by the Florida Building Commission. The code may also be amended between updates in order to incorporate the Florida Building Commission’s interpretations into the code, address conflicts, and update standards, among other statutorily specified reasons. Minimum requirements for permitting, plans review and inspections are established by the code, and local jurisdictions may adopt additional administrative requirements that are more stringent. Local technical amendments are subject to strict criteria established by Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes. They are subject to Commission review during each triennial update of the code, and may be either adopted into the updated edition of the code or repealed. Local technical amendments are also subject to appeal according to the procedures established by Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes.

Eleven Technical Advisory Committees (TACs), which are constituted consistent with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Guidelines, review proposed code changes and clarifications of the code and make recommendations to the Commission. These TACs whose membership is constituted consistent with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Guidelines include: Accessibility; Joint Building Fire (a joint committee of the Commission and the State Fire Marshal); Building Structural; Code Administration/Enforcement; Electrical; Energy; Mechanical; Plumbing and Fuel Gas; Roofing; Swimming Pool; and Special Occupancy (state agency construction and facility licensing regulations).

The Commission may only issue official code interpretations using procedures set out by Chapter 120, Florida Statutes. To obtain such an interpretation, a request for a declaratory statement must be made to the Florida Building Commission in a manner that establishes a clear set of facts and circumstances and identifies the section of the code in question. Requests are analyzed by staff, reviewed by the appropriate Technical Advisory Committee, and sent to the Florida Building Commission for action. These interpretations establish precedents for situations having similar facts and circumstances and are typically incorporated into the code in the next code amendment cycle. Nonbinding interpretations are available from the Building Officials Association of Florida’s website (www.BOAF.net) and a binding interpretation process is available online at www.floridabuilding.org.

Marginal Markings

Solid vertical lines in the margins within the body of the code indicate a change from the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building, 7th Edition (2020) to the Florida Building Code, Building, 8th Edition (2023) effective December 31, 2023.

Sections deleted from the base code are designated “Reserved” in order to maintain the structure of the base code.

Italicized Terms

Selected terms set forth in Chapter 2, Definitions, are italicized where they appear in code text. Such terms are not italicized where the definition set forth in Chapter 2 does not impart the intended meaning in the use of the term. The terms selected have definitions that the user should read carefully to facilitate better understanding of the code.

Acknowledgments

The Florida Building Code is produced through the efforts and contributions of building designers, contractors, product manufacturers, regulators and other interested parties who participate in the Florida Building Commission’s consensus processes, Commission staff and the participants in the national model code development processes.



================================================================================
2023 FLORIDA BUILDING CODE, RESIDENTIAL, EIGHTH EDITION
================================================================================

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-a]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX A
SIZING AND CAPACITIES OF GAS PIPING

(This appendix is informative and is not part of the code. This appendix is an excerpt from the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, 8th Edition (2023) coordinated with the section numbering of the Florida Building Code, Residential.)

A.1 General piping considerations.

The first goal of determining the pipe sizing for a fuel gas piping system is to make sure that there is sufficient gas pressure at the inlet to each appliance. The majority of systems are residential and the appliances will all have the same, or nearly the same, requirement for minimum gas pressure at the appliance inlet. This pressure will be about 5-inch water column (w.c.) (1.25 kPa), which is enough for proper operation of the appliance regulator to deliver about 3.5-inches water column (w.c.) (875 kPa) to the burner itself. The pressure drop in the piping is subtracted from the source delivery pressure to verify that the minimum is available at the appliance.

There are other systems, however, where the required inlet pressure to the different appliances may be quite varied. In such cases, the greatest inlet pressure required must be satisfied, as well as the farthest appliance, which is almost always the critical appliance in small systems.

There is an additional requirement to be observed besides the capacity of the system at 100-percent flow. That requirement is that at minimum flow, the pressure at the inlet to any appliance does not exceed the pressure rating of the appliance regulator. This would seldom be of concern in small systems if the source pressure is 1/2 psi (14-inch w.c.) (3.5 kPa) or less but it should be verified for systems with greater gas pressure at the point of supply.

To determine the size of piping used in a gas piping system, the following factors must be considered:

(1)	Allowable loss in pressure from point of delivery to appliance.

(2)	Maximum gas demand.

(3)	Length of piping and number of fittings.

(4)	Specific gravity of the gas.

(5)	Diversity factor.

For any gas piping system or special appliance, or for conditions other than those covered by the tables provided in this code such as longer runs, greater gas demands or greater pressure drops, the size of each gas piping system should be determined by standard engineering practices acceptable to the code official.

A.2 Description of tables.
A.2.1 General.

The quantity of gas to be provided at each outlet should be determined, whenever possible, directly from the manufacturer’s gas input Btu/h rating of the appliance that will be installed. In case the ratings of the appliances to be installed are not known, Table 402.2 shows the approximate consumption (in Btu per hour) of certain types of typical household appliances.

To obtain the cubic feet per hour of gas required, divide the total Btu/h input of all appliances by the average Btu heating value per cubic feet of the gas. The average Btu per cubic feet of the gas in the area of the installation can be obtained from the serving gas supplier.

A.2.2 Low pressure natural gas tables.

Capacities for gas at low pressure [less than 2.0 psig (13.8 kPa gauge)] in cubic feet per hour of 0.60 specific gravity gas for different sizes and lengths are shown in Tables 402.4(1) and 402.4(2) for iron pipe or equivalent rigid pipe; in Tables 402.4(8) through 402.4(11) for smooth wall semirigid tubing; and in Tables 402.4(15) through 402.4(17) for corrugated stainless steel tubing. Tables 402.4(1) and 402.4(6) are based upon a pressure drop of 0.3-inch w.c. (75 Pa), whereas Tables 402.4(2), 402.4(9) and 402.4(15) are based upon a pressure drop of 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa). Tables 402.4(3), 402.4(4), 402.4(10), 402.4(11), 402.4(16) and 402.4(17) are special low-pressure applications based upon pressure drops greater than 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa). In using these tables, an allowance (in equivalent length of pipe) should be considered for any piping run with four or more fittings (see Table A.2.2).

TABLE A.2.2

EQUIVALENT LENGTHS OF PIPE FITTINGS AND VALVES

	SCREWED FITTINGS1	90° WELDING ELBOWS AND SMOOTH BENDS2
45°/Ell	90°/Ell	180°close return
bends
	Tee	R/d = 1	R/d = 11/3	R/d = 2	R/d = 4	R/d = 6	R/d = 8
k factor =	0.42	0.90	2.00	1.80	0.48	0.36	0.27	0.21	0.27	0.36
L/d' ratio4 n =	1 4	30	67	60	16	12	9	7	9	12
Nominal
pipe size,
inches	Inside
diameter d,
inches,
Schedule 406
	L = Equivalent Length In Feet of Schedule 40 (Standard-weight) Straight Pipe6
1/2	0.622	0.73	1.55	3.47	3.10	0.83	0.62	0.47	0.36	0.47	0.62
3/4	0.824	0.96	2.06	4.60	4.12	1.10	0.82	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.82
1	1.049	1.22	2.62	5.82	5.24	1.40	1.05	0.79	0.61	0.79	1.05
11/4	1.380	1.61	3.45	7.66	6.90	1.84	1.38	1.03	0.81	1.03	1.38
11/2	1.610	1.88	4.02	8.95	8.04	2.14	1.61	1.21	0.94	1.21	1.61
2	2.067	2.41	5.17	11.5	10.3	2.76	2.07	1.55	1.21	1.55	2.07
21/2	2.469	2.88	6.16	13.7	12.3	3.29	2.47	1.85	1.44	1.85	2.47
3	3.068	3.58	7.67	17.1	15.3	4.09	3.07	2.30	1.79	2.30	3.07
4	4.026	4.70	10.1	22.4	20.2	5.37	4.03	3.02	2.35	3.02	4.03
5	5.047	5.88	12.6	28.0	25.2	6.72	5.05	3.78	2.94	3.78	5.05
6	6.065	7.07	15.2	33.8	30.4	8.09	6.07	4.55	3.54	4.55	6.07
8	7.981	9.31	20.0	44.6	40.0	10.6	7.98	5.98	4.65	5.98	7.98
10	10.02	11.7	25.0	55.7	50.0	13.3	10.0	7.51	5.85	7.51	10.0
12	11.94	13.9	29.8	66.3	59.6	15.9	11.9	8.95	6.96	8.95	11.9
14	13.13	15.3	32.8	73.0	65.6	17.5	13.1	9.85	7.65	9.85	13.1
16	15.00	17.5	37.5	83.5	75.0	20.0	15.0	11.2	8.75	11.2	15.0
18	16.88	19.7	42.1	93.8	84.2	22.5	16.9	12.7	9.85	12.7	16.9
20	18.81	22.0	47.0	105.0	94.0	25.1	18.8	14.1	11.0	14.1	18.8
24	22.63	26.4	56.6	126.0	113.0	30.2	22.6	17.0	13.2	17.0	22.6
	MITER ELBOWS3 (No. of miters)	WELDING TEES	VALVES (screwed, flanged, or welded)
1-45°	1-60°	1-90°	2-90°5	3-90°5	Forged	Miter3	Gate	Globe	Angle	Swing Check
k factor =	0.45	0.90	1.80	0.60	0.45	1.35	1.80	0.21	10	5.0	2.5
L/d' ratio4 n =	15	30	60	20	15	45	60	7	333	167	83
Nominal
pipe size,
inches	Inside
diameter d,
inches,
Schedule 406
	L = Equivalent Length In Feet of Schedule 40 (Standard-weight) Straight Pipe6
1/2	0.622	0.78	1.55	3.10	1.04	0.78	2.33	3.10	0.36	17.3	8.65	4.32
3/4	0.824	1.03	2.06	4.12	1.37	1.03	3.09	4.12	0.48	22.9	11.4	5.72
1	1.049	1.31	2.62	5.24	1.75	1.31	3.93	5.24	0.61	29.1	14.6	7.27
11/4	1.380	1.72	3.45	6.90	2.30	1.72	5.17	6.90	0.81	38.3	19.1	9.58
11/2	1.610	2.01	4.02	8.04	2.68	2.01	6.04	8.04	0.94	44.7	22.4	11.2
2	2.067	2.58	5.17	10.3	3.45	2.58	7.75	10.3	1.21	57.4	28.7	14.4
21/2	2.469	3.08	6.16	12.3	4.11	3.08	9.25	12.3	1.44	68.5	34.3	17.1
3	3.068	3.84	7.67	15.3	5.11	3.84	11.5	15.3	1.79	85.2	42.6	21.3
4	4.026	5.04	10.1	20.2	6.71	5.04	15.1	20.2	2.35	112.0	56.0	28.0
5	5.047	6.30	12.6	25.2	8.40	6.30	18.9	25.2	2.94	140.0	70.0	35.0
6	6.065	7.58	15.2	30.4	10.1	7.58	22.8	30.4	3.54	168.0	84.1	42.1
8	7.981	9.97	20.0	40.0	13.3	9.97	29.9	40.0	4.65	22.0	111.0	55.5
10	10.02	12.5	25.0	50.0	16.7	12.5	37.6	50.0	5.85	278.0	139.0	69.5
12	11.94	14.9	29.8	59.6	19.9	14.9	44.8	59.6	6.96	332.0	166.0	83.0
14	13.13	16.4	32.8	65.6	21.9	16.4	49.2	65.6	7.65	364.0	182.0	91.0
16	15.00	18.8	37.5	75.0	25.0	18.8	56.2	75.0	8.75	417.0	208.0	104.0
18	16.88	21.1	42.1	84.2	28.1	21.1	63.2	84.2	9.85	469.0	234.0	117.0
20	18.81	23.5	47.0	94.0	31.4	23.5	70.6	94.0	11.0	522.0	261.0	131.0
24	22.63	28.3	56.6	113.0	37.8	28.3	85.0	113.0	13.2	629.0	314.0	157.0

For SI: 1 foot = 305 mm, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Values for welded fittings are for conditions where bore is not obstructed by weld spatter or backing rings. If appreciably obstructed, use values for “Screwed Fittings.”

1.	Flanged fittings have three-fourths the resistance of screwed elbows and tees.

2.	Tabular figures give the extra resistance due to curvature alone to which should be added the full length of travel.

3.	Small size socket-welding fittings are equivalent to miter elbows and miter tees.

4.	Equivalent resistance in number of diameters of straight pipe computed for a value of (f - 0.0075) from the relation (n - k/4f).

5.	For condition of minimum resistance where the centerline length of each miter is between d and 21/2d.

6.	For pipe having other inside diameters, the equivalent resistance can be computed from the above n values.

Source: Crocker, S. Piping Handbook, 4th ed., Table XIV, pp. 100-101. Copyright 1945 by McGraw-Hill, Inc. Used by permission of McGraw-Hill Book Company.

A.2.3 Undiluted liquefied petroleum tables.

Capacities in thousands of Btu per hour of undiluted liquefied petroleum gases based on a pressure drop of 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa) for different sizes and lengths are shown in Table 402.4(28) for iron pipe or equivalent rigid pipe, in Table 402.4(30) for smooth wall semi-rigid tubing, in Table 402.4(32) for corrugated stainless steel tubing, and in Tables 402.4(35) and 402.4(37) for polyethylene plastic pipe and tubing. Tables 402.4(33) and 402.4(34) for corrugated stainless steel tubing and Table 402.4(36) for polyethylene plastic pipe are based on operating pressures greater than 11/2 pounds per square inch (psi) (3.5 kPa) and pressure drops greater than 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa). In using these tables, an allowance (in equivalent length of pipe) should be considered for any piping run with four or more fittings [see Table A.2.2].

A.2.4 Natural gas specific gravity.

Gas piping systems that are to be supplied with gas of a specific gravity of 0.70 or less can be sized directly from the tables provided in this code, unless the code official specifies that a gravity factor be applied. Where the specific gravity of the gas is greater than 0.70, the gravity factor should be applied.

Application of the gravity factor converts the figures given in the tables provided in this code to capacities for another gas of different specific gravity. Such application is accomplished by multiplying the capacities given in the tables by the multipliers shown in Table A.2.4. In case the exact specific gravity does not appear in the table, choose the next higher value specific gravity shown.

TABLE A.2.4

MULTIPLIERS TO BE USED WITH TABLES 402.4(1) THROUGH 402.4(22) WHERE THE SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF THE GAS IS OTHER THAN 0.60

SPECIFIC
GRAVITY
	MULTIPLIER	SPECIFIC
GRAVITY
	MULTIPLIER
0.35	1.31	1.00	0.78
0.40	1.23	1.10	0.74
0.45	1.16	1.20	0.71
0.50	1.10	1.30	0.68
0.55	1.04	1.40	0.66
0.60	1.00	1.50	0.63
0.65	0.96	1.60	0.61
0.70	0.93	1.70	0.59
0.75	0.90	1.80	0.58
0.80	0.87	1.90	0.56
0.85	0.84	2.00	0.55
0.90	0.82	2.10	0.54
A.2.5 Higher pressure natural gas tables.

Capacities for gas at pressures 2.0 psig (13.8 kPa) or greater in cubic feet per hour of 0.60 specific gravity gas for different sizes and lengths are shown in Tables 402.4(5) through 402.4(7) for iron pipe or equivalent rigid pipe; Tables 402.4(12) to 402.4(14) for semirigid tubing; Tables 402.4(18) and 402.4(19) for corrugated stainless steel tubing; and Table 402.4(22) for polyethylene plastic pipe.

A.3 Use of capacity tables.
A.3.1 Longest length method.

This sizing method is conservative in its approach by applying the maximum operating conditions in the system as the norm for the system and by setting the length of pipe used to size any given part of the piping system to the maximum value.

To determine the size of each section of gas piping in a system within the range of the capacity tables, proceed as follows (also see sample calculations included in this Appendix):

(1)	Divide the piping system into appropriate segments consistent with the presence of tees, branch lines and main runs. For each segment, determine the gas load (assuming all appliances operate simultaneously) and its overall length. An allowance (in equivalent length of pipe) as determined from Table A.2.2 shall be considered for piping segments that include four or more fittings.

(2)	Determine the gas demand of each appliance to be attached to the piping system. Where Tables 402.4(1) through 402.4(24) are to be used to select the piping size, calculate the gas demand in terms of cubic feet per hour for each piping system outlet. Where Tables 402.4(25) through 402.4(37) are to be used to select the piping size, calculate the gas demand in terms of thousands of Btu per hour for each piping system outlet.

(3)	Where the piping system is for use with other than undiluted liquefied petroleum gases, determine the design system pressure, the allowable loss in pressure (pressure drop), and specific gravity of the gas to be used in the piping system.

(4)	Determine the length of piping from the point of delivery to the most remote outlet in the building/piping system.

(5)	In the appropriate capacity table, select the row showing the measured length or the next longer length if the table does not give the exact length. This is the only length used in determining the size of any section of gas piping. If the gravity factor is to be applied, the values in the selected row of the table are multiplied by the appropriate multiplier from Table A.2.4.

(6)	Use this horizontal row to locate ALL gas demand figures for this particular system of piping.

(7)	Starting at the most remote outlet, find the gas demand for that outlet in the horizontal row just selected. If the exact figure of demand is not shown, choose the next larger figure left in the row.

(8)	Opposite this demand figure, in the first row at the top, the correct size of gas piping will be found.

(9)	Proceed in a similar manner for each outlet and each section of gas piping. For each section of piping, determine the total gas demand supplied by that section.

Where a large number of piping components (such as elbows, tees and valves) are installed in a pipe run, additional pressure loss can be accounted for by the use of equivalent lengths. Pressure loss across any piping component can be equated to the pressure drop through a length of pipe. The equivalent length of a combination of only four elbows/tees can result in a jump to the next larger length row, resulting in a significant reduction in capacity. The equivalent lengths in feet shown in Table A.2.2 have been computed on a basis that the inside diameter corresponds to that of Schedule 40 (standard-weight) steel pipe, which is close enough for most purposes involving other schedules of pipe. Where a more specific solution for equivalent length is desired, this can be made by multiplying the actual inside diameter of the pipe in inches by n/12, or the actual inside diameter in feet by n (n can be read from the table heading). The equivalent length values can be used with reasonable accuracy for copper or brass fittings and bends although the resistance per foot of copper or brass pipe is less than that of steel. For copper or brass valves, however, the equivalent length of pipe should be taken as 45 percent longer than the values in the table, which are for steel pipe.

A.3.2 Branch length method.

This sizing method reduces the amount of conservatism built into the traditional Longest Length Method. The longest length as measured from the meter to the furthest remote appliance is only used to size the initial parts of the overall piping system. The Branch Length Method is applied in the following manner:

(1)	Determine the gas load for each of the connected appliances.

(2)	Starting from the meter, divide the piping system into a number of connected segments, and determine the length and amount of gas that each segment would carry assuming that all appliances were operated simultaneously. An allowance (in equivalent length of pipe) as determined from Table A.2.2 should be considered for piping segments that include four or more fittings.

(3)	Determine the distance from the outlet of the gas meter to the appliance furthest removed from the meter.

(4)	Using the longest distance (found in Step 3), size each piping segment from the meter to the most remote appliance outlet.

(5)	For each of these piping segments, use the longest length and the calculated gas load for all of the connected appliances for the segment and begin the sizing process in Steps 6 through 8.

(6)	Referring to the appropriate sizing table (based on operating conditions and piping material), find the longest length distance in the first column or the next larger distance if the exact distance is not listed. The use of alternative operating pressures and/or pressure drops will require the use of a different sizing table, but will not alter the sizing methodology. In many cases, the use of alternative operating pressures and/or pressure drops will require the approval of both the code official and the local gas serving utility.

(7)	Trace across this row until the gas load is found or the closest larger capacity if the exact capacity is not listed.

(8)	Read up the table column and select the appropriate pipe size in the top row. Repeat Steps 6, 7 and 8 for each pipe segment in the longest run.

(9)	Size each remaining section of branch piping not previously sized by measuring the distance from the gas meter location to the most remote outlet in that branch, using the gas load of attached appliances and following the procedures of Steps 2 through 8.

A.3.3 Hybrid pressure method.

The sizing of a 2 psi (13.8 kPa) gas piping system is performed using the traditional Longest Length Method but with modifications. The 2 psi (13.8 kPa) system consists of two independent pressure zones, and each zone is sized separately. The Hybrid Pressure Method is applied as follows:

The sizing of the 2 psi (13.8 kPa) section (from the meter to the line regulator) is as follows:

(1)	Calculate the gas load (by adding up the name plate ratings) from all connected appliances. (In certain circumstances the installed gas load can be increased up to 50 percent to accommodate future addition of appliances.) Ensure that the line regulator capacity is adequate for the calculated gas load and that the required pressure drop (across the regulator) for that capacity does not exceed 3/4 psi (5.2 kPa) for a 2 psi (13.8 kPa) system. If the pressure drop across the regulator is too high (for the connected gas load), select a larger regulator.

(2)	Measure the distance from the meter to the line regulator located inside the building.

(3)	If there are multiple line regulators, measure the distance from the meter to the regulator furthest removed from the meter.

(4)	The maximum allowable pressure drop for the 2 psi (13.8 kPa) section is 1 psi (6.9 kPa).

(5)	Referring to the appropriate sizing table (based on piping material) for 2 psi (13.8 kPa) systems with a 1 psi (6.9 kPa) pressure drop, find this distance in the first column, or the closest larger distance if the exact distance is not listed.

(6)	Trace across this row until the gas load is found or the closest larger capacity if the exact capacity is not listed.

(7)	Read up the table column to the top row and select the appropriate pipe size.

(8)	If there are multiple regulators in this portion of the piping system, each line segment must be sized for its actual gas load, but using the longest length previously determined above.

The low pressure section (all piping downstream of the line regulator) is sized as follows:

(1)	Determine the gas load for each of the connected appliances.

(2)	Starting from the line regulator, divide the piping system into a number of connected segments or independent parallel piping segments, and determine the amount of gas that each segment would carry assuming that all appliances were operated simultaneously. An allowance (in equivalent length of pipe) as determined from Table A.2.2 should be considered for piping segments that include four or more fittings.

(3)	For each piping segment, use the actual length or longest length (if there are sub-branchlines) and the calculated gas load for that segment and begin the sizing process as follows:

(a)	Referring to the appropriate sizing table (based on operating pressure and piping material), find the longest length distance in the first column or the closest larger distance if the exact distance is not listed. The use of alternative operating pressures and/or pressure drops will require the use of a different sizing table, but will not alter the sizing methodology. In many cases, the use of alternative operating pressures and/or pressure drops can require the approval of the code official.

(b)	Trace across this row until the appliance gas load is found or the closest larger capacity if the exact capacity is not listed.

(c)	Read up the table column to the top row and select the appropriate pipe size.

(d)	Repeat this process for each segment of the piping system.

A.3.4 Pressure drop per 100 feet method.

This sizing method is less conservative than the others, but it allows the designer to immediately see where the largest pressure drop occurs in the system. With this information, modifications can be made to bring the total drop to the critical appliance within the limitations that are presented to the designer.

Follow the procedures described in the Longest Length Method for Steps (1) through (4) and (9).

For each piping segment, calculate the pressure drop based on pipe size, length as a percentage of 100 feet (30 480 mm) and gas flow. Table A.3.4 shows pressure drop per 100 feet (30 480 mm) for pipe sizes from 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) through 2 inches (51 mm). The sum of pressure drops to the critical appliance is subtracted from the supply pressure to verify that sufficient pressure will be available. If not, the layout can be examined to find the high drop section(s) and sizing selections modified.

Note: Other values can be obtained by using the following equation:

For example, if it is desired to get flow through 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) pipe at 2 inches/100 feet, multiply the capacity of 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) pipe at 1 inch/100 feet by the square root of the pressure ratio:

TABLE A.3.4

THOUSANDS OF BTU/H (MBH) OF NATURAL GAS PER 100 FEET OF PIPE AT VARIOUS PRESSURE DROPS AND PIPE DIAMETERS

PRESSURE DROP PER
100 FEET IN INCHES
W.C.	PIPE SIZES (inch)
1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
0.2	31	64	121	248	372	716
0.3	38	79	148	304	455	877
0.5	50	104	195	400	600	1160
1.0	71	147	276	566	848	1640

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

A.4 Use of sizing equations.

Capacities of smooth wall pipe or tubing can also be determined by using the following formulae:

(1)	High Pressure [1.5 psi (10.3 kPa) and above]:

(2)	Low Pressure [Less than 1.5 psi (10.3 kPa)]:

where:

Q = Rate, cubic feet per hour at 60°F and 30-inch mercury column

D = Inside diameter of pipe, in.

P1 = Upstream pressure, psia

P2 = Downstream pressure, psia

Y = Superexpansibility factor = 1/supercompressibility factor

Cr = Factor for viscosity, density and temperature*

Note: See Table 402.4 for Y and Cr for natural gas and propane.

S = Specific gravity of gas at 60°F and 30-inch mercury column (0.60 for natural gas, 1.50 for propane), or = 1488µ

T = Absolute temperature, °F or = t + 460

t = Temperature, °F

Z = Viscosity of gas, centipoise (0.012 for natural gas, 0.008 for propane), or = 1488µ

fba = Base friction factor for air at 60°F (CF = 1)

L = Length of pipe, ft

ΔH = Pressure drop, in. w.c. (27.7 in. H2O = 1 psi)

(For SI, see Section 402.4)

A.5 Pipe and tube diameters.

Where the internal diameter is determined by the formulas in Section 402.4, Tables A.5.1 and A.5.2 can be used to select the nominal or standard pipe size based on the calculated internal diameter.

TABLE A.5.1

SCHEDULE 40 STEEL PIPE STANDARD SIZES

NOMINAL SIZE
(inch)
	INTERNAL
DIAMETER
(inch)	NOMINAL SIZE
(inch)
	INTERNAL
DIAMETER
(inch)
1/4	0.364	11/2	1.610
3/8	0.493	2	2.067
1/2	0.622	21/2	2.469
3/4	0.824	3	3.068
1	1.049	31/2	3.548
11/4	1.380	4	4.026

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE A.5.2

COPPER TUBE STANDARD SIZES

TUBE
TYPE
	NOMINAL OR
STANDARD SIZE
(inches)	INTERNAL
DIAMETER
(inches)
K	1/4	0.305
L	1/4	0.315
ACR (D)	3/8	0.315
ACR (A)	3/8	0.311
K	3/8	0.402
L	3/8	0.430
ACR (D)	1/2	0.430
ACR (A)	1/2	0.436
K	1/2	0.527
L	1/2	0.545
ACR (D)	5/8	0.545
ACR (A)	5/8	0.555
K	5/8	0.652
L	5/8	0.666
ACR (D)	3/4	0.666
ACR (A)	3/4	0.680
K	3/4	0.745
L	3/4	0.785
ACR	7/8	0.785
K	1	0.995
L	1	1.025
ACR	11/8	1.025
K	11/4	1.245
L	11/4	1.265
ACR	13/8	1.265
K	11/2	1.481
L	11/2	1.505
ACR	15/8	1.505
K	2	1.959
L	2	1.985
ACR	21/8	1.985
K	21/2	2.435
L	21/2	2.465
ACR	25/8	2.465
K	3	2.907
L	3	2.945
ACR	31/8	2.945

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

A.6 Examples of piping system design and sizing.
A.6.1 Example 1: Longest length method.

Determine the required pipe size of each section and outlet of the piping system shown in Figure A.6.1, with a designated pressure drop of 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa) using the Longest Length Method. The gas to be used has 0.60 specific gravity and a heating value of 1,000 Btu/ft3 (37.5 MJ/m3).

Solution:

(1)	Maximum gas demand for Outlet A:

Maximum gas demand for Outlet B:

Maximum gas demand for Outlet C:

Maximum gas demand for Outlet D:

(2)	The length of pipe from the point of delivery to the most remote outlet (A) is 60 feet (18 288 mm). This is the only distance used.

(3)	Using the row marked 60 feet (18 288 mm) in Table 402.4(2):

(a)	Outlet A, supplying 35 cfh (0.99 m3/hr), requires 1/2-inch pipe.

(b)	Outlet B, supplying 75 cfh (2.12 m3/hr), requires 3/4-inch pipe.

(c)	Section 1, supplying Outlets A and B, or 110 cfh (3.11 m3/hr), requires 3/4-inch pipe.

(d)	Section 2, supplying Outlets C and D, or 135 cfh (3.82 m3/hr), requires 3/4-inch pipe.

(e)	Section 3, supplying Outlets A, B, C and D, or 245 cfh (6.94 m3/hr), requires 1-inch pipe.

(4)	If a different gravity factor is applied to this example, the values in the row marked 60 feet (18 288 mm) of Table 402.4(2) would be multiplied by the appropriate multiplier from Table A.2.4 and the resulting cubic feet per hour values would be used to size the piping.

FIGURE A.6.1

PIPING PLAN SHOWING A STEEL PIPING SYSTEM

A.6.2 Example 2: Hybrid or dual pressure systems.

Determine the required CSST size of each section of the piping system shown in Figure A.6.2, with a designated pressure drop of 1 psi (6.9 kPa) for the 2 psi (13.8 kPa) section and 3-inch w.c. (0.75 kPa) pressure drop for the 13-inch w.c. (2.49 kPa) section. The gas to be used has 0.60 specific gravity and a heating value of 1,000 Btu/ft3 (37.5 MJ/m3).

Solution:

(1)	Size 2 psi (13.8 kPa) line using Table 402.4(18).

(2)	Size 10-inch w.c. (2.5 kPa) lines using Table 402.4(16).

(3)	Using the following, determine if sizing tables can be used.

(a)	Total gas load shown in Figure A.6.2 equals 110 cfh (3.11 m3/hr).

(b)	Determine pressure drop across regulator [see notes in Table 402.4(18)].

(c)	If pressure drop across regulator exceeds 3/4 psig (5.2 kPa), Table 402.4(18) cannot be used. Note: If pressure drop exceeds 3/4 psi (5.2 kPa), then a larger regulator must be selected or an alternative sizing method must be used.

(d)	Pressure drop across the line regulator [for 110 cfh (3.11 m3/hr)] is 4-inch w.c. (0.99 kPa) based on manufacturer’s performance data.

(e)	Assume the CSST manufacturer has tubing sizes or EHDs of 13, 18, 23 and 30.

(4)	Section A [2 psi (13.8 kPa) zone]

(a)	Distance from meter to regulator = 100 feet (30 480 mm).

(b)	Total load supplied by A = 110 cfh (3.11 m3/hr) (furnace + water heater + dryer).

(c)	Table 402.4(18) shows that EHD size 18 should be used.

Note: It is not unusual to oversize the supply line by 25 to 50 percent of the as-installed load. EHD size 18 has a capacity of 189 cfh (5.35 m3/hr).

(5)	Section B (low pressure zone)

(a)	Distance from regulator to furnace is 15 feet (4572 mm).

(b)	Load is 60 cfh (1.70 m3/hr).

(c)	Table 402.4(16) shows that EHD size 13 should be used.

(6)	Section C (low pressure zone)

(a)	Distance from regulator to water heater is 10 feet (3048 mm).

(b)	Load is 30 cfh (0.85 m3/hr).

(c)	Table 402.4(16) shows that EHD size 13 should be used.

(7)	Section D (low pressure zone)

(a)	Distance from regulator to dryer is 25 feet (7620 mm).

(b)	Load is 20 cfh (0.57 m3/hr).

(c)	Table 402.4(16) shows that EHD size 13 should be used.

FIGURE A.6.2

PIPING PLAN SHOWING A CSST SYSTEM

A.6.3 Example 3: Branch length method.

Determine the required semirigid copper tubing size of each section of the piping system shown in Figure A.6.3, with a designated pressure drop of 1-inch w.c. (250 Pa) (using the Branch Length Method). The gas to be used has 0.60 specific gravity and a heating value of 1,000 Btu/ft3 (37.5 MJ/m3).

Solution:

(1)	Section A

(a)	The length of tubing from the point of delivery to the most remote appliance is 50 feet (15 240 mm), A + C.

(b)	Use this longest length to size Sections A and C.

(c)	Using the row marked 50 feet (15 240 mm) in Table 402.4(10), Section A, supplying 220 cfh (6.2 m3/hr) for four appliances requires 1-inch tubing.

(2)	Section B

(a)	The length of tubing from the point of delivery to the range/oven at the end of Section B is 30 feet (9144 mm), A + B.

(b)	Use this branch length to size Section B only.

(c)	Using the row marked 30 feet (9144 mm) in Table 402.4(10), Section B, supplying 75 cfh (2.12 m3/hr) for the range/oven requires 1/2-inch tubing.

(3)	Section C

(a)	The length of tubing from the point of delivery to the dryer at the end of Section C is 50 feet (15 240 mm), A + C.

(b)	Use this branch length to size Section C.

(c)	Using the row marked 50 feet (15 240 mm) in Table 402.4(10), Section C, supplying 30 cfh (0.85 m3/hr) for the dryer requires 3/8-inch tubing.

(4)	Section D

(a)	The length of tubing from the point of delivery to the water heater at the end of Section D is 30 feet (9144 mm), A + D.

(b)	Use this branch length to size Section D only.

(c)	Using the row marked 30 feet (9144 mm) in Table 402.4(10), Section D, supplying 35 cfh (0.99 m3/hr) for the water heater requires 3/8-inch tubing.

(5)	Section E

(a)	The length of tubing from the point of delivery to the furnace at the end of Section E is 30 feet (9144 mm), A + E.

(b)	Use this branch length to size Section E only.

(c)	Using the row marked 30 feet (9144 mm) in Table 402.4(10), Section E, supplying 80 cfh (2.26 m3/hr) for the furnace requires 1/2-inch tubing.

FIGURE A.6.3

PIPING PLAN SHOWING A COPPER TUBING SYSTEM

A.6.4 Example 4: Modification to existing piping system.

Determine the required CSST size for Section G (retrofit application) of the piping system shown in Figure A.6.4, with a designated pressure drop of 0.5-inch w.c. (125 Pa) using the branch length method. The gas to be used has 0.60 specific gravity and a heating value of 1,000 Btu/ft3 (37.5 MJ/m3).

Solution:

(1)	The length of pipe and CSST from the point of delivery to the retrofit appliance (barbecue) at the end of Section G is 40 feet (12 192 mm), A + B + G.

(2)	Use this branch length to size Section G.

(3)	Assume the CSST manufacturer has tubing sizes or EHDs of 13, 18, 23 and 30.

(4)	Using the row marked 40 feet (12 192 mm) in Table 402.4(15), Section G, supplying 40 cfh (1.13 m3/hr) for the barbecue requires EHD 18 CSST.

(5)	The sizing of Sections A, B, F and E must be checked to ensure adequate gas carrying capacity since an appliance has been added to the piping system (see A.6.1 for details).

FIGURE A.6.4

PIPING PLAN SHOWING A MODIFICATION TO EXISTING PIPING SYSTEM

A.6.5 Example 5: Calculating pressure drops due to temperature changes.

A test piping system is installed on a warm autumn afternoon when the temperature is 70°F (21°C). In accordance with local custom, the new piping system is subjected to an air pressure test at 20 psig (138 kPa). Overnight, the temperature drops and when the inspector shows up first thing in the morning the temperature is 40°F (4°C).

If the volume of the piping system is unchanged, then the formula based on Boyle’s and Charles’ law for determining the new pressure at a reduced temperature is as follows:

where:

T1 = Initial temperature, absolute (T1 + 459)

T2 = Final temperature, absolute (T2 + 459)

P1 = Initial pressure, psia (P1 + 14.7)

P2 = Final pressure, psia (P2 + 14.7)

P2 = 32.7 - 14.7

P2 = 18 psig

Therefore, the gauge could be expected to register 18 psig (124 kPa) when the ambient temperature is 40°F (4°C).

A.6.6 Example 6: Pressure drop per 100 feet of pipe method.

Using the layout shown in Figure A.6.1 and ΔH = pressure drop, in w.c. (27.7 in. H2O = 1 psi), proceed as follows:

(1)	Length to A = 20 feet, with 35,000 Btu/hr.

For 1/2-inch pipe, ΔH = 20 feet/100 feet × 0.3 inch w.c. = 0.06 in w.c.

(2)	Length to B = 15 feet, with 75,000 Btu/hr.

For 3/4-inch pipe, ΔH = 15 feet/100 feet × 0.3 inch w.c. = 0.045 in w.c.

(3)	Section 1 = 10 feet, with 110,000 Btu/hr. Here there is a choice:

For 1-inch pipe: ΔH = 10 feet/100 feet × 0.2 inch w.c. = 0.02 in w.c.

For 3/4-inch pipe: ΔH = 10 feet/100 feet × [0.5 inch w.c. + (110,000 Btu/hr-104,000 Btu/hr)/(147,000 Btu/hr-104,000 Btu/hr) × (1.0 inches w.c. - 0.5 inch w.c.)] = 0.1 × 0.57 inch w.c.≈ 0.06 inch w.c.

Note that the pressure drop between 104,000 Btu/hr and 147,000 Btu/hr has been interpolated as 110,000 Btu/hr.

(4)	Section 2 = 20 feet, with 135,000 Btu/hr. Here there is a choice:

For 1-inch pipe: ΔH = 20 feet/100 feet × [0.2 inch w.c. + (14,000 Btu/hr)/(27,000 Btu/hr) × 0.1 inch w.c.] = 0.05 inch w.c.

For 3/4-inch pipe: ΔH = 20 feet/100 feet × 1.0 inch w.c. = 0.2 inch w.c.

Note that the pressure drop between 121,000 Btu/hr and 148,000 Btu/hr has been interpolated as 135,000 Btu/hr, but interpolation for the ¾-inch pipe (trivial for 104,000 Btu/hr to 147,000 Btu/hr) was not used.

(5)	Section 3 = 30 feet, with 245,000 Btu/hr. Here there is a choice:

For 1-inch pipe: ΔH = 30 feet/100 feet × 1.0 inches w.c. = 0.3 inch w.c.

For 11/4-inch pipe: ΔH = 30 feet/100 feet × 0.2 inch w.c. = 0.06 inch w.c.

Note that interpolation for these options is ignored since the table values are close to the 245,000 Btu/hr carried by that section.

(6)	The total pressure drop is the sum of the section approaching A, Sections 1 and 3, or either of the following, depending on whether an absolute minimum is needed or the larger drop can be accommodated.

Minimum pressure drop to farthest appliance:

ΔH = 0.06 inch w.c. + 0.02 inch w.c. + 0.06 inch w.c. = 0.14 inch w.c.

Larger pressure drop to the farthest appliance:

ΔH = 0.06 inch w.c. + 0.06 inch w.c. + 0.3 inch w.c. = 0.42 inch w.c.

Notice that Section 2 and the run to B do not enter into this calculation, provided that the appliances have similar input pressure requirements.

For SI units: 1 Btu/hr = 0.293 W, 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 foot = 0.305 m, 1 inch w.c. = 249 Pa.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-au]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX AU
COB CONSTRUCTION (MONOLITHIC ADOBE)

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION AU101
GENERAL
AU101.1 Scope.

This appendix provides prescriptive and performance-based requirements for the use of natural cob as a building material. Buildings using cob walls shall comply with this code except as otherwise stated in this appendix.

AU101.2 Intent.

In addition to the intent described in Section 101.3 of the Florida Building Code, Building, the purpose of this appendix is to establish minimum requirements for cob structures that provide flexibility in the application of certain provisions of the code, to permit the use of site-sourced and local materials, and to permit combinations of historical and modern techniques.

AU101.3 Tests and empirical evidence.

Tests for an alternative material, design or method of construction shall be in accordance with Section 104.11 of the Florida Building Code, Building and the building official shall have the authority to consider evidence of a history of successful use in lieu of testing.

AU101.4 Cob wall systems.

Cob wall systems include those shown in Figure AU101.4 and approved variations.

FIGURE AU101.4

TYPICAL COB WALL

AU101.5 Definitions.

The words and terms in Section AU102 shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 for general definitions.

SECTION AU102
DEFINITIONS

BRACED WALL PANEL. A cob wall designed and constructed to resist in-plane shear loads through the interaction of the cob material, its reinforcing and its connections to its bond beam and foundation. The panel’s length meets the requirements for the particular wall type and contributes toward the total amount of bracing required along its braced wall line in accordance with Sections AU106.11 and R602.10.1.

BUTTRESS. A mass set at an angle to or bonded to a wall that it strengthens or supports.

CLAY. Inorganic soil with particle sizes less than 0.00008 inch (0.002 mm) and having the characteristics of high to very high dry strength and medium to high plasticity, used as the binder of other component materials in a mix of cob or of clay plaster.

CLAY SUBSOIL. Subsoil sourced directly from the earth, containing clay, sand and silt, and containing not more than trace amounts of organic matter.

COB. A composite building material consisting of refined clay or clay subsoil wet-mixed with loose straw and sometimes sand. Also known as “Monolithic adobe.”

COB CONSTRUCTION. A wall system of layers or lifts of moist cob placed to create monolithic walls, typically without formwork.

DRY JOINT. The boundary between a layer of moist cob and a previously laid and significantly drier, nonmalleable layer of cob that requires wetting to achieve bonding between the layers.

FINISH. Completed combination of materials on the face of a cob wall.

LIFT. A layer of installed cob.

LOAD-BEARING WALL. A cob wall that supports more than 100 pounds per linear foot (1459 N/m) of vertical load in addition to its own weight.

MONOLITHIC ADOBE. See “Cob.”

NATURAL COB. Cob not containing admixtures such as Portland cement, lime, asphalt emulsion or oil. Synonymous with “Unstabilized cob.”

NONSTRUCTURAL WALL. Walls other than load-bearing walls or shear walls.

PLASTER. Clay, soil-cement, gypsum, lime, clay-lime, cement-lime or cement plaster as described in Section AU104.

SHEAR WALL. A cob wall designed and constructed to resist in-plane lateral seismic and wind forces in accordance with Section AU106.11. Synonymous with “Braced wall panel.”

STABILIZED. Cob or other earthen material containing admixtures, such as Portland cement, lime, asphalt emulsion or oil, that are intended to help limit water absorption, stabilize volume, increase strength and increase durability.

STRAW. The dry stems of cereal grains after the seed heads have been removed.

STRUCTURAL WALL. A wall that meets the definition for a “Load-bearing wall” or “Shear wall.”

UNSTABILIZED. A cob or other earthen material that does not contain admixtures such as Portland cement, lime, asphalt emulsion or oil.

UNSTABILIZED COB. See “Natural cob.”

SECTION AU103
MATERIALS, MIXING AND INSTALLATION
AU103.1 Clay subsoil.

Clay subsoil for a cob mix shall be acceptable if the mix it produces meets the requirements of Section AU103.4.

AU103.2 Sand.

Sand or other aggregates such as, but not limited to, gravel, pumice and lava rock, when added to cob mixes, shall yield a mix that meets the requirements of Section AU103.4.

AU103.3 Straw.

Straw for cob mixes shall be from wheat, rice, rye, barley or oat, or similar reinforcing fibers with similar performance. Before mixing, the straw or other reinforcing fibers shall be dry to the touch and free of visible decay.

AU103.4 Mix proportions.

Cob mixes shall be of any proportions of refined clay or clay subsoil, added sand (if any) and straw that produce a dried mix that passes the shrinkage test in accordance with Section AU103.4.1, complies with the compressive strength requirements of Section AU106.6 and complies with the modulus of rupture requirements of Section AU106.7.

AU103.4.1 Shrinkage test for cob mixes.

Each proposed cob mix of different mix proportions shall be placed moist to completely fill a 24-inch by 31/2-inch by 31/2-inch (610 mm by 89 mm by 89 mm) wooden form on a plastic or paper slip sheet and dried to ambient moisture conditions, or oven dried. The total shrinkage of the length shall not exceed 1 inch (25 mm), as measured from the dried edges of the material to the insides of the form. Cracks in the sample greater than 1/16 inch (1.5 mm) shall first be closed manually. The shrinkage test shall be shown to the building official for approval before placement of the cob mix onto walls

AU103.5 Mixing.

The clay subsoil, sand and straw for cob shall be thoroughly mixed by manual or mechanical means with water sufficient to produce a mix of a plastic consistency capable of bonding of successively placed layers or lifts.

AU103.6 Installation.

Cob shall be installed on the wall in lifts of a height that supports itself with minimal slumping.

AU103.7 Dry joints.

Each layer of cob shall be prevented from drying until the next layer is installed, to ensure bonding of successive layers. The top of each layer shall be kept moist and malleable with one or more of the following methods:

1.	Covering with a material that prevents loss of or holds moisture.

2.	Covering with a material that shades it from direct sun.

3.	Wetting.

Where dry joints are unavoidable, the previous layer shall be wetted prior to application of the next layer.

AU103.8 Drying holes.

Where holes to facilitate drying are used, such holes shall be of any depth and not exceeding 3/4 inch (19 mm) in diameter on the face of cob walls. Drying holes shall not be spaced closer than 10 hole-diameters. Drying holes shall not be placed in braced wall panels. The design load on load-bearing walls with drying holes shall not exceed 90 percent of the allowable bearing capacity as determined in accordance with Section AU106.8. Drying holes shall be filled with cob before final inspection.

AU103.9 Adding roof loads to walls.

Roof and ceiling loads shall not be added until walls are sufficiently dry to support them without compressing.

SECTION AU104
FINISHES
AU104.1 General.

Cob walls shall not require a finish, except as required by Section AU104.2. Finishes applied to cob walls shall comply with this section and Chapters 3 and 7 unless stated otherwise in this section.

AU104.1.1 Interior wall finishes.

Where installed, interior wall finishes and interior fire protection shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section R302, and shall be plasters in accordance with Section AU104.4 or nonplaster wall coverings in accordance with Section R702.

AU104.1.2 Exterior wall finishes.

Where installed, exterior wall finishes shall be plasters in accordance with Section AU104.4, nonplaster exterior wall coverings in accordance with Section R703, or other finish systems in accordance with the following:

1.	Specifications and details of the finish system’s means of attachment to the wall or its independent support and means of draining or evaporating water that penetrates the exterior finish shall be provided.

2.	The vapor permeance of the combination of finish materials shall be 5 perms or greater to allow the transpiration of water vapor from the wall.

3.	Finish systems with weights greater than 10 pounds per square foot (48.9 kg/m) and less than or equal to20 pounds per square foot (97.8 kg/m) of wall area shall require that the minimum total length of braced wall panels in Table AU106.11(3) be multiplied by a factor of 1.2.

4.	Finish systems with weights greater than 20 pounds per square foot (97.8 kg/m) of wall area shall require an engineered design.

AU104.2 Where required.

Cob walls exposed to rain due to local climate, building design and wall orientation shall be finished or clad to provide protection from excessive erosion.

AU104.3 Vapor retarders.

Class I and II vapor retarders shall not be used on cob walls, except at cob walls surrounding showers or as required or addressed elsewhere in this appendix.

AU104.4 Plaster.

Plaster applied to cob walls shall be any type described in this section. Plaster thickness shall not exceed 3 inches (76 mm) on each face except where an approved engineered design is provided.

AU104.4.1 Plaster and membranes.

Plaster shall be applied directly to cob walls to facilitate transpiration of moisture from the walls and to secure a mechanical bond between the plaster and the cob. A membrane shall not be located between the cob wall and the plaster.

AU104.4.2 Plaster lath.

The surface of cob walls shall be permitted to function as lath for plaster, with no other lath required. Metal, plastic, and natural fiber lath shall be permitted to be used to limit plaster cracking, increase the plaster bond to the wall, or to bridge dissimilar materials.

AU104.4.3 Clay plaster.

Clay plaster shall comply with Sections AU104.4.3.1 and AU104.4.3.2.

AU104.4.3.1 General.

Clay plaster shall be any plaster having a clay or clay subsoil binder. Such plaster shall contain sufficient clay to fully bind the sand or other aggregate and any reinforcing fibers. Reinforcing fibers shall be chopped straw, sisal, hemp, animal hair or other similar approved fibers.

AU104.4.3.2 Clay subsoil requirements.

The suitability of clay subsoil shall be determined in accordance with the Figure 2 Ribbon Test and the Figure 3 Ball Test in the appendix of ASTM E2392/E2392M.

AU104.4.4 Soil-cement plaster.

Soil-cement plaster shall be composed of clay subsoil, sand, not more than 7 percent Portland cement by volume and, where provided, reinforcing fibers.

AU104.4.5 Gypsum plaster.

Gypsum plaster shall comply with Section R702.2.1 and shall be limited to interior use.

AU104.4.6 Lime plaster.

Lime plaster is any plaster with a binder composed of calcium hydroxide including Type N or S hydrated lime, hydraulic lime, natural hydraulic lime or slaked quicklime. Hydrated lime shall comply with ASTM C206. Hydraulic lime shall comply with ASTM C1707. Natural hydraulic lime shall comply with ASTM C141 and EN 459. Quicklime shall comply with ASTM C5.

AU104.4.7 Clay-lime plaster.

Clay-lime plaster shall be composed of refined clay or clay subsoil, sand, lime and, where provided, reinforcing fibers.

AU104.4.8 Cement-lime plaster.

Cement-lime plaster shall be plaster mix types CL, F or FL, as described in ASTM C926.

AU104.4.9 Cement plaster.

Cement plaster shall have not less than 1 part lime to 4 parts cement and be not thicker than 11/2 inches (38 mm), to ensure minimum acceptable vapor permeability.

SECTION AU105
COB WALLS—GENERAL
AU105.1 General.

Cob walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section and Figure AU101.4 or an approved alternative design. In addition to the general requirements for cob walls in this section, cob structural walls shall comply with Section AU106.

AU105.2 Building limitations and requirements for cob wall construction.

Cob walls shall be subject to the following limitations and requirements:

1.	Number of stories: not more than one.

2.	Building height: not more than 20 feet (6096 mm).

3.	Seismic design categories: limited to use in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C, except where an approved engineered design is provided.

4.	Wall height: in accordance with Table AU105.3, and with Table AU106.11(1) for braced wall panels.

5.	Wall thickness, excluding finish, shall be not less than 10 inches (254 mm), not greater than 24 inches (610 mm) at the top two-thirds, not limited at the bottom third and, for structural walls, shall comply with Section AU106.2, Item 2. Wall taper is permitted in accordance with Section AU106.5, Item 1.

6.	Interior cob walls shall require an approved engineered design that accounts for the seismic load of the interior cob walls, except in Seismic Design Category A for walls with a height to thickness ratio less than or equal to 6.

AU105.3 Out-of-plane resistance methods and unrestrained wall height limits.

Cob walls shall employ a method of out-of-plane load resistance in accordance with Table AU105.3, and comply with its associated height limits and requirements.

TABLE AU105.3

OUT-OF-PLANE RESISTANCE METHODS AND UNRESTRAINED WALL HEIGHT LIMITS

WALL TYPEa, g, h AND METHOD OF
OUT-OF-PLANE LOAD RESISTANCE
	FOR
ULTIMATE
DESIGN WIND
SPEEDS
(mph)	FOR SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORIES	UNRESTRAINED COB
WALL HEIGHT Hb, c, h
	TOP
ANCHORe
SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIEf
SPACING
(inches)
Absolute
Limit
(feet)	Limit Based on
Wall Thickness Td
(feet)
Wall 1i: no anchors, no steel wall reinforcing	≤ 110	A	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 6T	None	48
Wall 2: top anchorsj, continuous vertical 6″ × 6″ × 6″ gage steel mesh in center of wall embedded in founda tion 12 inches	≤ 140	A, B, C	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 8T	12	24
Wall Ai: top anchors, no vertical steel reinforcing	≤ 120	A, B	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 6T	12	48
Wall Bi: top and bottom anchors, no vertical steel rein forcing	≤ 130	A, B	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 6T	12	48
Wall C: top and bottom anchors, continuous vertical threaded rod at 4 feet on center embedded in founda tion and connected to bond beam	≤ 140	A, B, C	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 8T	12	24
Wall D: continuous vertical threaded rod at 1 foot on center embedded in foundation and connected to bond beam	≤ 140	A, B, C	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 8T	N/A	24
Wall E: top anchors, continuous vertical 6″ × 6″ × 6″ gage steel mesh 2 inches from each face of wall embedded in foundation	≤ 140	A, B, C	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 8T	12	24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

N/A = Not Applicable

a.	See Table AU106.11(1) for reinforcing and anchorage specifications for wall Types A, B, C, D and E.

b.	H = height of the cob portion of the wall only. See Figure AU101.4. The maximum H is the absolute limit or the limit based on wall thickness, whichever is more restrictive.

c.	Bond beams or other horizontal restraints are capable of separating a wall into more than one unrestrained wall height with an approved engineered design.

d.	T = Cob wall thickness (in feet) at its minimum, without plaster.

e.	5/8-inch threaded rod anchors at prescribed spacing with 12-inch embedment in cob, full embedment in concrete bond beams or full penetration in wood bond beam with a nut and washer.

f.	Attach rafters to bond beam with 4-inch by 3-inch by 3-inch by 18 gage tension tie angles at prescribed spacing. See Figure AU106.9.5. Where rafters are attached to tension ties, roof sheathing shall be edge nailed.

g.	All walls shall be tested for compressive strength in accordance with Section AU106.6.

h.	For curved walls with an arc length to radius ratio of 1.5:1 or greater, the H/T factor shall be increased by 1, and the absolute height limit by 1 foot.

i.	Wall type requires a modulus of rupture test in accordance with Section AU106.7.

j.	See wall Type A in Table AU106.11(1) for top anchor requirements.

AU105.3.1 Determination of out-of-plane loading.

Out-of-plane loading for the use of Table AU105.3 shall be in accordance with the ultimate design wind speed and seismic design category requirements of Sections R301.2.1 and R301.2.2, respectively. An approved engineered design shall be required where the building is located in a special wind region or where wind design is required in accordance with Figure R301.2.1.1.

AU105.3.2 Bond beams for nonstructural walls.

Nonstructural cob walls shall be provided with a bond beam at the top of the wall that complies with Section AU106.9, except for requirements relating to roof and/or ceiling loads or braced wall panels.

AU105.3.3 Lintels in nonstructural walls.

Door, window and other openings in nonstructural cob walls shall require a lintel in accordance with Section AU106.10, except for requirements relating to roof and/or ceiling loads or braced wall panels.

AU105.3.4 Reinforcing at wall openings.

Reinforcing shall be installed at window, door, and similar wall openings and penetrations greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width in accordance with Sections AU105.3.4.1 through AU105.3.4.3. Surface voids deeper than 25 percent of the wall thickness shall be considered an opening.

AU105.3.4.1 Opening size limit.

Openings shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in width, and the height of the cob wall below openings shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) above the top of the foundation.

AU105.3.4.2 Horizontal reinforcing.

Two-inch by 2-inch (51 mm by 51 mm) 14-gage galvanized steel mesh shall be embedded 4 inches (102 mm) in the cob above the rough opening and below the rough opening for windows, and shall extend 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the sides of the opening. Walls below rough window openings greater than 4 feet 6 inches (1372 mm) in height shall be provided with additional horizontal reinforcing at midheight.

AU105.3.4.3 Vertical reinforcing.

Full-height 5/8-inch (16 mm) threaded rod shall be installed 4 inches (102 mm) from each side of the opening, centered in the thickness of the cob wall. The threaded rods shall be embedded 7 inches (178 mm) in the foundation, and 4 inches (102 mm) in concrete bond beams or shall penetrate through wood bond beams and be secured with a nut and washer. The threaded rods shall be embedded in concrete lintels or pass through a drilled hole in wood lintels.

AU105.3.5 Minimum length of cob walls.

Sections of cob walls between openings shall be not less than 2 feet 6 inches (762 mm) in length. Wall sections less than 4 feet (1219 mm) and not less than 2 feet 6 inches (762 mm) in length shall contain vertical reinforcing in accordance with Section AU105.3.4.3.

AU105.4 Moisture control.

Cob walls shall be protected from moisture intrusion and damage in accordance with Sections AU105.4.1 through AU105.4.5.

AU105.4.1 Water-resistant barriers and vapor permeance.

Cob walls shall be constructed without a membrane barrier between the cob wall and plaster to facilitate transpiration of water vapor from the wall, and to secure a mechanical bond between the cob and plaster, except as otherwise required elsewhere in this appendix. Where a water-resistant barrier is placed behind an exterior finish, it shall be considered part of the finish system and shall comply with Item 2 of Section AU104.1.2 for the combined vapor permeance rating.

AU105.4.2 Horizontal surfaces.

Cob walls and other cob elements shall be provided with a water-resistant barrier at weather-exposed horizontal surfaces. The water-resistant barrier shall be of a material and installation that will prevent erosion and prevent water from entering the wall system. Horizontal surfaces, including exterior window sills, sills at exterior niches and exterior buttresses, shall be sloped not less than 1 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal to drain away from cob walls or other cob elements.

AU105.4.3 Separation of cob and foundation.

A liquid-applied or bituminous Class II vapor retarder shall be installed between cob and supporting concrete or masonry.

Exception: Where local climate, site conditions and foundation design limit ground moisture migration into the base of the cob wall, including but not limited to the use of a moisture barrier or capillary break between the supporting concrete or masonry and the earth.

AU105.4.4 Separation of cob and finished grade.

Cob shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above finished grade.

Exception: The minimum separation shall be 4 inches (102 mm) in dry climate zones as defined in SectionR301 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation, and shall be 2 inches (51mm) on walls that are not weather exposed.

AU105.4.5 Installation of windows and doors.

Windows and doors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions to a wooden frame of not less than nominal 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) wood members anchored into the cob wall with 16d galvanized nails half-driven at a maximum 6-inch (152 mm) spacing, with the protruding half embedded in the cob. The wood frame shall be embedded not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in the cob and shall be set in from each face of the wall not less than 3 inches (76 mm). Alternative window and door installation methods shall be capable of resisting the wind loads in Table R301.2.1(1). Windows and doors in cob walls shall be installed so as to mitigate the passage of air or moisture into or through the wall system. Window sills shall comply with Section AU105.4.2.

AU105.5 Inspections.

In addition to ensuring compliance with Section 110 of the Florida Building Code, Building, the building official shall inspect the following aspects of cob construction:

1.	Anchors and vertical and horizontal reinforcing in cob walls, where required in accordance with Tables AU105.3 and AU106.11(1) and Sections AU105.3.4 through AU105.3.5.

2.	Reinforcing in any concrete bond beams or lintels, in accordance with Section AU106.9.2 and Table AU106.10.

SECTION AU106
COB WALLS—STRUCTURAL
AU106.1 General.

Cob structural walls shall be in accordance with the prescriptive provisions of this section. Designs or portions of designs not complying with this section shall require an approved engineered design.

AU106.2 Requirements for cob structural walls.

In addition to the requirements of Section AU105.2, cob structural walls shall be subject to the following:

1.	Wall height: shall be in accordance with Table AU105.3 for load-bearing cob walls or Table AU106.11(1) for cob braced wall panels, as applicable and most restrictive.

2.	Wall thickness: shall be in accordance with Sections AU105.2, Item 5 and Section AU106.8.1 for load-bearing cob walls or Table AU106.11(1) for cob braced wall panels, as applicable and most restrictive.

3.	Braced wall panel lengths: for buildings using cob braced wall panels, the greater of the values determined in accordance with Table AU106.11(2) for wind loads and Table AU106.11(3), AU106.11(4) or AU106.11(5) for seismic loads shall be used.

AU106.3 Loads and other limitations.

Live and dead loads and other limitations shall be in accordance with Section R301, except that the dead load for cob walls shall be determined by Equation AU-1.

(Equation AU-1)

CWDL = Cob wall dead load (in pounds per lineal foot of wall).

H = Height of cob portion of wall (in feet).

Tavg = Average thickness of wall (in feet).

D = Density of cob = 110 (in pounds per cubic foot), unless a lesser value at equilibrium moisture content is demonstrated to the building official.

AU106.4 Foundations.

Foundations for cob walls shall be in accordance with Chapter 4. The width of foundations for cob walls shall be not less than the width of the cob at its base, excluding finish.

AU106.5 Wall taper, straightness and surface voids for cob walls.

Cob walls shall be in accordance with the following:

1.	Cob structural and nonstructural walls shall be vertical or shall taper from bottom to top with the wall thickness in accordance with Section AU105.2, Item 5 and the wall height in accordance with Section AU105.2, Item 4.

2.	Cob structural and nonstructural walls shall be straight or curved. Curved braced wall panels shall be in accordance with Sections AU106.11.2 and AU106.11.3.

3.	Niches and other surface voids in load-bearing walls are limited to 12 inches (305 mm) in width and height and 25 percent of the wall thickness, and shall be located in the top two-thirds of the wall. Surface voids that exceed these limits shall be considered wall openings, and shall receive a lintel in accordance with Section AU106.10 and be reinforced in accordance with Section AU105.3.4. Surface voids are prohibited in braced wall panels.

AU106.6 Compressive strength of cob structural and nonstructural walls.

All cob walls shall have a minimum compressive strength of 60 psi (414 kPa). Cob in walls used as braced wall panels shall have a minimum compressive strength of 85 psi (586 kPa).

AU106.6.1 Demonstration of compressive strength.

The compressive strength of the cob mix to be used in structural walls and nonstructural walls as required in Section AU106.6 shall be demonstrated to the building official before the placement of cob onto walls, with compressive strength tests and an associated report by an approved laboratory or with an approved on-site test as follows:

1.	Five samples of the proposed cob mix shall be placed moist to completely fill a 4-inch by 4-inch by 4-inch (102 mm by 102 mm by 102 mm) form and dried to ambient moisture conditions.

2.	Samples shall not be oven dried.

3.	Any opposite faces shall be faced with plaster of paris if needed to achieve smooth, parallel faces, after which the sample shall reach ambient moisture conditions before testing.

4.	The horizontal cross section of the dried sample as tested, and the maximum applied load at failure shall be used to calculate the sample’s compressive strength.

5.	The fourth-lowest value shall be used to determine the mix’s compressive strength.

AU106.7 Modulus of rupture of cob structural walls.

Cob in walls used as braced wall panels shall have a minimum modulus of rupture of 50 pounds per square inch (345 kPa).

AU106.7.1 Demonstration of modulus of rupture.

The modulus of rupture of cob used in structural walls shall be demonstrated to the building official before the placement of cob onto walls, with modulus of rupture tests and an associated report by an approved laboratory or with an approved on-site test as follows:

1.	Five samples of the proposed cob mix shall be placed moist to completely fill a 6-inch by 6-inch by 12-inch (152 mm by 152 mm by 305 mm) form and dried to indoor ambient moisture conditions.

2.	Samples shall not be oven dried.

3.	Each sample shall be tested with the 12-inch (305 mm) dimension horizontal.

4.	The fourth-lowest value shall be used to determine if the mix meets the minimum required modulus of rupture.

AU106.8 Bearing capacity.

The allowable bearing capacity for cob load-bearing walls supporting vertical roof and/or ceiling loads imposed in accordance with Section R301 shall be determined by Equation AU-2.

(Equation AU-2)

BC = Allowable bearing capacity of wall (in pounds per lineal foot of wall).

C = Compressive strength (in psi) as determined in accordance with Section AU106.6.

Tmin = Thickness of wall (in feet) at its minimum.

H = Height of cob portion of wall (in feet).

Tavg = Average thickness of wall (in feet).

D = Density of cob = 110 (in pounds per cubic foot), unless a lesser value at equilibrium moisture content is demonstrated.

AU106.8.1 Support of uniform loads.

Uniform roof and/or ceiling loads shall be supported by cob load-bearing walls not exceeding their allowable bearing capacity, as demonstrated in accordance with Equation AU-3.

(Equation AU-3)

BL = Design load on the wall (in pounds per lineal foot) determined in accordance with Sections R301.4 and R301.6.

BC = Allowable bearing capacity of wall (in pounds per lineal foot of wall) determined in accordance with Section AU106.8.

AU106.8.2 Support of concentrated loads.

Concentrated roof and ceiling loads shall be distributed by structural elements capable of distributing the loads to the cob load-bearing wall and within its allowable bearing capacity as determined in accordance with Section AU106.8. Concentrated loads over lintels or over bond beams spanning openings shall require an approved engineered design.

AU106.9 Bond beams.

Cob structural walls shall require a bond beam at the top of the wall in accordance with Section AU106.9.1, AU106.9.2 or AU106.9.3, and shall be anchored to the cob below in accordance with Tables AU105.3, AU106.11(1) and AU106.12 as applicable and most restrictive. Bond beams spanning openings shall be in accordance with Section AU106.9.4.

AU106.9.1 Wood bond beams.

Wood bond beams shall be not less than nominal 4 inches high by 8 inches wide and shall comply with Sections AU106.9.1.1 through AU106.9.1.3.

AU106.9.1.1 Wood species and grade.

Wood bond beams shall be of a species with an extreme fiber in bending (Fb) of not less than 850 psi (5.9 MPa), a modulus of elasticity (E) of not less than 1,300,000 psi (8964 MPa), and No. 2 grade or better. Composite lumber bond beams shall have an Fb of not less than 850 psi (5.9 MPa), and an E of not less than 1,300,000 psi (8964 MPa).

AU106.9.1.2 Discontinuity.

Discontinuous wood bond beams shall be spliced on top with a metal strap with not less than the allowable wind or seismic load tension capacity in accordance with the following, whichever is more restrictive:

1.	For seismic design categories: A, 2,500 pounds (11 kN); B, 4,500 pounds (20 kN); C, 6,000 pounds (26.7 kN).

2.	For braced wall line lengths, when wind governs: 10 feet, 2,500 pounds (11 kN); 20 feet, 3,400 pounds (15.1 kN); 30 feet, 5,000 pounds (22.2 kN).

AU106.9.1.3 Corners and curved walls.

Wood bond beams at corners and discontinuities atop curved walls shall be connected across their exterior faces with a metal strap with a capacity of not less than that determined in accordance with Section AU106.9.1.2.

AU106.9.2 Concrete bond beams.

Concrete bond beams shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high by 8 inches (305 mm) wide. Concrete bond beams shall be reinforced with two No. 4 bars, 2 inches (51 mm) clear from the bottom and 2 inches (51 mm) clear from the sides. Lap splices shall comply with Table R608.5.4(1). Reinforcing at corners shall be in accordance with the horizontal reinforcing requirements in Section R608.6.4. The concrete shall have a compressive strength of not less than 2,500 pounds per square inch (17.2 MPa) at 28 days.

AU106.9.3 Other bond beams.

Bond beams of other materials, including earthen materials, require an approved engineered design.

AU106.9.4 Bond beams spanning openings.

Bond beams that support uniform roof and/or ceiling loads and span openings in cob walls shall be in accordance with Table AU106.10. Bond beams shall be continuous across the opening and not less than 1 foot (305 mm) beyond each side of the opening.

AU106.9.5 Connection of roof framing to bond beams.

Roof and ceiling framing shall be attached to bond beams in accordance with Table R602.3(1), Items 2 and 6, and Figure AU106.9.5. Roof sheathing shall be attached to roof framing in accordance with Figure AU106.9.5. A minimum nominal 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) wood plate shall be installed on concrete bond beams with 5/8-inch (16 mm) diameter anchor bolts with 5-inch (127 mm) embedment at 2 feet (610 mm) on center to allow the required fastening of roof and ceiling framing, including tension ties and straps.

FIGURE AU106.9.5

CONNECTION OF ROOF FRAMING TO BOND BEAMS

AU106.9.6 Bond beams and connections at gable and shed roof end walls.

Bond beams and connections at end walls of buildings with gable or shed roofs shall comply with Figure AU106.9.6 and the following:

1.	End walls shall not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) in length.

2.	Bond beams shall be continuous and straight for the entire wall line.

3.	Wood bond beams shall comply with the following:

3.1.	Not less than nominal 4 inches by 8 inches (102 mm by 203 mm) where wind design governs in accordance with Table AU106.11(2) and where seismic design governs in accordance with Table AU106.11(3), AU106.11(4) or AU106.11(5) for wall lengths less than or equal to 20 feet (6096 mm) in Seismic Design Category A or wall lengths less than or equal to 10 feet (3048 mm) in Seismic Design Categories B and C.

3.2.	Not less than nominal 4 inches by 10 inches (102 mm by 254 mm) for wall lengths less than or equal to 20 feet (6096 mm) in Seismic Design Category B.

3.3.	Not less than nominal 6 inches by 12 inches (152 mm by 305 mm) or 4 inches by 16 inches (102 mm by 406 mm) for wall lengths less than or equal to 20 feet (6096 mm) in Seismic Design Category C.

3.4.	Corners shall be connected in accordance with Section AU106.9.3.

4.	Concrete bond beams when used shall be in accordance with Section AU106.9.2 in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C and for ultimate design wind speeds less than or equal to 140 mph (63.6 m/s).

5.	Walls between the bond beam and roof shall be of wood-framed construction in accordance with Section R602. The ratio of its greatest height to its length shall not exceed 1:2. The wall shall not contain openings.

FIGURE AU106.9.6

CONNECTIONS AT GABLE AND SHED ROOF END WALLS

AU106.10 Lintels.

Door, window and other openings in load-bearing cob walls shall be provided with a lintel of wood or concrete in accordance with Table AU106.10.

TABLE AU106.10

LINTELS AND BOND BEAMS SPANNING OPENINGS

GROUND SNOW LOAD ≤ 30 PSF	WOOD:

•	Fb ≥ 850 psi

•	E ≥ 1,300,000 psi

•	No. 2 Grade or better

•	Oriented flat

•	1 piece or 2 equal-width pieces

•	Extend 1 foot beyond opening sides

	CONCRETE:

•	2500 psi compressive strength

•	Height = 6 inches

•	Extend 1 foot beyond opening sides

•	Reinforcement two No. 4 barsa

•	2 inches clear from bottom

•	2 inches clear from sidesa


Building Width
(feet)
	Cob above Lintel
(feet)
	Total Cob Wall and
Plaster Thickness
(inches)	Size of Wood Lintel or Bond Beam—H × W
(nominal inches)
	Width of Concrete Lintel or Bond Beam
(inches)

For Span ≤ 4 ft	For Span ≤ 6 ft	For Span ≤ 6 ft	For Span ≤ 8 ft
10	0	≤ 27	4 × 8	4 × 8	8	8
10	1	15	4 × 12	4 × 12	12	12
10	1	19	4 × 16	4 × 16	16	16
10	1	27	4 × 24	4 × 24	24	24
10	2	15	4 × 12	6 × 12	12	12
10	2	19	4 × 16	6 × 16	16	16
10	2	27	4 × 24	4 × 24	24	24
20	0	≤ 27	4 × 8	6 × 8	8	8
20	1	15	4 × 12	6 × 12	12	12
20	1	19	4 × 16	6 × 16	16	16
20	1	27	4 × 24	4 × 24	24	24
20	2	15	4 × 12	6 × 12	12	NP
20	2	19	4 × 16	6 × 16	16	NP
20	2	27	4 × 24	6 × 24	24	NP
30	0	≤ 27	4 × 8	6 × 8	8	NP
30	1	15	4 × 12	6 × 12	12	NP
30	1	19	4 × 13	6 × 16	16	NP
30	1	27	4 × 24	6 × 24	24	NP
30	2	15	4 × 12	6 × 12	12	NP
30	2	19	4 × 16	6 × 16	16	NP
30	2	27	4 × 24	6 × 24	24	NP

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPA.

NP = Not Permitted.

a.	Concrete bond beams spanning openings, and lintels greater than 16 inches in width, shall have an additional No. 4 bar in the center of their width.

AU106.11 Cob braced wall panels.

Cob braced wall panels shall be in accordance with Section R602.10 and Tables AU106.11(1), AU106.11(2), AU106.11(3), AU106.11(4) and AU106.11(5). Wind design criteria shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.1. Seismic design criteria shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.2. An approved engineered design shall be required in accordance with Section R301.2.1 where the building is located in a special wind region or where wind design is required in accordance with Figure R301.2.1.1.

TABLE AU106.11(1)

COB BRACED WALL PANEL TYPES

WALL TYPEa
DESIGNATION
	ANCHORS TO
FOUNDATIONb
	ANCHORS TO
BOND BEAMc
	VERTICAL STEEL
REINFORCINGb, c
	HORIZONTAL STEEL
REINFORCING
	MAXIMUM
HEIGHT Hd
(in feet)	MAXIMUM
ASPECT RATIO
(H:L)
A	none	5/8″ threaded rod @ 12″; 4″ from wall ends; 12″ embedment in cob	none	none	7e	1:1
B	#5 bar @ 12″; 16″ embedment in cob	5/8″ threaded rod @ 12″; 4″ from wall ends; 16″ embedment in cob; 2″ × 2″ × 1/4″ washer and nut at cob end	none	2″ × 2″ × 14 gage welded wire meshf @ 18″; 6″ from foundation and bond beam	7e	1:1
C	#5 bar @ 12″; 16″ embedment in cob	5/8″ threaded rod @ 12″; 16″ embedment in cob	5/8″ threaded rod; 4″ from each end of braced wall panel; continuous from foundation to bond beam	2″ × 2″ × 14 gage welded wire meshf @ 18″; 6″ from foundation and bond beam	7e	2:1
D	(see vertical steel reinforcing)	(see vertical steel reinforcing)	5/8″ threaded rod; 4″ from each end of braced wall panel and @ 12″; continuous from foundation to bond beam	2″ × 2″ × 14 gage welded wire meshf @ 18″; 6″ from foundation and bond beam	7e	2:1
E	6″ × 6″× 6 gage welded wire mesh; 12″ embedment in foundation	5/8″ threaded rod @ 12″; 4″ from wall ends; 12″ embedment in cob	6″ × 6″ × 6 gage welded wire mesh; 2″ from each wall face	none	7.5	1:1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Braced wall panel Types A, B, C and D shall be not less than 16 inches thick. Braced wall panel Type E shall be not less than 12 inches thick. All braced wall panels shall be not greater than 24 inches thick.

b.	Not less than 8-inch embedment into foundation, unless otherwise stated.

c.	Not less than 4-inch embedment into concrete bond beams. Full penetration through wood bond beam, secured with nut and washer.

d.	H = height of the cob portion of the wall only. See Figure AU101.4.

e.	Maximum height shall be 8 feet when wall thickness is increased to 18 inches.

f.	Galvanized mesh.

TABLE AU106.11(2)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS FOR COB-BRACED WALL PANELS BASED ON WIND SPEED

•	EXPOSURE CATEGORY Bd

•	25-FOOT MEAN ROOF HEIGHT

•	10-FOOT EAVE-TO-RIDGE HEIGHTd

•	10-FOOT WALL HEIGHTd

•	2 BRACED WALL LINESd

	MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (FEET) OF COB-BRACED WALL PANELS
REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED WALL LINEa, b, c, d, e

Ultimate Design
Wind Speed
(mph)	Story Location	Braced Wall
Line Spacing
(feet)	Cob-Braced
Wall Panele A;
(aspect ratio H:L ≤ 1:1)	Cob-Braced
Wall Panele B;
(aspect ratio H:L ≤ 1:1)	Cob-Braced
Wall Panele C, D;
(aspect ratio H:L ≤ 2:1)	Cob-Braced
Wall Panele E;
(aspect ratio H:L ≤ 1:1)
≤ 110	One-story building	10	6.0	6.0	3.7	6.0
≤ 110	One-story building	20	7.9	7.4	7.4	6.0
≤ 110	One-story building	30	11.8	11.0	11.0	6.9
≤ 115	One-story building	10	6.0	6.0	4.1	6.0
≤ 115	One-story building	20	8.7	8.1	8.1	6.0
≤ 115	One-story building	30	13.0	12.1	12.1	7.6
≤ 120	One-story building	10	6.0	6.0	4.4	6.0
≤ 120	One-story building	20	9.4	8.8	8.8	6.0
≤ 120	One-story building	30	14.1	13.1	13.1	8.3
≤ 130	One-story building	10	6.0	6.0	5.1	6.0
≤ 130	One-story building	20	11.0	10.3	10.3	6.5
≤ 130	One-story building	30	16.5	15.4	15.4	9.7
≤ 140	One-story building	10	6.0	6.0	5.9	6.0
≤ 140	One-story building	20	12.7	11.9	11.9	7.5
≤ 140	One-story building	30	19.1	17.8	17.8	11.2

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	Linear interpolation shall be permitted.

b.	Braced wall panels shall be without openings.

c.	Braced wall panel Types A, B and E shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 1:1. Braced wall panel Types C and D shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1.

d.	Subject to applicable wind adjustment factors associated with Items 1 and 2 of Table R602.10.3(2).

e.	Cob braced wall panel types indicated shall comply with Section AU106.11 and Table AU106.11(1).

TABLE AU106.11(3)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS FOR COB BRACED WALL PANELS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY A

•	SOIL CLASS Df

•	TOTAL WALL HEIGHT = 10 FEET (INCLUDING STEM WALL AND BOND BEAM)

•	COB WALL HEIGHT PER TABLE AU106.11(1)

•	15 PSF ROOF-CEILING DEAD LOADd

•	STORY LOCATION: ONE-STORY BUILDING

•	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY A

•	1.5″ PLASTER THICKNESS EACH SIDEg

	MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (FEET) OF COB BRACED WALL
PANELS REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED WALL LINEa, b, c, d, e

Braced Wall
Line Spacing
(feet)	Braced Wall
Line Length
(feet)	Min. Braced Wall
Line % Openings
	Min. Perpendicular
Braced Wall
Line % Openings	Cob Braced Wall
Panele A, B
	Cob Braced Wall
Panele C, D
	Cob Braced Wall
Panele E

10	30	0	0	—	3.4	6.0
20	20	0	0	—	3.5	6.0
20	30	0	0	—	4.5	6.0
30	30	0	0	—	5.6	6.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

a.	Interpolation is not permitted.

b.	Braced wall panels shall be without openings.

c.	Braced wall panel Types A, B and E shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 1:1. Braced wall panel Types C and D shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1.

d.	Subject to applicable seismic adjustment factors associated with Item 5 in Table R602.10.3(4).

e.	Cob braced wall panel types indicated shall comply with Section AU106.11 and Table AU106.11(1).

f.	Wall bracing lengths are based on a soil site class D. Interpolation of bracing lengths between SDS values associated with the seismic design categories is allowable where a site-specific SDS value is determined in accordance with Section 1613 of the International Building Code.

g.	For total plaster thickness between 3 inches and 6 inches, the minimum total length of braced wall panels shall be multiplied by 1.2.

TABLE AU106.11(4)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS FOR COB BRACED WALL PANELS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY B

• SOIL CLASS Df

• TOTAL WALL HEIGHT = 10 FEET (INCLUDING STEM WALL AND BOND BEAM)

• COB WALL HEIGHT PER TABLE AU106.11(1)

• 15 PSF ROOF-CEILING DEAD LOADd

• STORY LOCATION: ONE-STORY BUILDING

• SESIMIC DESIGN CATEGORY B

• 1.5″ PLASTER THICKNESS EACH SIDEg

	MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (FEET) OF COB BRACED WALL
PANELS REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED WALL LINEa, b, c, d, e

Braced Wall
Line Spacing
(feet)	Braced Wall
Line Length
(feet)	Min. Braced Wall
Line % Openings
	Min. Perpendicular Braced
Wall Lines % Openings
	Cob Braced
Wall Panele A, B
	Cob Braced
Wall Panele C, D
	Cob Braced
Wall Panele E

10	10	0	0	6.0	3.2	6.0
10	20	0	0	6.0	4.9	6.0
10	20	50	0	6.0	3.5	6.0
10	30	0	0	7.1	6.6	6.0
10	30	50	0	6.0	4.5	6.0
20	10	0	0	6.0h	4.9h	6.0
20	10	0	50	6.0	3.5	6.0
20	10	50	0	NP	4.2	NP
20	10	50	50	NP	3.0	NP
20	20	0	0	7.4	6.9	6.0
20	20	0	50	6.0	5.5	6.0
20	20	50	0	6.0	5.5	6.0
20	20	50	50	6.0	4.1	6.0
20	30	0	0	9.4	8.8	6.0
20	30	0	50	7.9	7.4	6.0
20	30	50	0	7.2	6.7	6.0
20	30	50	50	6.0	5.3	6.0
30	10	0	0	7.1	6.6	6.0
30	20	0	0	9.4	8.8	6.0
30	20	0	50	7.2	6.7	6.0
30	20	50	0	7.9	7.4	6.0
30	30	0	0	11.8	11.0	6.0
30	30	0	50	9.5	8.9	6.0
30	30	50	0	9.5	8.9	6.0
30	30	50	50	7.3	6.8	6.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

NP = Not Permitted.

a.	Interpolation is not permitted.

b.	Braced wall panels shall be without openings.

c.	Braced wall panel Types A, B and E shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 1:1. Braced wall panel Types C and D shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1.

d.	Subject to applicable seismic adjustment factors associated with Item 5 in Table R602.10.3(4).

e.	Cob braced panel types indicated shall comply with Section AU106.11 and Table AU106.11(1).

f.	Wall bracing lengths are based on a soil site class D. Interpolation of bracing lengths between SDS values associated with the seismic design categories is allowable where a site-specific SDS value is determined in accordance with Section 1613 of the International Building Code.

g.	For total plaster thicknesses 3 inches to 6 inches, the minimum total length of braced wall panels shall be multiplied by 1.2.

h.	Total plaster thicknesses shall be not greater than 3 inches. Substitute 15/32″ roof sheathing and 10d at 6″ edge nailing for requirements in Table R602.3(1).

TABLE AU106.11(5)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS FOR COB BRACED WALL PANELS BASED ON SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY C

• SOIL CLASS Df

• TOTAL WALL HEIGHT = 10 FEET (INCLUDING STEM WALL AND BOND BEAM)

• COB WALL HEIGHT PER TABLE AU106.11(1)

• 15 PSF ROOF-CEILING DEAD LOADd

• STORY LOCATION: ONE-STORY BUILDING

• SESIMIC DESIGN CATEGORY C

• 1.5″ PLASTER THICKNESS EACH SIDEg

	MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (FEET) OF COB BRACED WALL
PANELS REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED WALL LINEa, b, c, d, e

Braced Wall Line
Spacing (feet)
	Braced Wall Line
Length (feet)
	Min. Braced Wall
Line % Openings
	Min. Perpendicular
Braced Wall Lines %
Openings	Cob Braced
Wall Panele A, B
	Cob Braced
Wall Panele C, D
	Cob Braced
Wall Panele E

10	10	0	0	8.3h	7.8h	6.0
10	10	0	50	6.5	6.1	6.0
10	10	25	0	7.4h	6.9h	6.0
10	10	50	50	NP	4.4	6.0
10	15	0	0	10.6	9.9	6.0
10	15	0	50	8.7	8.2	6.0
10	15	50	0	NP	7.3	6.0
10	15	50	50	6.0	5.6	6.0
10	20	0	0	12.8	11.9	6.0
10	20	0	50	11.0	10.2	6.0
10	20	50	0	9.1	8.5	6.0
10	20	50	50	7.3	6.8	6.0
15	10	25	0	NP	NP	6.0h
15	10	0	50	7.8	7.3	6.0
15	10	50	0	NP	NP	NP
15	10	50	50	NP	NP	NP
15	15	0	0	12.9	12.1	6.0
15	15	0	50	10.2	9.5	6.0
15	15	50	0	NP	NP	6.0
15	15	50	50	7.5	7.0	6.0
15	20	0	0	15.3	14.3	6.0
15	20	0	50	12.6	11.7	6.0
15	20	50	0	NP	NP	6.0
15	20	50	50	8.9	8.3	6.0
20	10	25	0	NP	NP	NP
20	10	0	50	9.1	8.5	6.0
20	10	50	0	NP	NP	NP
20	10	50	50	NP	NP	NP
20	15	0	0	NP	14.3h	6.0h
20	15	0	50	11.7h	10.9h	6.0
20	15	50	0	NP	NP	6.0h
20	15	50	50	NP	NP	6.0
20	20	0	0	17.8	16.7	6.9
20	20	0	50	14.2	13.3	6.0
20	20	50	0	NP	NP	6.0
20	20	50	50	NP	9.9	6.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

NP = Not Permitted.

a.	Interpolation is not permitted.

b.	Braced wall panels shall be without openings.

c.	Braced wall panel Types A, B and E shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 1:1. Braced wall panel Types C and D shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1.

d.	Subject to applicable seismic adjustment factors associated with Item 5 in Table R602.10.3(4).

e.	Cob braced panel types indicated shall comply with Section AU106.11 and Table AU106.11(1).

f.	Wall bracing lengths are based on a soil site class D. Interpolation of bracing lengths between SDS values associated with the seismic design categories is allowable where a site-specific SDS value is determined in accordance with Section 1613 of the International Building Code.

g.	For total plaster thicknesses 3″ to 6″, multiply the minimum total length of braced wall panels by 1.2.

h.	Total plaster thickness shall not be greater than 3 inches. Substitute 15/32″ roof sheathing and 10d at 6″ edge nailing for requirements in Table R602.3(1).

AU106.11.1 Nonorthogonal braced wall panels.

Braced wall panels at an angle to the orthogonal braced wall lines shall be considered to contribute to the minimum total braced wall lengths in Tables AU106.11(2), AU106.11(3), AU106.11(4) and AU106.11(5), as follows:

1.	A braced wall panel not more than 45 degrees and greater than 30 degrees to an adjacent orthogonal braced wall line shall contribute 50 percent of its length to that line.

2.	A braced wall panel not more than 30 degrees to an orthogonal braced wall line shall contribute 65 percent of its length to that line.

3.	A braced wall panel greater than 45 degrees and not more than 60 degrees to an orthogonal braced wall line shall contribute 35 percent of its length to that line.

4.	The angle of a curved braced wall panel to a braced wall line shall be determined with the chord of that section of wall, connecting the end points of the arc at the center of the wall.

AU106.11.2 Braced wall lines for buildings with curved walls.

Buildings with curved cob walls shall contain two braced wall lines in two orthogonal directions. The spacing of the braced wall lines for wind design in Table AU106.11(2) and the spacing and length of the braced wall lines for seismic design in Tables AU106.11(3), AU106.11(4) and AU106.11(5) shall be the maximum widths of the building in the two orthogonal directions.

AU106.11.3 Radius, thickness and length of curved braced wall panels.

Cob curved braced wall panels shall have an inside radius of not less than 5 feet (1524 mm), shall be of the thickness required in Table AU106.11(1) and of the length determined in accordance with Section AU106.11. The length of the curved wall shall be considered to be the length of the arc at the center of the wall, in accordance with Figure AU106.11.3 and determined by Equation AU-4.

(Equation AU-4)

ARCC = Length of arc at center of wall (in feet).

RC = Radius at center of wall = Ri + 0.5T (in feet).

Ri = Inside radius of wall (in feet).

T = Thickness of wall without finish (in feet).

A = Angle of extent of braced wall panel from the center of the arc (in degrees).

FIGURE AU106.11.3

CURVED BRACED WALL PANEL

AU106.12 Resistance to wind uplift forces.

Cob walls that resist uplift forces from the roof assembly, as determined in accordance with Section R802.11, shall be in accordance with Table AU106.12.

TABLE AU106.12

ANCHORAGE OF BOND BEAMS FOR WIND UPLIFT

ANCHORS:

• 5/8″ ALL THREAD AT 12″ O.C.a, b

• 2″ × 2″ × 1/4″ WASHERS AND NUT AT END IN COB

• 4″ EMBEDMENT IN CONCRETE BOND BEAMS

• FULL PENETRATION THROUGH WOOD BOND BEAMS WITH 2″ × 2″ × 1/4″ WASHER AND NUT


WIND UPLIFT FORCE FROM
TABLE R802.11 (PLF)
	ANCHORAGE DEPTH IN INCHES, PER WALL WIDTH AND WIND UPLIFT FORCE
≤ 12″ Wall Widthc	≤ 16″ Wall Widthc	≤ 24″ wall widthc
< 75	16	12	12
< 100	24	16	12
< 150	48 o.c. continuous from foundation to bond beamd	24	16
< 200	48 o.c. continuous from foundation to bond beamd	48 o.c. continuous from foundation to bond beamd	24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	For wood bond beams a maximum of 6 inches from bond beam ends.

b.	For minimum 6-inch by 8-inch concrete bond beams, at 18″ o.c. for wind uplift forces less than 75 pounds per linear foot, and at 16″ o.c. for wind uplift forces less than 100 pounds per linear foot.

c.	Excluding finishes.

d.	With 7-inch embedment in foundation, 4-inch embedment in concrete bond beam or full penetration through wood bond beam with 2-inch by 2-inch by 1/4-inch washer and nut.

AU106.13 Post-and-beam with cob infill.

Post-and-beam with cob infill wall systems shall be in accordance with an approved engineered design.

AU106.14 Buttresses.

Cob buttresses that are intended to provide out-of-plane wall bracing or additional capacity for braced wall panels shall be in accordance with an approved engineered design.

SECTION AU107
COB FLOORS
AU107.1 Cob floors.

Cob floors supported by grade shall be in accordance with an approved specification. Straw shall not be required in the material mix.

SECTION AU108
FIRE RESISTANCE
AU108.1 Fire-resistance rating.

Cob walls are not fire-resistance rated.

AU108.2 Clearance to fireplaces and chimneys.

Cob walls or other cob surfaces shall not require clearance to fireplaces and chimneys, except where clearance to noncombustibles is required by the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION AU109
THERMAL PERFORMANCE
AU109.1 Thermal characteristics.

Cob walls shall be classified as mass walls in accordance with Section R402.2.5 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation and shall meet the R-value requirements for mass walls in Table R402.1.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

AU109.2 Thermal resistance.

The unit R-value for cob walls with a density of 110 pounds per cubic foot (1762 kg/m3) shall be R-0.22 per inch of cob thickness. Walls that vary in thickness along their height or length shall use the average thickness of the wall to determine its R-value. The thermal resistance values of air films and finish materials or additional insulation shall be added to the cob wall’s thermal resistance value to determine the R-value of the wall assembly.

AU109.3 Additional insulation.

Where insulating materials are added to the face of a cob wall, the combination of additional insulation and any associated connecting, weatherresisting or protective materials shall comply with Section AU104.1.2, Items 1–4.

SECTION AU110
REFERENCED STANDARDS
AU110.1 General.

See Table AU110.1 for standards that are referenced in various sections of this appendix. Standards are listed by the standard identification with the effective date, the standard title and the section or sections of this appendix that reference the standard.

TABLE AU110.1

REFERENCED STANDARDS

STANDARD ACRONYM	STANDARD NAME	SECTIONS HEREIN
REFERENCED

ASTM C5—10	Standard Specification for Quicklime for Structural Purposes	AU104.4.6
ASTM C141/C141M—14	Standard Specification for Hydrated Hydraulic Lime for Structural Purposes	AU104.4.6
ASTM C206—14	Standard Specification for Finishing Hydrated Lime	AU104.4.6
ASTM C926	Specification for Appliance of Portland Cement-based Plaster	AU104.4.8
ASTM C1707—11	Standard Specification for Pozzolanic Hydraulic Lime for Structural Purposes	AU104.4.6
ASTM E2392/E2392M—10	Standard Guide for Design of Earthen Wall Building Systems	AU104.4.3.2
ASTM BS1, ASTM BS EN 459—2015	Part 1: Building Lime. Definitions, Specifications and Conformity Criteria; Part 2: Test Methods	AU104.4.6

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-b]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX B
SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS SERVING APPLIANCES EQUIPPED
WITH DRAFT HOODS, CATEGORY I APPLIANCES, AND
APPLIANCES LISTED FOR USE WITH TYPE B VENTS

(This appendix is informative and is not part of the code. This appendix is an excerpt from the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, 8th Edition (2023) coordinated with the section numbering of the Florida Building Code, Residential.)

EXAMPLES USING SINGLE APPLIANCE VENTING TABLES

Example 1: Single draft-hood-equipped appliance.

An installer has a 120,000 British thermal unit (Btu) per hour input appliance with a 5-inch-diameter draft hood outlet that needs to be vented into a 10-foot-high Type B vent system. What size vent should be used assuming (a) a 5-foot lateral single-wall metal vent connector is used with two 90-degree elbows, or (b) a 5-foot lateral single-wall metal vent connector is used with three 90-degree elbows in the vent system?

Solution:

Table 504.2(2) should be used to solve this problem, because single-wall metal vent connectors are being used with a Type B vent.

(a)	Read down the first column in Table 504.2(2) until the row associated with a 10-foot height and 5-foot lateral is found. Read across this row until a vent capacity greater than 120,000 Btu per hour is located in the shaded columns labeled “NAT Max” for draft-hood-equipped appliances. In this case, a 5-inch-diameter vent has a capacity of 122,000 Btu per hour and can be used for this application.

(b)	If three 90-degree elbows are used in the vent system, then the maximum vent capacity listed in the tables must be reduced by 10 percent (see Section 504.2.3 for single appliance vents). This implies that the 5-inch-diameter vent has an adjusted capacity of only 110,000 Btu per hour. In this case, the vent system must be increased to 6 inches in diameter (see calculations below).

122,000 (0.90) = 110,000 for 5-inch vent

From Table 504.2(2), Select 6-inch vent 186,000 (0.90) = 167,000; This is greater than the required 120,000. Therefore, use a 6-inch vent and connector where three elbows are used.

Example 2: Single fan-assisted appliance.

An installer has an 80,000 Btu per hour input fan-assisted appliance that must be installed using 10 feet of lateral connector attached to a 30-foot-high Type B vent. Two 90-degree elbows are needed for the installation. Can a single-wall metal vent connector be used for this application?

Solution:

Table 504.2(2) refers to the use of single-wall metal vent connectors with Type B vent. In the first column find the row associated with a 30-foot height and a 10-foot lateral. Read across this row, looking at the FAN Min and FAN Max columns, to find that a 3-inch-diameter single-wall metal vent connector is not recommended. Moving to the next larger size single wall connector (4 inches), note that a 4-inch-diameter single-wall metal connector has a recommended minimum vent capacity of 91,000 Btu per hour and a recommended maximum vent capacity of 144,000 Btu per hour. The 80,000 Btu per hour fan-assisted appliance is outside this range, so the conclusion is that a single-wall metal vent connector cannot be used to vent this appliance using 10 feet of lateral for the connector.

However, if the 80,000 Btu per hour input appliance could be moved to within 5 feet of the vertical vent, then a 4-inch single-wall metal connector could be used to vent the appliance. Table 504.2(2) shows the acceptable range of vent capacities for a 4-inch vent with 5 feet of lateral to be between 72,000 Btu per hour and 157,000 Btu per hour.

If the appliance cannot be moved closer to the vertical vent, then Type B vent could be used as the connector material. In this case, Table 504.2(1) shows that for a 30-foot-high vent with 10 feet of lateral, the acceptable range of vent capacities for a 4-inch-diameter vent attached to a fan-assisted appliance is between 37,000 Btu per hour and 150,000 Btu per hour.

Example 3: Interpolating between table values.

An installer has an 80,000 Btu per hour input appliance with a 4-inch-diameter draft hood outlet that needs to be vented into a 12-foot-high Type B vent. The vent connector has a 5-foot lateral length and is also Type B. Can this appliance be vented using a 4-inch-diameter vent?

Solution:

Table 504.2(1) is used in the case of an all Type B vent system. However, since there is no entry in Table 504.2(1) for a height of 12 feet, interpolation must be used. Read down the 4-inch diameter NAT Max column to the row associated with 10-foot height and 5-foot lateral to find the capacity value of 77,000 Btu per hour. Read further down to the 15-foot height, 5-foot lateral row to find the capacity value of 87,000 Btu per hour. The difference between the 15-foot height capacity value and the 10-foot height capacity value is 10,000 Btu per hour. The capacity for a vent system with a 12-foot height is equal to the capacity for a 10-foot height plus 2/5 of the difference between the 10-foot and 15-foot height values, or 77,000 + 2/5 (10,000) = 81,000 Btu per hour. Therefore, a 4-inch-diameter vent can be used in the installation.

EXAMPLES USING COMMON VENTING TABLES

Example 4: Common venting two draft-hood-equipped appliances.

A 35,000 Btu per hour water heater is to be common vented with a 150,000 Btu per hour furnace using a common vent with a total height of 30 feet. The connector rise is 2 feet for the water heater with a horizontal length of 4 feet. The connector rise for the furnace is 3 feet with a horizontal length of 8 feet. Assume single-wall metal connectors will be used with Type B vent. What size connectors and combined vent should be used in this installation?

Solution:

Table 504.3(2) should be used to size single-wall metal vent connectors attached to Type B vertical vents. In the vent connector capacity portion of Table 504.3(2), find the row associated with a 30-foot vent height. For a 2-foot rise on the vent connector for the water heater, read the shaded columns for draft-hood-equipped appliances to find that a 3-inch-diameter vent connector has a capacity of 37,000 Btu per hour. Therefore, a 3-inch single-wall metal vent connector can be used with the water heater. For a draft-hood-equipped furnace with a 3-foot rise, read across the appropriate row to find that a 5-inch-diameter vent connector has a maximum capacity of 120,000 Btu per hour (which is too small for the furnace) and a 6-inch-diameter vent connector has a maximum vent capacity of 172,000 Btu per hour. Therefore, a 6-inch-diameter vent connector should be used with the 150,000 Btu per hour furnace. Since both vent connector horizontal lengths are less than the maximum lengths listed in Section 504.3.2, the table values can be used without adjustments.

In the common vent capacity portion of Table 504.3(2), find the row associated with a 30-foot vent height and read over to the NAT + NAT portion of the 6-inch-diameter column to find a maximum combined capacity of 257,000 Btu per hour. Since the two appliances total only 185,000 Btu per hour, a 6-inch common vent can be used.

Example 5a: Common venting a draft-hood-equipped water heater with a fan-assisted furnace into a Type B vent.

In this case, a 35,000 Btu per hour input draft-hood-equipped water heater with a 4-inch-diameter draft hood outlet, 2 feet of connector rise, and 4 feet of horizontal length is to be common vented with a 100,000 Btu per hour fan-assisted furnace with a 4-inch-diameter flue collar, 3 feet of connector rise, and 6 feet of horizontal length. The common vent consists of a 30-foot height of Type B vent. What are the recommended vent diameters for each connector and the common vent? The installer would like to use a single-wall metal vent connector.

Solution: [Table 504.3(2)].

Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Since the water heater vent connector horizontal length of 4 feet is less than the maximum value listed in Section 504.3.2, the venting table values can be used without adjustments. Using the Vent Connector Capacity portion of Table 504.3(2), read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet and read across the 2-foot Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu per hour rating in the NAT Max column that is equal to or greater than the water heater input rating. The table shows that a 3-inch vent connector has a maximum input rating of 37,000 Btu per hour. Although this is greater than the water heater input rating, a 3-inch vent connector is prohibited by Section 504.3.21. A 4-inch vent connector has a maximum input rating of 67,000 Btu per hour and is equal to the draft hood outlet diameter. A 4-inch vent connector is selected. Since the water heater is equipped with a draft hood, there are no minimum input rating restrictions.

Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using the Vent Connector Capacity portion of Table 504.3(2), read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet and across the 3-foot Connector Rise (R) row. Since the furnace has a fan-assisted combustion system, find the first FAN Max column with a Btu per hour rating greater than the furnace input rating. The 4-inch vent connector has a maximum input rating of 119,000 Btu per hour and a minimum input rating of 85,000 Btu per hour. The 100,000 Btu per hour furnace in this example falls within this range, so a 4-inch connector is adequate. Since the furnace vent connector horizontal length of 6 feet does not exceed the maximum value listed in Section 504.3.2, the venting table values can be used without adjustment. If the furnace had an input rating of 80,000 Btu per hour, then a Type B vent connector [see Table 504.3(1)] would be needed in order to meet the minimum capacity limit.

Common Vent Diameter. The total input to the common vent is 135,000 Btu per hour. Using the Common Vent Capacity portion of Table 504.3(2), read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet and across this row to find the smallest vent diameter in the FAN + NAT column that has a Btu per hour rating equal to or greater than 135,000 Btu per hour. The 4-inch common vent has a capacity of 132,000 Btu per hour and the 5-inch common vent has a capacity of 202,000 Btu per hour. Therefore, the 5-inch common vent should be used in this example.

Summary. In this example, the installer can use a 4-inch-diameter, single-wall metal vent connector for the water heater and a 4-inch-diameter, single-wall metal vent connector for the furnace. The common vent should be a 5-inch-diameter Type B vent.

Example 5b: Common venting into a masonry chimney.

In this case, the water heater and fan-assisted furnace of Example 5a are to be common vented into a clay tile-lined masonry chimney with a 30-foot height. The chimney is not exposed to the outdoors below the roof line. The internal dimensions of the clay tile liner are nominally 8 inches by 12 inches. Assuming the same vent connector heights, laterals, and materials found in Example 5a, what are the recommended vent connector diameters, and is this an acceptable installation?

Solution:

Table 504.3(4) is used to size common venting installations involving single-wall connectors into masonry chimneys.

Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 504.3(4), Vent Connector Capacity, read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet, and read across the 2-foot Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu per hour rating in the NAT Max column that is equal to or greater than the water heater input rating. The table shows that a 3-inch vent connector has a maximum input of only 31,000 Btu per hour while a 4-inch vent connector has a maximum input of 57,000 Btu per hour. A 4-inch vent connector must therefore be used.

Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using the Vent Connector Capacity portion of Table 504.3(4), read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet and across the 3-foot Connector Rise (R) row. Since the furnace has a fan-assisted combustion system, find the first FAN Max column with a Btu per hour rating greater than the furnace input rating. The 4-inch vent connector has a maximum input rating of 127,000 Btu per hour and a minimum input rating of 95,000 Btu per hour. The 100,000 Btu per hour furnace in this example falls within this range, so a 4-inch connector is adequate.

Masonry Chimney. From Table B-1, the equivalent area for a nominal liner size of 8 inches by 12 inches is 63.6 square inches. Using Table 504.3(4), Common Vent Capacity, read down the FAN + NAT column under the Minimum Internal Area of Chimney value of 63 to the row for 30-foot height to find a capacity value of 739,000 Btu per hour. The combined input rating of the furnace and water heater, 135,000 Btu per hour, is less than the table value, so this is an acceptable installation.

Section 504.3.17 requires the common vent area to be no greater than seven times the smallest listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet area. Both appliances in this installation have 4-inch-diameter outlets. From Table B-1, the equivalent area for an inside diameter of 4 inches is 12.2 square inches. Seven times 12.2 equals 85.4, which is greater than 63.6, so this configuration is acceptable.

Example 5c: Common venting into an exterior masonry chimney.

In this case, the water heater and fan-assisted furnace of Examples 5a and 5b are to be common vented into an exterior masonry chimney. The chimney height, clay tile liner dimensions, and vent connector heights and laterals are the same as in Example 5b. This system is being installed in Charlotte, North Carolina. Does this exterior masonry chimney need to be relined? If so, what corrugated metallic liner size is recommended? What vent connector diameters are recommended?

Solution:

In accordance with Section 504.3.20, Type B vent connectors are required to be used with exterior masonry chimneys. Use Tables 504.3(7a), (7b) to size FAN+NAT common venting installations involving Type-B double wall connectors into exterior masonry chimneys.

The local 99-percent winter design temperature needed to use Table 504.3(7b) can be found in the ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. For Charlotte, North Carolina, this design temperature is 19°F.

Chimney Liner Requirement. As in Example 5b, use the 63 square inch Internal Area columns for this size clay tile liner. Read down the 63 square inch column of Table 504.3(7a) to the 30-foot height row to find that the combined appliance maximum input is 747,000 Btu per hour. The combined input rating of the appliances in this installation, 135,000 Btu per hour, is less than the maximum value, so this criterion is satisfied. Table 504.3(7b), at a 19°F design temperature, and at the same vent height and internal area used above, shows that the minimum allowable input rating of a space-heating appliance is 470,000 Btu per hour. The furnace input rating of 100,000 Btu per hour is less than this minimum value. So this criterion is not satisfied, and an alternative venting design needs to be used, such as a Type B vent shown in Example 5a or a listed chimney liner system shown in the remainder of the example.

In accordance with Section 504.3.19, Table 504.3(1) or 504.3(2) is used for sizing corrugated metallic liners in masonry chimneys, with the maximum common vent capacities reduced by 20 percent. This example will be continued assuming Type B vent connectors.

Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 504.3(1), Vent Connector Capacity, read down the Total Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet, and read across the 2-foot Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu/h rating in the NAT Max column that is equal to or greater than the water heater input rating. The table shows that a 3-inch vent connector has a maximum capacity of 39,000 Btu/h. Although this rating is greater than the water heater input rating, a 3-inch vent connector is prohibited by Section 504.3.21. A 4-inch vent connector has a maximum input rating of 70,000 Btu/h and is equal to the draft hood outlet diameter. A 4-inch vent connector is selected.

Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 504.3(1), Vent Connector Capacity, read down the Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet, and read across the 3-foot Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu per hour rating in the FAN Max column that is equal to or greater than the furnace input rating. The 100,000 Btu per hour furnace in this example falls within this range, so a 4-inch connector is adequate.

Chimney Liner Diameter. The total input to the common vent is 135,000 Btu per hour. Using the Common Vent Capacity Portion of Table 504.3(1), read down the Vent Height (H) column to 30 feet and across this row to find the smallest vent diameter in the FAN+NAT column that has a Btu per hour rating greater than 135,000 Btu per hour. The 4-inch common vent has a capacity of 138,000 Btu per hour. Reducing the maximum capacity by 20 percent (Section 504.3.19) results in a maximum capacity for a 4-inch corrugated liner of 110,000 Btu per hour, less than the total input of 135,000 Btu per hour. So a larger liner is needed. The 5-inch common vent capacity listed in Table 504.3(1) is 210,000 Btu per hour, and after reducing by 20 percent is 168,000 Btu per hour. Therefore, a 5-inch corrugated metal liner should be used in this example.

Single-Wall Connectors. Once it has been established that relining the chimney is necessary, Type B double-wall vent connectors are not specifically required. This example could be redone using Table 504.3(2) for single-wall vent connectors. For this case, the vent connector and liner diameters would be the same as found above with Type B double-wall connectors.

TABLE B-1

MASONRY CHIMNEY LINER DIMENSIONS WITH CIRCULAR EQUIVALENTSa

NOMINAL
LINER SIZE
(inches)	INSIDE
DIMENSIONS
OF LINER
(inches)
	INSIDE DIAMETER
OR EQUIVALENT
DIAMETER
(inches)
	EQUIVALENT
AREA
(square inches)
4 × 8	21/2 × 61/2	4	12.2
5	19.6
6	28.3
7	38.3
8 × 8	63/4 × 63/4	7.4	42.7
8	50.3
8 × 12	61/2 × 101/2	9	63.6
10	78.5
12 × 12	93/4 × 9 3/4	10.4	83.3
11	95
12 × 16	91/2 × 131/2	11.8	107.5
12	113.0
14	153.9
16 × 16	131/4 × 131/4	14.5	162.9
15	176.7
16 × 20	13 × 17	16.2	206.1
18	254.4
20 × 20	163/4 × 163/4	18.2	260.2
20	314.1
20 × 24	161/2 × 201/2	20.1	314.2
22 ×	380.1
24 × 24	201/4 × 201/4	22.1	380.1
24	452.3
24 × 28	201/4 × 201/4	24.1	456.2
28 × 28	241/4 × 241/4	26.4	543.3
27	572.5
30 × 30	251/2 × 251/2	27.9	607
30	706.8
30 × 36	251/2 × 311/2	30.9	749.9
33	855.3
36 × 36	311/2 × 311/2	34.4	929.4
36	1017.9

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 m2.

a.	Where liner sizes differ dimensionally from those shown in Table B-1, equivalent diameters can be determined from published tables for square and rectangular ducts of equivalent carrying capacity or by other engineering methods.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

Table 504.2(1) is used when sizing Type B double-wall gas vent connected directly to the appliance.

Note: The appliance may be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-1

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE WITH A TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

Table 504.2(2) is used when sizing a single-wall metal vent connector attached to a Type B double-wall gas vent.

Note: The appliance may be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-2

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE WITH A SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR

Table 504.2(3) is used when sizing a Type B double-wall gas vent connector attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney.

Note: “A” is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner.

Note: The appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-3

VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE WITH A MASONRY CHIMNEY OF TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR

Table 504.2(4) is used when sizing a single-wall vent connector attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney.

Note: “A” is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner.

Note: The appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-4

VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE USING A MASONRY CHIMNEY AND A SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR

Asbestos cement Type B or single-wall metal vent serving a single draft-hood-equipped appliance [see Table 504.2(5)].

FIGURE B-5

ASBESTOS CEMENT TYPE B OR SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE DRAFT-HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCE

Table 504.3(1) is used when sizing Type B double-wall vent connectors attached to a Type B double-wall common vent.

Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-6

VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES WITH TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR

Table 504.3(2) is used when sizing single-wall vent connectors attached to a Type B double-wall common vent.

Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-7

VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES WITH TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTORS

Table 504.3(3) is used when sizing Type B double-wall vent connectors attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney.

Note: “A” is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner.

Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-8

MASONRY CHIMNEY SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES WITH TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR

Table 504.3(4) is used when sizing single-wall metal vent connectors attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney.

Note: “A” is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner.

Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood equipped or fan-assisted type.

FIGURE B-9

MASONRY CHIMNEY SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES WITH SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTORS

Asbestos cement Type B or single-wall metal pipe vent serving two or more draft-hood-equipped appliances [see Table 504.3(5)].

FIGURE B-10

ASBESTOS CEMENT TYPE B OR SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE DRAFT-HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCES

Example: Manifolded Common Vent Connector LM shall be no greater than 18 times the common vent connector manifold inside diameter; i.e., a 4-inch (102 mm) inside diameter common vent connector manifold shall not exceed 72 inches (1829 mm) in length (see Section 504.3.4).

Note: This is an illustration of a typical manifolded vent connector. Different appliance, vent connector, or common vent types are possible. Consult Section 502.3.

FIGURE B-11

USE OF MANIFOLD COMMON VENT CONNECTOR

Example: Offset Common Vent

Note: This is an illustration of a typical offset vent. Different appliance, vent connector, or vent types are possible. Consult Sections 504.2 and 504.3.

FIGURE B-12

USE OF OFFSET COMMON VENT

Vent connector size depends on:

•	Input

•	Rise

•	Available total height “H”

•	Table 504.3(1) connectors

	

Common vent size depends on:

•	Combined inputs

•	Available total height “H”

•	Table 504.3(1) common vent

FIGURE B-13

MULTISTORY GAS VENT DESIGN PROCEDURE FOR EACH SEGMENT OF SYSTEM

Principles of design of multistory vents using vent connector and common vent design tables (see Sections 504.3.11 through 504.3.17).

FIGURE B-14

MULTISTORY VENT SYSTEMS

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

FIGURE B-15 (EXAMPLE 1)

SINGLE DRAFT-HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCE

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

FIGURE B-16 (EXAMPLE 2)

SINGLE FAN-ASSISTED APPLIANCE

FIGURE B-17 (EXAMPLE 4)

COMMON VENTING TWO DRAFT-HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCES

FIGURE B-18 (EXAMPLE 5A)

COMMON VENTING A DRAFT HOOD WITH A FAN-ASSISTED FURNACE INTO A TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT

FIGURE B-19

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-c]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX C
EXIT TERMINALS OF MECHANICAL
DRAFT AND DIRECT-VENT VENTING SYSTEMS

(This appendix is informative and is not part of the code. This appendix is an excerpt from the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, 8th Edition (2023) coordinated with the section numbering of the Florida Building Code, Residential.)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

APPENDIX C

EXIT TERMINALS OF MECHANICAL DRAFT AND DIRECT-VENT VENTING SYSTEMS

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-d]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX D
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR SAFETY
INSPECTION OF AN EXISTING APPLIANCE INSTALLATION

(This appendix is not a part of the requirements of this code and is included for informational purposes only.)

(This appendix is an excerpt from the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, 8th Edition (2023) coordinated with the section numbering of the Florida Building Code, Residential.)

D.1 General.

The following procedure is intended as a guide to aid in determining that an appliance is properly installed and is in a safe condition for continued use. Where a gas supplier performs an inspection, their written procedures should be followed.

D.1.1 Application.

This procedure is intended for existing residential installations of a furnace, boiler, room heater, water heater, cooking appliance, fireplace appliance and clothes dryer. This procedure should be performed prior to any attempt to modify the appliance installation or building envelope.

D.1.2 Weatherization Programs.

Before a building envelope is to be modified as part of a weatherization program, the existing appliance installation should be inspected in accordance with these procedures. After all unsafe conditions are repaired, and immediately after the weatherization is complete, the appliance inspections in D.5.2 are to be repeated.

D.1.3 Inspection Procedure.

The safety of the building occupant and inspector are to be determined as the first step as described in D.2. Only after the ambient environment is found to be safe should inspections of gas piping and appliances be undertaken. It is recommended that all inspections described in D.3, D.4, and D.6, where the appliance is in the off mode, be completed and any unsafe conditions repaired or corrected before continuing with inspections of an operating appliance described in D.5 and D.6.

D.1.4 Manufacturer Instructions.

Where available, the manufacturer’s installation and operating instructions for the installed appliances should be used as part of these inspection procedures to determine if it is installed correctly and is operating properly.

D.1.5 Instruments.

The inspection procedures include measuring for fuel gas and carbon monoxide (CO) and will require the use of a combustible gas detector (CGD) and a CO detector. It is recommended that both types of detectors be listed. Prior to any inspection, the detectors should be calibrated or tested in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In addition, it is recommended that the detectors have the following minimum specifications.

(1)	Gas Detector: The CGD should be capable of indicating the presence of the type of fuel gas for which it is to be used (e.g. natural gas or propane). The combustible gas detector should be capable of the following:

a.	PPM: Numeric display with a parts per million (ppm) scale from 1ppm to 900 ppm in 1 ppm increments.

b.	LEL: Numeric display with a percent lower explosive limit (% LEL) scale from 0 percent to 100 percent in 1 percent increments.

c.	Audio: An audio sound feature to locate leaks.

(2)	CO Detector: The CO detector should be capable of the following functions and have a numeric display scale as follows:

a.	PPM: For measuring ambient room and appliance emissions a display scale in parts per million (ppm) from 0 to 1,000 ppm in 1 ppm increments.

b.	Alarm: A sound alarm function where hazardous levels of ambient CO is found (see D.2 for alarm levels)

c.	Air Free: Capable of converting CO measurements to an air free level in ppm. Where a CO detector is used without an air free conversion function, the CO air free can be calculated in accordance with footnote 3 in Table D.6.

D.2 Occupant and Inspector Safety.

Prior to entering a building, the inspector should have both a combustible gas detector (CGD) and CO detector turned on, calibrated, and operating. Immediately upon entering the building, a sample of the ambient atmosphere should be taken. Based on CGD and CO detector readings, the inspector should take the following actions:

(1)	The CO detector indicates a carbon monoxide level of 70 ppm or greater 1. The inspector should immediately notify the occupant of the need for themselves and any building occupant to evacuate; the inspector shall immediately evacuate and call 911.

(2)	Where the CO detector indicates a reading between 30 ppm and 70 ppm1. The inspector should advise the occupant that high CO levels have been found and recommend that all possible sources of CO should be turned off immediately and windows and doors opened. Where it appears that the source of CO is a permanently installed appliance, advise the occupant to keep the appliance off and have the appliance serviced by a qualified servicing agent.

(3)	Where CO detector indicates CO below 30 ppm1 the inspection can continue.

(4)	The CGD indicates a combustible gas level of 20% LEL or greater. The inspector should immediately notify the occupant of the need for themselves and any building occupant to evacuate; the inspector shall immediately evacuate and call 911.

(5)	The CGD indicates a combustible gas level below 20% LEL, the inspection can continue.

If during the inspection process it is determined a condition exists that could result in unsafe appliance operation, shut off the appliance and advise the owner of the unsafe condition. Where a gas leak is found that could result in an unsafe condition, advise the owner of the unsafe condition and call the gas supplier to turn off the gas supply. The inspector should not continue a safety inspection on an operating appliance, venting system, and piping system until repairs have been made.

1 U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, Responding to Residential Carbon Monoxide Incidents, Guidelines For Fire and Other Emergency Response Personnel, Approved 7/23/02

D.3 Gas Piping and Connection Inspections.

(1)	Leak Checks. Conduct a test for gas leakage using either a non-corrosive leak detection solution or a CGD confirmed with a leak detection solution.

 The preferred method for leak checking is by use of gas leak detection solution applied to all joints. This method provides a reliable visual indication of significant leaks.

 The use of a CGD in its audio sensing mode can quickly locate suspect leaks but can be overly sensitive indicating insignificant and false leaks. All suspect leaks found through the use of a CGD should be confirmed using a leak detection solution.

 Where gas leakage is confirmed, the owner should be notified that repairs must be made. The inspection should include the following components:

a.	All gas piping fittings located within the appliance space.

b.	Appliance connector fittings.

c.	Appliance gas valve/regulator housing and connections.

(2)	Appliance Connector. Verify that the appliance connection type is compliant with Section G2422 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. Inspect flexible appliance connections to determine if they are free of cracks, corrosion and signs of damage. Verify that there are no uncoated brass connectors. Where connectors are determined to be unsafe or where an uncoated brass connector is found, the appliance shutoff valve should be placed in the off position and the owner notified that the connector must be replaced.

(3)	Piping Support. Inspect piping to determine that it is adequately supported, that there is no undue stress on the piping, and if there are any improperly capped pipe openings.

(4)	Bonding. Verify that the electrical bonding of gas piping is compliant with Section G2411 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

D.4 Inspections to be performed with the Appliance Not Operating.

The following safety inspection procedures are performed on appliances that are not operating. These inspections are applicable to all appliance installations.

(1)	Preparing for Inspection. Shut off all gas and electrical power to the appliances located in the same room being inspected. For gas supply, use the shutoff valve in the supply line or at the manifold serving each appliance. For electrical power, place the circuit breaker in the off position or remove the fuse that serves each appliance. A lock type device or tag should be installed on each gas shutoff valve and at the electrical panel to indicate that the service has been shut off for inspection purposes.

(2)	Vent System Size and Installation. Verify that the existing venting system size and installation are compliant with Chapter 5 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. The size and installation of venting systems for other than natural draft and Category I appliances should be in compliance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Inspect the venting system to determine that it is free of blockage, restriction, leakage, corrosion, and other deficiencies that could cause an unsafe condition. Inspect masonry chimneys to determine if they are lined. Inspect plastic venting system to determine that it is free of sagging and it is sloped in an upward direction to the outdoor vent termination.

(3)	Combustion Air Supply. Inspect provisions for combustion air as follows:

a.	Non-Direct Vent Appliances. Determine that non-direct vent appliance installations are compliant with the combustion air requirements in Section G2407 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. Inspect any interior and exterior combustion air openings and any connected combustion air ducts to determine that there is no blockage, restriction, corrosion or damage. Inspect to determine that the upper horizontal combustion air duct is not sloped in a downward direction toward the air supply source.

b.	Direct Vent Appliances. Verify that the combustion air supply ducts and pipes are securely fastened to direct vent appliance and determine that there are no separations, blockage, restriction, corrosion or other damage. Determine that the combustion air source is located in the outdoors or to areas that freely communicate to the outdoors.

c.	Unvented Appliances. Verify that the total input of all unvented room heaters and gas-fired refrigerators installed in the same room or rooms that freely communicate with each other does not exceed 20 Btu/hr/ft3.

(4)	Flooded Appliances. Inspect the appliance for signs that the appliance may have been damaged by flooding. Signs of flooding include a visible water submerge line on the appliance housing, excessive surface or component rust, deposited debris on internal components, and mildew-like odor. Inform the owner that any part of the appliance control system and any appliance gas control that has been under water must be replaced. All flood-damaged plumbing, heating, cooling and electrical appliances should be replaced.

(5)	Flammable Vapors. Inspect the room/space where the appliance is installed to determine if the area is free of the storage of gasoline or any flammable products such as oil-based solvents, varnishes or adhesives. Where the appliance is installed where flammable products will be stored or used, such as a garage, verify that the appliance burner(s) is a minimum of 18 inches above the floor unless the appliance is listed as flammable vapor ignition resistant.

(6)	Clearances to Combustibles. Inspect the immediate location where the appliance is installed to determine if the area is free of rags, paper or other combustibles. Verify that the appliance and venting system are compliant with clearances to combustible building components in accordance with Sections G2408.5, G2425.15.4, G2426.5, G2427.6.2, G2427.10.5 and other applicable sections of Section G2427.

(7)	Appliance Components. Inspect internal components by removing access panels or other components for the following:

a.	Inspect burners and crossovers for blockage and corrosion. The presence of soot, debris, and signs of excessive heating may indicate incomplete combustion due to blockage or improper burner adjustments.

c.	Metallic and non-metallic hoses for signs of cracks, splitting, corrosion, and lose connections.

d.	Signs of improper or incomplete repairs

e.	Modifications that override controls and safety systems

f.	Electrical wiring for loose connections; cracks, missing or worn electrical insulation; and indications of excessive heat or electrical shorting. Appliances requiring an external electrical supply should be inspected for proper electrical connection in accordance with the National Electric Code.

(8)	Placing Appliances Back in Operation. Return all inspected appliances and systems to their preexisting state by reinstalling any removed access panels and components. Turn on the gas supply and electricity to each appliance found in safe condition. Proceed to the operating inspections in D.5 through D.6.

D.5 Inspections to be performed with the Appliance Operating.

The following safety inspection procedures are to be performed on appliances that are operating where there are no unsafe conditions or where corrective repairs have been completed.

D.5.1 General Appliance Operation.

(1)	Initial Startup. Adjust the thermostat or other control device to start the appliance. Verify that the appliance starts up normally and is operating properly.

 Determine that the pilot(s), where provided, is burning properly and that the main burner ignition is satisfactory, by interrupting and re-establishing the electrical supply to the appliance in any convenient manner. If the appliance is equipped with a continuous pilot(s), test all pilot safety devices to determine whether they are operating properly by extinguishing the pilot(s) when the main burner(s) is off and determining, after 3 minutes, that the main burner gas does not flow upon a call for heat. If the appliance is not provided with a pilot(s), test for proper operation of the ignition system in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s lighting and operating instructions.

(2)	Flame Appearance. Visually inspect the flame appearance for proper color and appearance. Visually determine that the main burner gas is burning properly (i.e., no floating, lifting, or flashback). Adjust the primary air shutter as required. If the appliance is equipped with high and low flame controlling or flame modulation, check for proper main burner operation at low flame.

(3)	Appliance Shutdown. Adjust the thermostat or other control device to shut down the appliance. Verify that the appliance shuts off properly.

D.5.2 Test for Combustion Air and Vent Drafting for Natural Draft and Category I Appliances.

Combustion air and vent draft procedures are for natural draft and category I appliances equipped with a draft hood and connected to a natural draft venting system.

(1)	Preparing for Inspection. Close all exterior building doors and windows and all interior doors between the space in which the appliance is located and other spaces of the building that can be closed. Turn on any clothes dryer. Turn on any exhaust fans, such as range hoods and bathroom exhausts, so they will operate at maximum speed. Do not operate a summer exhaust fan. Close fireplace dampers and any fireplace doors.

(2)	Placing the Appliance in Operation. Place the appliance being inspected in operation. Adjust the thermostat or control so the appliance will operate continuously.

(3)	Spillage Test. Verify that all appliances located within the same room are in their standby mode and ready for operation. Follow lighting instructions for each appliance as necessary. Test for spillage at the draft hood relief opening as follows:

a.	After 5 minutes of main burner operation, check for spillage using smoke.

b.	Immediately after the first check, turn on all other fuel gas burning appliances within the same room so they will operate at their full inputs and repeat the spillage test.

c.	Shut down all appliances to their standby mode and wait for 15 minutes.

d.	Repeat the spillage test steps a through c on each appliance being inspected.

(4)	Additional Spillage Tests: Determine if the appliance venting is impacted by other door and air handler settings by performing the following tests.

a.	Set initial test condition in accordance with D.5.2 (1).

b.	Place the appliance(s) being inspected in operation. Adjust the thermostat or control so the appliance(s) will operate continuously.

c.	Open the door between the space in which the appliance(s) is located and the rest of the building. After 5 minutes of main burner operation, check for spillage at each appliance using smoke.

d.	Turn on any other central heating or cooling air handler fan that is located outside of the area where the appliances are being inspected. After 5 minutes of main burner operation, check for spillage at each appliance using smoke. The test should be conducted with the door between the space in which the appliance(s) is located and the rest of the building in the open and in the closed position.

(5)	Return doors, windows, exhaust fans, fireplace dampers, and any other fuel gas burning appliance to their previous conditions of use.

(6)	If, after completing the spillage test it is believed sufficient combustion air is not available, the owner should be notified that an alternative combustion air source is needed in accordance with Section G2407 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. Where it is believed that the venting system does not provide adequate natural draft, the owner should be notified that alternative vent sizing, design or configuration is needed in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. If spillage occurs, the owner should be notified as to its cause, be instructed as to which position of the door (open or closed) would lessen its impact, and that corrective action by a HVAC professional should be taken.

D.6 Appliance-Specific Inspections.

The following appliance-specific inspections are to be performed as part of a complete inspection. These inspections are performed either with the appliance in the off or standby mode (indicated by “OFF”) or on an appliance that is operating (indicated by “ON”). The CO measurements are to be undertaken only after the appliance is determined to be properly venting. The CO detector should be capable of calculating CO emissions in ppm air free.

(1)	Forced Air Furnaces:

a.	OFF. Verify that an air filter is installed and that it is not excessively blocked with dust.

b.	OFF. Inspect visible portions of the furnace combustion chamber for cracks, ruptures, holes, and corrosion. A heat exchanger leakage test should be conducted.

c.	ON. Verify both the limit control and the fan control are operating properly. Limit control operation can be checked by blocking the circulating air inlet or temporarily disconnecting the electrical supply to the blower motor and determining that the limit control acts to shut off the main burner gas.

d.	ON. Verify that the blower compartment door is properly installed and can be properly re-secured if opened. Verify that the blower compartment door safety switch operates properly.

e.	ON. Check for flame disturbance before and after blower comes on which can indicate heat exchanger leaks.

f.	ON. Measure the CO in the vent after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(2)	Boilers:

a.	OFF and ON. Inspect for evidence of water leaks around boiler and connected piping.

b.	ON. Verify that the water pumps are in operating condition. Test low water cutoffs, automatic feed controls, pressure and temperature limit controls, and relief valves in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations to determine that they are in operating condition.

c.	ON. Measure the CO in the vent after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(3)	Water Heaters:

a.	OFF. Verify that the pressure-temperature relief valve is in operating condition. Water in the heater should be at operating temperature.

b.	OFF. Verify that inspection covers, glass, and gaskets are intact and in place on a flammable vapor ignition resistant (FVIR) type water heater.

c.	ON. Verify that the thermostat is set in accordance with the manufacturer’s operating instructions and measure the water temperature at the closest tub or sink to verify that it is no greater than 120ºF.

d.	Reserved.

e.	ON. Measure the CO in the vent after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(4)	Cooking Appliances

a.	OFF. Inspect oven cavity and range-top exhaust vent for blockage with aluminum foil or other materials.

b.	OFF. Inspect cook top to verify that it is free from a build-up of grease.

c.	ON. Measure the CO above each burner and at the oven exhaust vents after 5 minutes of burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(5)	Vented Room Heaters

a.	OFF. For built-in room heaters and wall furnaces, inspect that the burner compartment is free of lint and debris.

b.	OFF. Inspect that furnishings and combustible building components are not blocking the heater.

a.	ON. Measure the CO in the vent after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(6)	Vent-Free (unvented) Heaters

a.	OFF. Verify that the heater input is a maximum of 40,000 Btu input, but not more than 10,000 Btu where installed in a bedroom, and 6,000 Btu where installed in a bathroom.

b.	OFF. Inspect the ceramic logs provided with gas log type vent free heaters that they are properly located and aligned.

c.	OFF. Inspect the heater that it is free of excess lint build-up and debris.

c.	OFF. Verify that the oxygen depletion safety shutoff system has not been altered or bypassed.

d.	ON. Verify that the main burner shuts down within 3 minutes by extinguishing the pilot light. The test is meant to simulate the operation of the oxygen depletion system (ODS).

e.	ON. Measure the CO after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(7)	Gas Log Sets and Gas Fireplaces

a.	OFF. For gas logs installed in wood burning fireplaces equipped with a damper, verify that the fireplace damper is in a fixed open position.

b.	ON. Measure the CO in the firebox (log sets installed in wood burning fireplaces or in the vent (gas fireplace) after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

(8)	Gas Clothes Dryer

a.	OFF. Where installed in a closet, verify that a source of make-up air is provided and inspect that any make-up air openings, louvers, and ducts are free of blockage.

b.	OFF. Inspect for excess amounts of lint around the dryer and on dryer components. Inspect that there is a lint trap properly installed and it does not have holes or tears. Verify that it is in a clean condition.

c.	OFF. Inspect visible portions of the exhaust duct and connections for loose fittings and connections, blockage, and signs of corrosion. Verify that the duct termination is not blocked and that it terminates in an outdoor location. Verify that only approved metal vent ducting material is installed (plastic and vinyl materials are not approved for gas dryers).

d.	ON. Verify mechanical components including drum and blower are operating properly.

e.	ON. Operate the clothes dryer and verify that exhaust system is intact and exhaust is exiting the termination.

f.	ON. Measure the CO at the exhaust duct or termination after 5 minutes of main burner operation. The CO should not exceed threshold in Table D.6.

TABLE D.6

CO THRESHOLDS

Central Furnace (all categories)	400 ppm1 air free2, 3
Floor Furnace	400 ppm air free
Gravity Furnace	400 ppm air free
Wall Furnace (BIV)	200 ppm air free
Wall Furnace (Direct Vent)	400 ppm air free
Vented Room Heater	200 ppm air free
Vent-Free Room Heater	200 ppm air free
Water Heater	200 ppm air free
Oven/Boiler	225 ppm as measured
Top Burner	25 ppm as measured (per burner)
Clothes Dryer	400 ppm air free
Refrigerator	25 ppm as measured
Gas Log (gas fireplace)	25 ppm as measured in vent
Gas Log (installed in wood
burning fireplace)
	400 ppm air free in firebox

1	Parts per million

2	Air free emission levels are based on a mathematical equation (involving carbon monoxide and oxygen or carbon dioxide readings) to convert an actual diluted flue gas carbon monoxide testing sample to an undiluted air free flue gas carbon monoxide level utilized in the appliance certification standards. For natural gas or propane, using as-measured CO ppm and O2 percentage:

Where:

COAFppm= Carbon monoxide, air-free ppm

COppm = As-measured combustion gas carbon monoxide ppm

O2 = Percentage of oxygen in combustion gas, as a percentage

3	An alternate method of calculating the CO air free when access to an oxygen meter is not available:

Where:

UCO2 = Ultimate concentration of carbon dioxide for the fuel being burned in percent for natural gas (12.2 percent) and propane (14.0 percent)

CO2 = Measured concentration of carbon dioxide in combustion products in percent

CO = Measured concentration of carbon monoxide in combustion products in percent

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-e]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX E
FLORIDA STANDARD FOR MITIGATION OF RADON
IN EXISTING BUILDINGS

Effective: June 1, 1994




INTRODUCTION

Radon is a radioactive gas which occurs naturally in soils. It has been found in high concentrations in some areas of many states including Florida. Radon can enter buildings through floor cracks and openings driven by pressure differences which result from space conditioning and ventilation systems, temperatures and wind. Its radioactive decay products can cause lung cancer when breathed.

The following building standards have been developed in accordance with Section 553.98, Florida Statutes to protect the public by setting standards for mitigation of radon concentrations in existing buildings.

PRINCIPAL APPROACHES FOR RADON MITIGATION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS

This building standard addresses five principal approaches to mitigating radon accumulation in buildings:

1.	Radon control using the building structure as a gas barrier. This is a passive approach which requires no fans (see Chapter 4).

2.	Radon control by lowering the air pressure in the soil beneath the building relative to the indoor air pressure of the building. This is an active approach which requires one or more electrically driven fan (see Chapter 6).

3.	Radon control by raising the indoor air pressure in the building relative to the air pressure in the soil beneath the building. This is an active approach which may either use an existing heating and air-conditioning system blower or an additional electrically driven fan. This approach may have significant negative impact on the annual energy consumption of the building due to heating and cooling of additional outdoor air in addition to fan power consumption (see Chapter 5).

4.	Radon control by ventilating the building with outdoor air. This is an active approach which may either use an existing heating and air-conditioning system blower or an additional electrically driven fan. This approach may have significant negative impact on the annual energy consumption of the building due to heating and cooling of additional outdoor air and to increased fan power consumption (see Chapter 5).

5.	Radon control by separating the building and source with a ventilated region of outside air. This approach is generally applicable to buildings with a crawl space, and may be either active or passive (see Chapter 6).

The standard does not mandate the implementation of any of the principal approaches listed above. It establishes minimum standard practices for each of the principal approaches. Implementation of these minimum standard practices does not guarantee successful mitigation. A post-mitigation indoor radon concentration test must be conducted to demonstrate successful mitigation in compliance with the rules of the Department of Health and Chapter 3 of this standard.

FOREWORD

The practices incorporated in the standard are based on experience, testing and, in certain cases, expectations founded on interpretation of fundamental physical principles. The demonstration at successful mitigation utilizing the different approaches incorporated in this standard varies.

Subslab depressurization, crawlspace ventilation, and submembrane depressurization have the highest demonstrated success rates. Success with these approaches has in many cases required modification and enhancement of systems based on post mitigation indoor radon tests.

Effective sealing of accessible entry points has been demonstrated to make a significant impact on indoor radon concentrations. However, mitigation by sealing entry points alone has not had a demonstrated level of success equivalent to the aforementioned active mitigation systems. This is understood to be principally because of the difficulty in locating and treating enough entry points to resist the driving forces which cause radon laden soil gas and crawlspace air entry. The significance of entry points and their treatment can be ranked based on their size, location and the degree of depressurization of the building space surrounding them. Design and construction of successful subslab depressurization systems also depends on entry point size, location and the magnitude of coincident building depressurization. Attention to limiting entry at points of high depressurization such as space conditioning system return plenums, mechanical closets, etc., is critical to the success of both passive mitigation and minimally designed active mitigation systems.

Building pressurization is expected, based on fundamental principles, to provide a potentially effective mitigation strategy. The effectiveness for individual cases may rely on occupant behavior as well as building leakage characteristics. Pressurization systems also have potentially major impacts on occupant comfort, humidity control and energy use.

Building ventilation has potential application where low indoor radon concentrations exist initially. This approach can have significant impacts on the ability of a building’s climate control systems to perform adequately in the hot and humid climate and on energy consumption for comfort conditioning.

None of the techniques in this standard are guaranteed to provide adequate mitigation. The complexities of existing buildings and the inherent limitations in the ability to determine the building’s construction characteristics result in conditions too diverse for a standard to anticipate. Successful mitigation depends on the experience of the mitigator to make an effective selection of mitigation options. A post mitigation indoor radon test is essential for determining if initial mitigation has been successful. Proper maintenance and operation of mechanical systems implemented as part of active mitigation approaches are critical to the long term effectiveness of mitigation where such systems are used. Periodic retests of indoor radon concentrations at least every two years, and when the building undergoes significant structural alterations, are advised for all mitigation approaches to provide continued assurance of safe indoor radon levels.

CHAPTER E1
ADMINISTRATION
E101 General.
E101.1 Title.

Provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known as, and may be cited as, the Florida Standard For Mitigation of Radon in Existing Buildings, hereinafter referred to as “this standard.”

E101.2 Intent.
E101.2.1 General.

This standard applies to those alterations to existing buildings that are implemented to reduce indoor radon concentrations, in order to enable control of human exposure to indoor radon and its progeny.

E101.2.2 Limits.

This standard is intended to improve indoor air quality with respect to radon. These standards are based on the principle of limiting radon concentrations to levels as low as reasonably achievable, within the limitations at current technology and economic feasibility. Use of this standard does not guarantee radon will be limited to any specific concentrations in a building; however, experience indicates a reduction in radon and its progeny can be realized by using the mitigation strategies described in this standard.

E101.2.3 Durability.

Experience with the radon-resistant construction details contained herein has been limited to a fraction of the average life of a building. Implementation of radon mitigation measures described herein does not guarantee that mitigation effects will be permanent. Periodic inspection and maintenance of the radon mitigation measures and retesting of indoor radon levels is the responsibility of the building owner.

E101.3 Scope.
E101.3.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this standard shall apply to the construction or alteration associated with the mitigation of indoor radon in every building or structure not specifically exempted. Exempted occupancies shall include structures not intended for human occupancy.

E102 Alternate materials and methods.

The provisions of this standard are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this standard, provided any such alternate is demonstrated according to the provisions of Chapter E3 of this standard, to be effective at the control of radon.

E103 Compliance.

All mitigation shall be deemed to be in compliance with this standard when: (a) the techniques utilized in mitigation meet the minimum standard practices established herein; and (b) the building is determined to meet the “not to exceed” exposure standard established by the Department of Health (DOH) or the level specified in any warranty or guarantee provided to the client. The DOH has set an exposure standard for radon decay products in buildings at an annual average of 0.02 working levels. Under conditions often encountered in homes, this is equivalent to an annual average radon level of 4.0 picocuries per liter. Radon levels in most buildings can be reduced to 4.0 picocuries per liter or below.

Testing must be conducted in accordance with all applicable sections of the DOH Florida Administrative Code Chapter 64E-5 and in accordance with Chapter E3 of this standard.

CHAPTER E2
DEFINITIONS
E201 General.

For the purposes of this standard, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be set forth in this chapter. Where terms are not defined therein, they shall have the meaning as noted in the applicable locally adopted code. Words not defined in any locally adopted code shall have the meanings in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.

E202
DEFINITIONS

AUTOMATIC. Self-acting, operating by its own mechanism when activated by some personal influence, as for example, a change in current, pressure, temperature or mechanical configuration.

CAULKS AND SEALANTS. Those materials which will significantly reduce the flow of gases through small openings in the building shell. Among those used are:

Urethane. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

CONDITIONED SPACE. All spaces which are provided with heated and/or cooled air or which are maintained at temperatures over 50°F (10°C) during the heating season, including adjacent connected spaces separated by an uninsulated component (e.g., basements, utility rooms, garages, corridors).

CONTRACTOR. A building trades professional licensed by the state, including certified mitigation business.

CRAWL SPACE. An area beneath the living space in some houses, where the floor of the lowest living area is elevated above grade level. This space (which generally provides only enough head room for a person to crawl in), is not living space, but often contains utilities.

DEPRESSURIZATION. A condition that exists when the measured air pressure is lower than the reference air pressure.

ELASTOMERIC. That property of macromolecular material of returning rapidly to approximately the initial dimensions and shape, after substantial deformation by a weak stress and release of stress.

MIL. 1 mil = 1/1000 of an inch.

MITIGATION. The act of making less severe, reducing or relieving. For the purposes of this standard, a building shall not be considered as mitigated until it has been demonstrated to meet the standards of compliance specified in Section 103.

OUTSIDE AIR. Air taken from the outdoors and, therefore, not previously circulated through the system.

PICOCURIE (pCi). A unit of measurement of radioactivity. A curie is the amount of any radionuclide that undergoes exactly 3.7 × 1010 radioactive disintegrations per second. A picocurie is one trillionth (1012) of a curie, or 0.037 disintegrations per second.

PICOCURIES PER LITER (pCi/L). A common unit of measurement of the concentration of radioactivity in a gas. A picocurie per liter corresponds to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second in every liter of air.

RADIUM (Ra). A naturally occurring radioactive element resulting from the decay of uranium. It is the parent of radon.

RADON (Rn). A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the uranium-238 decay series, it is the direct decay product of radium-226.

SOIL DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEM. A system designed to withdraw air below the slab through means of a vent pipe and fan arrangement (active).

SOIL GAS. Gas which is always present underground, in the small spaces between particles of the soil or in crevices in rock. Major constituents of soil gas include nitrogen, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and (near the surface) oxygen. Since radium-226 is essentially always present in the soil or rock, varying levels of radon-222 will exist in the soil gas.

SOIL GAS RETARDER. A concrete slab; polyvinylchloride (PVC) ethylenepropylene dieneterpolymer (EPDM), neoprene or other flexible sheet material; or other system of materials placed between the soil and the building for the purpose of reducing the flow of soil gas into the building.

URETHANE. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

VENTILATION. The process of supplying or removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been conditioned.

CHAPTERE3
TESTING
E301 General.

Where mitigation projects are performed by commercial mitigation contractors, all tests performed to demonstrate compliance with this standard must be performed by a certified radon measurement business certified by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. Compliance tests must be performed by a measurement business independent of the mitigation contractor.

E301.1 Test procedures.

Testing shall be conducted according to the procedures in the appropriate sections of EPA 402-R-92-004, Indoor Radon and Radon Decay Product Measurement Device Protocols (US EPA, July, 1992) and EPA 402-R-92-003, Protocols for Radon and Radon Decay Product Measurements in Homes (US EPA, June 1993).

E301.2 Acceptable devices and test periods.

Selection of devices, operational devices, and test periods shall be in accordance with EPA 402-R-92-004.

E301.2.1 Acceptance criteria.

The building will be deemed to comply with the standard if postmitigation test results performed in accordance with this chapter and all applicable sections of Chapter 64E-5, Florida Administrative Code, Part XII, Subpart A, meet the “not to exceed” exposure standard established by the DOH or the level specified in any warranty or guarantee to the client.

CHAPTER E4
STRUCTURAL SEALING
AND HVAC SYSTEM BALANCING
E401 General.

When accessible cracks, penetrations, and joints in floors and walls in contact with the soil, or separating conditioned space from a crawl space, are sealed to reduce radon entry, they shall as a minimum be sealed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition, when acceptable indoor radon concentrations are attained by the sealing of ducts and plenums, they shall be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

E402 Sealing cracks and joints in concrete floors and walls.
E402.1 Small cracks and joints.

Cracks and joints with widths less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) shall be repaired by the application of an elastomeric material capable of withstanding at least 25-percent extension and extending at least 4 inches (102 mm) beyond the length and width of the crack, or by the method described in Section E402.2.

E402.2 Large cracks and joints.

Cracks with widths larger than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) shall be enlarged to a recess with minimum dimensions of 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch (6 mm by 6 mm) and sealed with an approved caulk or sealant applied over a sealant backer in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Cracks and joints with widths less than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) may also be sealed in this manner if traffic, floor covering material or other conditions are inconsistent with the provisions of Section E402.1.

E402.3 Utility penetrations, work spaces and large slab openings.

Where large openings through the slab exist, such as at a bath tub drain or a toilet flange, an acceptable method for sealing the exposed soil shall include fully covering the exposed soil with a solvent based plastic roof cement or other approved material as per Section E405.1 to a minimum depth of 1 inch (25 mm). Where voids between masonry foundation walls and the slab edge are accessible, and are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, nonshrinking cementitious material may be used.

E402.4 Utility penetrations in crawl space walls.

Utility penetrations or other openings through hollow cavity walls that separate conditioned space from soil, or conditioned space from a crawl space, shall be sealed with an approved material on both the interior and exterior faces of the wall. Penetrations and openings through solid concrete floors or walls may be sealed on only the interior face.

E402.5 Hollow masonry walls.

All openings for electrical boxes or plumbing or other wall penetrations in hollow masonry walls, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed with an approved caulk and/or gasket on the interior face of the wall.

E402.6 Sumps.

Any sump located in a conditioned portion of a building, or in an enclosed space directly attached to a conditioned portion of a building, shall be covered by a lid. An air tight seal shall be formed between the sump and lid and at any wire or pipe penetrations.

E403 Floors over crawl space.
E403.1 Reinforced concrete floors.

Cracks and penetrations through concrete floors constructed over crawl-spaces, and that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed in conformance with all applicable provisions of Section E402.

E403.2 Wood-framed floors.

All penetrations through the subfloor, including but not limited to plumbing pipes, wiring and ductwork, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be sealed with an approved caulk in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Where large openings are created by plumbing, such as at bath tub drains, sheet metal or other rigid and durable materials shall be used in conjunction with sealants to close and seal the opening.

E404 Combined construction types.
E404.1 Structural chases.

Openings which connect a crawlspace and the space between floor or ceiling joists, wall studs, or any other hollow chase adjoining conditioned space, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry concentrations, shall be closed and sealed in accordance with the appropriate portions of this chapter.

E404.2 Wall penetrations.

Openings for electrical or plumbing connections in a wall between a crawl space and a conditioned space, that are sealed in order to reduce radon entry, shall be closed and sealed with an approved caulk and/or gasket.

E404.3 Doors.

When a door is located in a wall between a crawl space and the conditioned space, it shall be fully weatherstripped or gasketed.

E405 Approved sealant materials.
E405.1 Sealants.

Acceptable caulks and sealants shall conform with ASTM C920, Standard Specifications for Elastomeric Joint Sealants, and ASTM C962, Standard Guide for Use of Elastomeric Joint Sealants. All sealant materials and methods of application shall be compatible with the location, function and material of the surface or surfaces being sealed.

E406 Space conditioning and ventilation systems.
E406.1 Mechanical system connections.

Condensate drains and pipe chases for freon lines that provide a direct connection between the indoor air and the soil shall be sealed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

E406.1.1 Condensate drains.

Condensate drains shall connect to air outside the building perimeter at a height of at least 6 inches (172 mm) above the finished grade ground level. Chases through which the condensate and refrigerant lines run shall not terminate in the air return plenum or duct. If a portion of the condensate pipe does not drop below the height of the condensate outlet, then a trap should be installed to prevent suction of outdoor air into the air handler.

E406.1.2 Freon chases.

Freon chases that terminate within the house or garage shall be sealed with closed cell expanding foam material. Pipe insulation shall be removed from the freon lines at the point of the seal to provide for complete bond between the freon line and the foam.

E406.2 Air distribution systems.
E406.2.1 Sealing.

All ducts and plenums that are modified or sealed in order to achieve acceptable indoor radon concentration shall be made airtight in accordance with the current edition, Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building. If ductboard is used, the seal must be on the foil side of the ductboard. Mastic sealing systems designed specifically for the conditions of use shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations to close and seal leaks in ducts or plenums. Modifications to ducts located in crawlspaces or service areas of attics shall incorporate support, cover or other protection from accidental damage.

E406.2.2 Return plenums.

If acceptable indoor radon concentrations are achieved in part by construction or modification of a return plenum, it shall be constructed with materials and closures which produce a continuous air barrier for the life of the building. Construction of the return plenum shall be done such that a continuous air barrier completely separates the plenum from adjacent building structures. If duct board is the primary air barrier, then the joints shall be sealed by fabric and mastic on the foil side of the board.

CHAPTER E5
ENGINEERED SYSTEMS
E501 General.

Design of radon mitigation systems must be signed by a certified radon mitigation specialist. Additionally, for radon mitigation systems that rely upon ventilation or pressurization of the conditioned space for radon control, the plans and specifications for the ventilation or pressurization system shall be signed and, where appropriate, sealed according to the provisions of Section 471.003, Florida Statutes and Section 553.79, Florida Statutes. Such systems may include, but are not limited to, one of the following:

E501.1 Air pressure control.

Indoor pressure may be elevated relative to subslab levels.

E501.2 Ventilation.

An indoor air exchange rate may be maintained in a sufficient quantity to satisfy Section E502.1.

E502 Design criteria.
E502.1 Compliance.

Any engineered radon mitigation system in compliance with this standard must maintain an indoor radon concentration equal to or less than the “not to exceed” radon exposure standard established by the Florida DOH during the primary hours of occupancy. The interior surfaces of buildings pressurized as the primary means of radon control, must be sealed to Section 606, Air infiltration and Chapter 13, Energy Efficiency, of the Florida Building Code, Building. The design values for total ventilation and air exchange rates for each space occupancy shall not exceed the minimums provided for each space occupancy classification in Chapter M4, Ventilation, of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical or the ASHRAE 62 Alternative. When these air quantities are not sufficient to maintain indoor concentrations below the acceptable level, other mitigation options shall be used.

E502.2 Tests.

The indoor radon concentration must be measured in accordance with Chapter 3 and certified as acceptable according to current Florida DOH rules.

E502.3 System monitoring device.

Any engineered system must have a mechanism installed to automatically indicate failure of the system to building occupants, which shall be either a visual device conveniently visible to building occupants, or a device that produces a minimum 60 db audible signal.

CHAPTER E6
SOIL DEPRESSURIZATION SYSTEMS
E601 General.

This chapter provides minimum design and construction criteria for active soil depressurization systems. The operating soil depressurization system shall maintain under the building a pressure less than the indoor air pressure. Systems for buildings with slab on grade floors shall as a minimum comply with Section E603.1. Systems for buildings with off grade floors shall as minimum comply with Section E603.2 or E604.

E602 Soil depressurization system installation criteria.
E602.1 Suction fans.
E602.1.1 Fan.

Suction shall be provided by a fan, rated for continuous operation and having thermal overload with automatic reset features.

E602.1.2 Seal.

The suction fan shall be designed and manufactured to provide an air-tight seal between the inlet and outlet ducts and the fan housing. The fan housing must remain air-tight at air pressure equal to the rated maximum operating pressure.

E602.1.3 Rating.

The rating specific to system type shall apply (see Sections E603.1 and E603.2).

E602.1.4 Location.

The suction fan shall be located where any leakage of air from the exhaust portion of the fan or vent system shall be into outside air. No pressurized portion of the vent system shall pass through conditioned space.

E602.1.5 Power supply.

Electrical power shall be supplied to the fan in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building and any additional local regulations.

E602.2 System monitoring device.

The soil depressurization system shall include a system monitoring device which shall be either a visual device, conveniently visible to building occupants, or a device that produces a minimum 60 db audible signal, activated by the loss of pressure or flow in the vent pipe.

E602.3 Vents.
E602.3.1 Material.

Piping material shall be of any type approved by locally adopted codes for plumbing vents.

E602.3.2 Slope.

The vent piping shall have a minimum slope of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) per foot in order to drain any condensation back to soil beneath the soil gas retarder. The system shall be designed and installed so that no portion will allow the excess accumulation of condensation.

E602.3.3 Terminals.

Vent pipes shall be terminated in locations that will minimize human exposure to their exhaust air. Locations shall be above the eave of the roof. To prevent reentrainment of radon, the point of discharge from vents of fan-powered soil depressurization shall meet all of the following requirements:

(1)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more above ground level,

(2)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from any window, door, or other opening (e.g., operable skylight, or air intake) into conditioned spaces of the structure, and

(3)	be 10 feet (3048 mm) or more from any opening into an adjacent building. The total required distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] from the point of discharge to openings in the structure shall be measured either directly between the two points or be the sum of measurements made around intervening obstacles. If the point of discharge is at or below any window, door, or other opening into conditioned spaces of the structure the total required distance [10 feet (3048 mm)] shall be measured horizontally between the two points.

E602.3.4 Labeling.

All exposed components of the soil depressurization system shall be labeled “Soil Gas System” to prevent accidental damage or misuse. Labels shall be on a yellow band, 2 inches (51 mm) wide and spaced 3 feet (914 mm) apart on all components.

E602.3.5 Clearance.

All vent piping shall be located in compliance with existing and applicable codes, with regards to clearances from mechanical equipment and flues and notching of structural members. No vent shall penetrate a fire wall or party wall.

E603 Soil depressurization system design criteria.
E603.1 Subslab depressurization systems.

Depressurization systems in sands or other granular soils shall, as a minimum and within the practical limits posed by the building, meet the following requirements:

E603.1.1 Arrangement.

Within the practical limits posed by the building, suction points shall be distributed as nearly equally as possible, and as follows:

(1)	A maximum of 1,300 square feet (121 m2) per suction point, and

(2)	Each required suction point shall be located not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) nor more than 18 feet (5486 mm) from the perimeter; and

(3)	Multiple suction points shall be located within 36 feet (10 973 mm) of each other.

E603.1.2 Pipe size.

Suction pipe should be of a size appropriate to the air-flows of the system, a minimum of 1/2 inch (38 mm) in diameter at the fan, and shall not be reduced between the fan outlet and the final termination point.

E603.1.3 Pits.

Suction point pits excavated below the slab shall be sized to provide adequate pressure distribution beneath the slab. Dimensions of 22 inches (559 mm) in diameter and 11 inches (279 mm) deep, or excavation of 1 cubic foot (0.02832 m3) of soil, shall be presumed to meet this requirement. Further, the pit shall be filled with 1 inch (25 mm) size gravel.

E603.1.4 Rating.

Suction fans must be capable of developing minimum flows appropriate to the system at 1-inch water column (0.2488 kPa) pressure. Fans producing 100 cubic foot per minute (cfm) (.047 m3/s) at 1-inch water column (0.2488 kPa) pressure are presumed to meet this requirement.

E603.2 Submembrane depressurization systems.
E603.2.1 General.

Submembrane soil depressurization systems are essentially the same as subslab depressurization systems, but without the cover of a concrete slab. The membrane shall be protected from wind uplift in accordance with locally adopted codes. Systems may be of suction pit or continuous ventilation mat design.

E603.2.2 Membrane soil-gas retarder.

A membrane soil-gas retarder shall consist of an 8 mil or thicker single ply polyethylene sheet or other sheeting material of equal or lower permeability and equal or greater strength. Place sheeting to minimize seams and to cover all of the soil below the building floor. Retarders must provide excellent environmental stress crack resistance, impact strength and high tensile strength including additives to retard polymer oxidation and UV degradation. Where pipes, columns or other objects penetrate the soil-gas retarder, it shall be cut and sealed to the pipe, column or penetration. All seams of the membrane shall be lapped at least 12 inches (305 mm). Punctures or tears in the membrane shall be repaired with the same or compatible material.

E603.2.3 Depressurization systems in sands or granular soils with suction pit design.

Submembrane soil depressurization systems covering sand or other granular soils shall meet the requirements of Section E602.1, with the suction pits filled with 1-inch (25 mm) size gravel which shall be covered by 1/8-inch (3.2 mm) thick steel plate, 16 gage corrugated sheet metal, or equivalent sheets of other termite-resistant structural materials, in compliance with existing and applicable codes.

E603.2.4 Depressurization systems in sands or granular soils with continuous ventilation mat(s) design.

Depressurization systems in sands or other granular soils and utilizing a continuous ventilation mat shall have at least 216 square inches (0.14 m2) of suction area per lineal foot and shall meet the following requirements:

E603.2.4.1 Arrangement.

Suction points shall be equally distributed as follows:

(1)	The suction point should be centrally located along the length of each unconnected strip of mat; and

(2)	Mat strips should be oriented along the central axis of the longest dimension of the crawl space; and

(3)	A minimum of one strip shall be used for crawl spaces having widths up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) [additional strips should be added for each additional crawl space width of up to 50 feet (15 240 mm) width]; and

(4)	The mat strip shall extend to not closer than 6 feet (1828 mm) of the inner stemwall at both ends of the building; and

(5)	A separate suction point and fan shall be installed for each 100 feet (30 480 mm) linear length of ventilation mat.

E603.2.4.2 Pipe size.

Suction pipe shall be a minimum 3 inch (76 mm) diameter and shall be carried full size to the final termination point.

E603.2.4.3 Rating.

Suction fans must be capable of developing minimum flows of at least 100 cfm (0.047 m3/s), at 1-inch water column (0.2488 kPa) pressure.

E604 Crawlspace ventilation.
E604.1 Active ventilation of the crawl space.

Structures that rely upon active (fan-driven) ventilation of the crawl space for radon control, shall utilize fans rated for continuous operation, and shall be equipped with a fan failure warning device as specified in Section 603.2, and shall have a thermal overload with automatic reset feature.

E604.1.1 Vents.

Vents connecting the crawl space with outside air shall be sized and located as required to provide mitigation of the indoor radon concentration as demonstrated by postmitigation test, and shall not be equipped with operable louvers or other means for adjustment by building occupants. Where adjustable vents are used, they shall be permanently fixed in the proper adjustment by the mitigation contractor.

E604.1.2 Plumbing.

Plumbing located in the crawl space shall be adequately protected from freezing by insulation or means other than restriction of ventilation air.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-f]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX F
FLORIDA STANDARD FOR PASSIVE RADON-RESISTANT
NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER F1
GENERAL
F101 General.

Provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be known as and may be cited as the Florida Standard For Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction, hereinafter referred to as “this standard.”

F102 Intent.
F102.1 General.

This standard shall apply to the design and construction of new residential buildings as determined in Section F103, Scope, to enable control of human exposure to indoor radon and its progeny.

F102.2 Compliance.

This passive standard will provide radon protection beyond that provided by standard building code provisions. Compliance with existing local building codes and with the Energy Efficiency, Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, current edition, is assumed.

F103 Scope.
F103.1 Applicability.

The provisions of this standard shall apply to the construction of new residential buildings and additions to existing residential buildings. Residential buildings are defined for the purposes of this standard as one- or two-family detached houses and town house apartments with no more than three stories (distinguished from condominiums, apartments and commercial buildings that employ different construction practices).

F103.2 Additions.

When the cost of an addition exceeds a cumulative total of 50 percent of the assessed value of the existing building, only the addition to the building must meet the requirements for new buildings in Section F104.1.

F104 Compliance.
F104.1 New buildings and additions.

All new residential buildings and additions to existing residential buildings shall use passive radon protection measures, as determined in Chapter F3 of this standard.

F104.2 Exemptions.

Exempt buildings are as follows:

(1)	Buildings of classifications not listed in Section F103.1, Applicability, and

(2)	Residential buildings built on piers or pilings that elevate the bottom of the floor joists a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) above grade, which do not have skirting or stem walls that restrict air ventilation, and which comply with the following additional provisions:

(a)	The perimeter of the building from the ground plane to the lower surface of the floor shall be totally open for ventilation, except for the occurrence of enclosures complying with Item c below.

(b)	All pilings, posts or other supports shall be solid, or if hollow, shall be capped by an 8-inch (203 mm) solid masonry unit or sealed by a permanent barrier that is impermeable to air flow.

(c)	Enclosures of any kind, including chases, storage rooms, elevator shafts and stairwells, etc., that connect between the soil and the structure shall be sealed at the surface of the soil to comply with the sealing provisions of Chapter F3 and shall have a soil contact area of less than 5 percent of the total building floor area.

CHAPTER F2
DEFINITIONS
F201 General.

For the purposes of this standard, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be set forth in this chapter. Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Standard Building Code, Standard Mechanical Code, Standard Plumbing Code, Standard Gas Code, or the Standard Fire Prevention Code or the current Florida Building Code, Building. Words not defined in these codes shall have the meanings in Webster’s Ninth Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.

F202 Definitions.

ADDITION. A building extension or increase in floor area that can be occupied or that exchanges air with the conditioned space of the building.

AIR-DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. For the purposes of this standard, the air-distribution system components which include ducts, plenums, air handlers, furnaces, single-package air conditioners, etc.

CAULKS AND SEALANTS. Those materials which will significantly reduce the flow of gases through small openings in the building shell. Among those used are:

Urethane. A crystalline ester-amide used as a gelatinizing agent for cellulose acetate or cellulose nitrate. A component of polyurethane used in making flexible and rigid foams, elastomers, and resins for coatings and adhesives.

Epoxy. A thermosetting resin characterized by adhesiveness, flexibility and resistance to chemicals and used chiefly as a coating or adhesive.

Polysulfide rubber. A synthetic rubber characterized by impermeability to gases and used in adhesives, binders and sealing compositions and in coatings.

CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA. The horizontal projection (outside measurements) of that portion of space which is conditioned directly or indirectly by an energy-using system.

CONDITIONED SPACE. All spaces which are provided with heated and/or cooled air or which are maintained at temperatures over 50°F (10°C) during the heating season, including adjacent connected spaces separated by an uninsulated component (e.g., basements, utility rooms, garages, corridors).

CONTRACTION JOINT. A formed, sawed, or tooled groove in a concrete slab to create a weakened plane and control the location of cracking resulting from drying and thermal shrinkage (also sometimes called control joint).

CRAWL SPACE. The unconditioned space between the lowest structural member of the floor and the earth. The crawl space is created when the floor spans between structural supports rather than being directly supported by the earth beneath the floor.

ELASTOMERIC. That property of macromolecular material of returning rapidly to approximately the initial dimensions and shape, after substantial deformation by a weak stress and release of stress.

HIGH RANGE WATER REDUCER. A chemical admixture added to the concrete capable of reducing the water content at least 12 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494, Type F or G.

HVAC. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning.

INFILTRATION BARRIER. A product or system designed to limit the free passage of air through a building envelope component (wall, ceiling or floor). Such products and systems may be continuous or noncontinuous discrete elements which are sealed together to form a continuous barrier against air infiltration.

MANUFACTURED SANDS. Sands resulting from the crushing of rock, gravel or slag.

MASTIC. A sealant with putty-like properties.

MIDRANGE WATER REDUCER. A water reducing admixture capable of reducing water content from 6 to 15 percent. This admixture shall conform to ASTM C494, Type A and/or F.

MITIGATE. Make less severe, reduce, relieve.

NATURAL SANDS. Sands resulting from the natural disintegration and abrasion of rock.

OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or part thereof is used or intended to be used. For the purposes of determining changes of occupancy for this code, the occupancy shall be considered the major occupancy group designations established by the locally adopted building code.

OUTSIDE AIR. Air taken from the outdoors and, therefore, not previously circulated through the system.

PASSIVE RADON PROTECTION SYSTEM. Indoor radon reducing building design, material, or construction features that increase the barriers to radon entry and require no mechanical operation, operating costs, or user attention beyond normal home maintenance (such as recaulking floor cracks, etc.).

PERM. Unit of measurement of the water vapor permeance of materials. Value of one perm is equal to one grain of water vapor per square foot hour per inch of mercury vapor pressure difference.

PICOCURIE (pCi). A unit of measurement of radioactivity. A curie is the amount of any radionuclide that undergoes exactly 3.7 × 1010 radioactive disintegrations per second. A picocurie is one trillionth (10-12) of a curie, or 0.037 disintegrations per second.

PlCOCURIE PER LITER (pCi/L). A common unit of measurement of the concentration of radioactivity in a gas. A picocurie per liter corresponds to 0.037 radioactive disintegrations per second in every liter of air.

RADIUM (Ra). A naturally occurring radioactive element resulting from the decay of uranium. For the purposes of this standard, radium applies to radium-226. It is the parent of radon gas.

RADON. A naturally occurring, chemically inert, radioactive gas. It is part of the uranium-238 decay series. For the purposes of this standard, radon applies to radon-222; thus, it is the direct decay product of radium-226.

REMOTE SPACE. A space isolated from the main conditioned area of a building by intermediate nonconditioned spaces.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Residential occupancies which include single- and multiple-family buildings that are three or fewer stories above grade. Hotels, motels and other transient occupancies are considered nonresidential buildings for the purpose of this standard.

SLUMP. A measure of the relative consistency or stiffness of fresh concrete mix, as defined by ASTM C143.

SOIL GAS. Gas which is always present underground, in the small spaces between particles of the soil or in crevices of rock. Major constituents of soil gas include air and water vapor. Since radium-226 is essentially always present in the soil or rock, trace levels of radon-222 also will exist in the soil gas.

SUBSTRUCTURE MEMBRANE. Flexible, nondegrading material sheet placed between the soil and the building for the purpose of reducing the flow of soil gas and moisture into the building. Examples are: polyethylene, ethylenepropylene diene terpolymer (EPDM), neoprene, and cross-laminated HDPE.

VENTILATION. The process of supplying or removing air, by natural or mechanical means, to or from any space. Such air may or may not have been conditioned.

WATER-REDUCING ADMIXTURE. A chemical additive to concrete capable of increasing its flow ability without increased mixing water, without set retardation, and without increased air entrainment.

CHAPTER F3
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
FOR PASSIVE RADON CONTROL
F301 General.

This chapter provides minimum design and construction criteria for passive control of radon entry into residential buildings. Construction to these standards will limit radon entry points through building floors and foundations and will limit mechanical depressurization of buildings which can enhance radon entry.

F302 Subslab and soil cover membranes.
F302.1 Membrane material.

A subslab or soil-cover membrane shall consist of a minimum 0.006 inch (0.152 mm) (6 mil) thick single layer of polyethylene. Polyvinylchloride (PVC), ethylene propylene diene terpolymer (EPDM), neoprene or other nondeteriorating nonporous material may be used instead of polyethylene, provided the installed thickness has greater or equal resistance to air flow, puncturing, cutting and tearing, and a permeance of less than 0.3 perm as determined in accordance with ASTM E96. The membrane shall be placed to minimize seams and to cover all of the soil below the building floor.

F302.2 Tape.

Tape used to install the membrane shall have a minimum width of 2 inches (51 mm) and shall be pressure sensitive vinyl or other nondeteriorating pressure sensitive tape compatible with the surfaces being joined. Paper tape and/or cloth shall not be used for these purposes.

F302.3 Mastic.

Mastic used to install the membrane shall be compatible with the surfaces being joined, and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for the materials, surface conditions and temperatures involved. Mastic may be used to join sections of membrane to one another or to elements of the building foundation, or to seal penetrations in the membrane.

F302.4 Installation.

The membrane shall be placed under the entire soil-contact area of the floor in a manner that minimizes the required number of joints and seams. Care shall be taken to prevent damage to the membrane during the construction process.

F302.5 Seams.

Seams between portions of the membrane shall be lapped a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) and shall be secured in place with a continuous band of tape or mastic centered over the edge of the top membrane.

F302.6 Slab edges and joints.

The membrane shall fully cover the soil beneath the building floor. Where the slab edge is cast against a foundation wall or grade beam, the membrane shall contact the foundation element, and shall not extend vertically into the slab more than 1 inch (25.4 mm).

F302.7 Penetrations, punctures, cuts and tears.

At all points where pipes, conduits, stakes, reinforcing bars or other objects pass through the membrane, the membrane shall be fitted to within 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of the penetration and sealed to the penetration. Penetrations may be sealed with either mastic or tape. When necessary to meet this requirement, a second layer of the membrane, cut so as to provide a minimum 12-inches (305 mm) lap on all sides, shall be placed over the object and shall be sealed to the membrane with a continuous band of tape.

F302.8 Repairs.

Where portions of an existing slab have been removed and are about to be replaced, a membrane shall be carefully fined to the opening and all openings between the membrane and the soil closed with tape or mastic.

F303 Floor slab-on-grade buildings.
F303.1 General.

All concrete slabs supported on soil and used as floors for conditioned space or enclosed spaces connected or adjacent to a conditioned space shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Sections F302 and F303.

F303.2 Slab edge detail.

Slabs and foundations shall be constructed using a slab edge detail that eliminates cracks that could connect the house interior to subslab soil and is consistent with other construction constraints such as terrain. Monolithic slab construction should be used where possible. Only the following slab edge detail options may be used:

(1)	Thickened edge monolithic — the subslab membrane shall extend beyond the outside face of the slab edge.

(2)	Slab poured into stem wall — where concrete blocks are used as slab forms, the subslab membrane shall extend horizontally at least 1 inch (25.4 mm) into the stem wall, but shall not extend upward along any vertical faces of the stem wall. The concrete slab shall be poured into the stem wall to completely fill its open volume to form a continuous and solid stem wall cap of minimum 8 inch (203 mm) thickness. Framed exterior walls shall be sealed or gasketed to the slab.

(3)	Slab capping stem wall — where the floor slab is formed and placed to completely cover the stem wall, the subslab membrane shall extend horizontally beneath the slab to its outer edge. The supporting stem wall shall be capped with a solid masonry unit of at least 4 inch (102 mm) thickness beneath the membrane and the slab.

F303.3 Sealing of joints, penetrations and cracks in slabs.
F303.3.1 Contraction joints.

All contraction joints shall be cleaned and sealed against soil-gas entry by use of an approved sealant (see Section F303.6) applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions. (Note: most sealants require the concrete to be cured and dried.) For bottom-induced joints, inverted T-split ribbed waterstops at least 6 inches (152 mm) wide made of impermeable material may be formed into the slab and shall not require top-surface sealing for radon control.

F303.3.2 Horizontal joints.

Horizontal joints between two slabs of different elevations that are poured at different times shall provide horizontal contact between the two slabs that is at least 8 inches (203 mm) wide, or shall be sealed by an approved sealant (see Section F303.6).

F303.3.3 Vertical joints through slabs.

Vertical joints through slabs shall be formed with a recess of not less than 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch (6.4 by 6.4 mm) and sealed with an approved sealant.

Exception: Slab-edge vertical joints occurring in slab poured into stem wall construction [see Section F303.2(2)]. The sealant (see Section F303.6) shall be applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

(Note: most sealants require the concrete to be cured and dried.)

F303.3.4 Penetrations.
F303.3.4.1 Stake penetrations.

Any stake that extends through more than one-fourth the thickness of the slab shall be of a nonporous material resistant to decay, corrosion and rust, and shall be cast tightly against the slab, or sealed to the slab in accordance with Section F303.6. All stakes shall either be solid, or shall have the upper end tightly sealed by installation of an end cap designed to provide a gas-tight seal.

F303.3.4.2 Work spaces.

Work spaces formed into a slab, such as beneath a shower or bath tub drain, shall be sealed gas tight. The exposed soil shall be compacted and then shall be fully covered with a solvent-based plastic roof cement or a foamed-in-place polyurethane sealant or other approved elastomeric material to a minimum depth of 1 inch (25.4 mm).

F303.3.4.3 Pipe penetrations.

Plastic pipes shall be in contact with the slab along the slab’s depth by casting the concrete tightly against the pipe. Where pipes are jacketed by sleeves, they shall be sealed by one of the following methods:

(1)	Formation of a slot in the slab around the pipe and casting with asphalt or an approved sealant from the slab to a point above the sleeve, or

(2)	Seal the space between the sleeve and the pipe with an appropriate joint sealant (see Section F303.6).

(3)	Pipes and wiring penetrating the slab through chases or conduit shall be sealed by placing an approved sealant between the pipe or wiring and chase or conduit. Plastic sheath, foam or insulation material shall not be used alone around pipes or conduit for sealing purposes.

(4)	Where multiple pipes are ganged, block out a work space around the multiple pipes and seal as in Section F303.3.4.2.

F303.3.5 Cracks.

All slab cracks greater than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) wide; all cracks that exhibit vertical displacement; all cracks that connect weakened zones in the slab such as vertical penetrations or reentrant corners; and, all cracks that cross changes in materials or planes in the structure, shall be cleaned and sealed against radon entry, prior to applying floor covering, with a flexible field-molded elastomeric sealant installed in accordance with Section F303.6. Cracks less than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) in width that do not meet any of the above criteria may be left unsealed.

F303.4 Concrete for slabs.
F303.4.1 Mix design.

Mix designs for all concrete used in the construction of slab-on-grade floors shall specify a minimum design strength of 3,000 psi (20.7 MPa) at 28 days and a design slump not to exceed 4 inches (102 mm). On-site slumps shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm), provided total water added to the mix including plant, transit and site added water does not exceed the following parameters:

(1)	For mixes using natural sands — 275 pounds per cubic yard [33 gallons (125 L)].

(2)	For mixes using manufactured sands — 292 pounds per cubic yard [35 gallons (132.5 L)].

F303.4.2 Concrete placement.

For improved workability of concrete used in the construction of slab-on-grade floors, additional water and/or water-reducing admixtures shall be wed within the following constraints:

(1)	Slumps in excess of 5 inches (127 mm) shall be achieved through the use of mid-range or high-range water reducing admixtures. Water shall not be used in excess of the limitations.

(2)	Slumps of concrete containing mid-range or high-range water reducing admixtures shall not exceed 8 inches (203 mm).

F303.4.3 Curing.

Concrete slabs shall be cured continuously after pouring according to one of the following procedures:

(1)	Moist curing by means of ponding, fog spray or wet burlap for at least 7 days.

(2)	Moist curing using impermeable cover sheet materials conforming with ASTM Cl71 for at least 7 days.

(3)	Curing with liquid membrane forming compound according to manufacturer’s specifications and conforming with ASTM C309.

Curing compounds shall be compatible with materials specified in Section F303.6.

F303.4.4 Loading.

Loading or use of the slab shall be delayed for a minimum of 48 hours after concrete placement. When the slab is used for material storage after the minimum 48-hour period, caution should be used to prevent impact loading.

F303.4.5 Slab reinforcement.

Floor slabs shall be reinforced by steel reinforcing bars at reentrant corners such as inside comers of an L-shaped slab. Reentrant corners shall have two pieces of #4 reinforcing bar 36 inches (914 mm) long placed diagonally to the comer, 12 inches (305 mm) apart, with the first bar placed 2 inches (51 mm) from the comer. All reinforcement shall be appropriately positioned in the upper third of the slab.

F303.5 Sealing walls.

Penetrations for electrical receptacles and switches, wiring, plumbing, etc., in the interior surface of the concrete block walls shall be sealed.

F303.6 Approved sealant material.

Acceptable polyurethane, polysulfide and epoxy caulks and sealants shall conform with ASTM C920-87, Standard Specifications for Elastomeric Joint Sealants, and ASTM C1193-91, Standard Guide for Use of Joint Sealants. Sealant material and the method of application shall be compatible with curing compounds, admixtures and floor finishing materials; withstand light traffic; be impermeable to soil gas; and have an allowable extension and compression of at least 25 percent with 100-percent recovery. Sealants shall be applied to dried and cured concrete in accordance with manufacturers’ instructions. Backer rods may be used to support sealants in cracks and joints.

F304 Slab-below-grade construction.
F304.1 General.

For the purposes of this standard, slab-below-grade construction is defined as any conditioned space with the finished floor below finished grade at any point.

F304.2 Slab construction.

Slabs shall have a subslab membrane, conforming with Section F302 that extends to the slab perimeter, but does not vertically separate the slab from the foundation wall. The slab and membrane shall be placed in accordance with Section F303, or may use a floating slab design with all of the following conditions:

(1)	The stem wall is solid poured concrete.

(2)	The slab-wall joint is tooled and sealed with flowable polyurethane (according to Section F303.6).

(3)	All other provisions of Section F303 are satisfied.

F304.3 Sealing walls.
F304.3.1 Walls.

Walls surrounding slab-below-grade space shall be constructed from solid poured concrete, at least 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and shall be sealed with a continuous waterproofing coating applied to their outside surface from the top of the footing to finished grade. This coating shall completely seal any joint between the footing and the wall.

F304.3.2 Utility penetrations.

All utility penetrations through walls in partial or full contact with the soil shall be closed and sealed with an approved sealant material (see Section F303.6) on the interior and exterior faces of the wall.

F304.4 Sumps.

Any sump located in a habitable portion of a building, or in an enclosed space directly attached to a portion of a building, shall be covered by a lid. An air-tight seal shall be formed between the sump and lid and at any wire or pipe penetrations.

F305 Buildings with crawl spaces.
F305.1 General.

For the purposes of this standard, buildings with crawl spaces include all buildings with floor supported above grade which do not meet the requirements of Section F306.

F305.2 Floor systems.

Reinforced concrete floors constructed over crawl spaces shall conform to all applicable provisions of Section F303. Wood-framed floors constructed over crawl spaces shall include an air infiltration barrier in compliance with Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, current edition. All joints and penetrations through the floor, including plumbing pipes, conduits, chases, wiring, ductwork and floor-wall joints, shall be fully sealed with an approved caulk. Where large openings are created (such as at bathtub drains), sheet metal or other rigid materials shall be used in conjunction with sealants to close and seal the openings.

F305.3 Crawl space ventilation.

Screened vents without closures shall be installed around the perimeter of the house to connect the crawl space with outdoor air.

F305.3.1 Vent area.

The crawl space vents shall have a total area equal to either:

(1)	at least 1/150 of the area enclosed by the crawl space if the crawl space is exposed to bare soil; or

(2)	at least 1/300 of the area enclosed by the crawl space if the crawl space is completely covered by a sub-structure membrane.

F305.3.2 Ventilation obstructions.

The crawl space shall not contain structures that restrict ventilation in the crawl space. If freeze protection is provided for plumbing in the crawl space, the protection shall not restrict air ventilation in the crawl space.

F305.4 Sealing walls and doors.

Penetrations from the crawl space into wall cavities shall be fully sealed with an approved caulk or sealant. When a door is located between the crawl space and the conditioned space, it shall be fully weatherstripped or gasketed.

F305.5 Closing and sealing other paths.

Any openings that connect a crawl space and the closed space between floor or ceiling joists, wall studs, or any other cavity adjoining conditioned space shall be closed and sealed.

F305.6 Soil connection.

Foundation walls and piers or other intermediate supports that intersect the floor plane shall be solid across the entire horizontal section at a point above the ground plane.

F306 Buildings with combination floor systems.
F306.1 Floor system construction.

Where slab-on-grade, slab below-grade, crawl space or elevated building construction are combined in one structure, the provisions for each construction type shall be met.

F306.2 Walls.

A wall located between a crawl space and conditioned space shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building, current, and the provisions of the applicable Sections F303 through F305 of this standard.

F307 Space conditioning systems.
F307.1 Equipment enclosures.
F307.1.1 Crawl spaces.

Return ducts, return plenums and air handlers shall not be located in crawl spaces. Crawl spaces shall not be used as supply or return plenums.

F307.1.2 Condensate drains, piping and wiring chases.

Condensate drain pipe joints shall be sealed (chemical weld, soldered, etc.) gas tight and shall terminate outside the building perimeter at a height of at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the finished grade ground level. Chases through which the condensate and refrigerant lines run shall not terminate in the return sections of the air distribution system. Where chase lines terminate within the house or garage, they shall be sealed.

F307.2 Air distribution systems.
F307.2.1 Sealing.

All ducts and plenums shall be made air tight, constructed and installed in accordance with the current edition Chapter 13 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Where rigid fibrous glass ductboard is used, the seal must be on the foil air barrier side of the ductboard.

F307.2.2 Return plenums and ducts.

Return air shall be separated from any floor that is in contact with the soil or a crawl space, by a plenum or duct fabricated in compliance with Section F307.2.1 and all local codes. Construction of the return plenum or duct shall provide a continuous air barrier that completely separates the depressurized plenum or duct from adjacent building components including but not limited to floors, walls, chases, enclosures, etc. The support platform shall not be used as a return plenum. Where the support platform provides a protective enclosure for a duct, one side shall have a removable panel or door to provide access for inspection and/or repair of the duct and duct-to-air handler connection. Ducts shall carry the return air from the return grills or return plenums to the air handler and shall have a positive air-tight seal to the air handler. A closet shall not be used as a return plenum.

F307.2.3 Return grille connection.

The return pathway from the return grille shall be a part of the return duct or plenum and shall have a continuous air barrier along its boundary. Where the return pathway passes through a wall cavity, the cavity shall be sealed around the duct in all directions to prevent the leakage of air into the return air stream.

F307.2.4 Location of ducts and plenums.

Supply and return ducts shall not be located below concrete slab-on-grade floors, and return ducts and plenums shall not be located in crawl spaces.

F307.3 Exhaust fans.
F307.3.1 Bathroom fans.

Bathroom exhaust fans shall be controlled by an independent separate switch. Manually operated timers should be used as applicable.

F307.3.2 Attic fans.

If used, attic exhaust fans shall be installed with unobstructed vent and intake areas in accordance with the minimum areas prescribed by their manufacturer. In no case shall effective open vent area be less than the minimum areas prescribed by the manufacturer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-g]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX G
PIPING STANDARDS FOR VARIOUS APPLICATIONS
SECTION AG101
PLASTIC PIPING STANDARDS
AG101.1 Plastic piping.

Table AG101.1 provides a list of plastic piping product standards for various applications.

TABLE AG101.1

PLASTIC PIPING STANDARDS FOR VARIOUS APPLICATIONSa,b

APPLICATION	LOCATION	TYPE OF PLASTIC PIPING
ABS	CPVC	PE	PE-AL-
PE
	PE-RT	PEX	PEX-AL-
PEX
	PP	PVC
Central vacuum	System
piping
	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	ASTM F2158
Foundation drainage	System
piping
	ASTM F628	—	ASTM F405	—	—	—	—	—	ASTM D2665
ASTM D2729
ASTM D3034

Geothermal ground loop	System
piping
	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
CSA B137.6
	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2241
CSA B137.3

Loop
piping
	—	—	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
NSF 358-1
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	—	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	—
Graywater	Nonpressure
distribution/
collection	ASTM F628	—	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
ASTM F2306
	—	—	—	—	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2729
ASTM D2949
ASTM D3034
ASTM F891
ASTM F1760
CSA B137.3

Graywater	Pressure/
distribution
	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
CSA B137.6
	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2241
CSA B137.3

Radiant cooling	Loop piping	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	—
Radiant heating	Loop piping	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
	—	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	—
Rainwater harvesting	Nonpressure/
collection
	ASTM F628	—	ASTM F1901	—	—	—	—	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2729
ASTM D2949
ASTM F891
ASTM F1760
CSA B137.3

Pressure/
distribution
	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
CSA B137.6
	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2241
CSA B137.3

Radon venting	System piping	ASTM F628	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	ASTM D1785
ASTM F891
ASTM F1760
Reclaimed water	Main to
building
service	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
CSA B137.6
	ASTM D3035
AWWA C901
CSA B137.1
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
AWWA C904
CSA B137.5
	—	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2241
AWWA C905
CSA B137.3

Pressure/
distribution/
irrigation	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
CSA B137.6
	ASTM D2239
ASTM D2737
ASTM D3035
	ASTM F1282	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
AWWA C900
CSA B137.11
	ASTM D1785
ASTM D2241
AWWA C900
Residential fire sprinklersc	Sprinkler
piping
	—	ASTM F441
ASTM F442
CSA B137.6
UL 1821
	—	—	ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
UL 1821	—	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	—
Solar heating	Pressure/
distribution
	—	ASTM D2846
ASTM F441
ASTM F442
ASTM F2855
	—	—	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
CSA B137.18
	ASTM F876
CSA B137.5
	ASTM F1281	ASTM F2389
CSA B137.11
	—

a.	This table indicates manufacturing standards for plastic piping materials that are suitable for use in the applications indicated. Such applications support green and sustainable building practices. The system designer or the installer of piping shall verify that the piping chosen for an application complies with local codes and the recommendations of the manufacturer of the piping.

b.	Fittings applicable for the piping shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the piping.

c.	Piping systems for fire sprinkler applications shall be listed for the application.

SECTION AG102
REFERENCED STANDARDS
AG102.1 General.
ASTM
F1760—01(2011)	Standard Specification for Coextruded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Plastic Pipe Having Reprocessed-Recycled Content
F1901—10	Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings for Roof Drain Systems
F2158—08	Standard Specification for Residential Central-Vacuum Tube and Fittings
F2306—08	12" to 60" Annular Corrugated Profile-wall Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings for Gravity Flow Storm Sewer and Subsurface Drainage Applications
AWWA
900—07	Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and Fabricated Fittings, 4 in. through 12 in. (350 mm through 1200 mm), for Water Transmission and Distribution
905—10	Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and Fabricated Fittings, 14 in. through 48 in. (100 mm through 300 mm)
UL
1821—2011	Standard for Thermoplastic Sprinkler Pipe and Fittings for Fire Protection Service

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-h]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX H
PATIO COVERS

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AH101
GENERAL
AH101.1 Scope.

Patio covers shall conform to the requirements of Sections AH101 through AH106.

AH101.2 Permitted uses.

Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached from or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes, and not as carports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms.

SECTION AH102
DEFINITION
AH102.1 General.

The following word and term shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meaning shown herein.

PATIO COVER. A structure with open or glazed walls that is used for recreational, outdoor living purposes associated with a dwelling unit.

SECTION AH103
EXTERIOR WALLS AND OPENINGS
AH103.1 Enclosure walls.

Enclosure walls shall be permitted to be of any configuration, provided the open or glazed area of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 percent of the area below a minimum of 6 feet, 8 inches (2032 mm) of each wall, measured from the floor. Openings shall be permitted to be enclosed with any of the following:

1.	Insect screening.

2.	Approved translucent or transparent plastic not more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness.

3.	Glass conforming to the provisions of Section R308.

4.	Any combination of the foregoing.

AH103.2 Light, ventilation and emergency egress.

Exterior openings required for light and ventilation shall be permitted to open into a patio structure conforming to Section AH101, provided that the patio structure shall be unenclosed if such openings are serving as emergency egress or rescue openings from sleeping rooms. Where such exterior openings serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio structure, unless unenclosed, shall be provided with exits conforming to the provisions of Section R311 of this code.

SECTION AH104
HEIGHT
AH104.1 Height.

Patio covers are limited to one-story structures not exceeding 12 feet (3657 mm) in height.

SECTION AH105
STRUCTURAL PROVISIONS
AH105.1 Design loads.

Patio covers shall be designed and constructed to sustain, within the stress limits of this code, all dead loads plus a vertical live load of not less than 10 pounds per square foot (0.48 kN/m2). Such covers shall be designed to resist the minimum wind loads set forth in Section R301.2.1.

AH105.2 Footings.

In areas with a frostline depth of zero as specified in Table R301.2(1), a patio cover shall be permitted to be supported on a slab-on-grade without footings, provided the slab conforms to the provisions of Section R506, is not less than 3.5 inches (89 mm) thick and the columns do not support live and dead loads in excess of 750 pounds (3.34 kN) per column.

SECTION AH106
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ALUMINUM SCREEN
ENCLOSURES IN HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS
AH106.1 General.

Screen enclosures in hurricane-prone regions shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.

AH106.1.1 Habitable spaces.

Screen enclosures shall not be considered habitable spaces.

AH106.1.2 Minimum ceiling height.

Screen enclosures shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

AH106.2 Definition.

The following word and term shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meaning shown herein.

SCREEN ENCLOSURE. A building or part thereof, in whole or in part self-supporting, and having walls of insect screening, and a roof of insect screening, plastic, aluminum or similar lightweight material.

AH106.3 Screen enclosures.

Screen enclosures shall comply with Sections AH106.3.1 and AH106.3.2.

AH106.3.1 Thickness.

Actual wall thickness of extruded aluminum members shall be not less than 0.040 inch (1.02 mm).

AH106.3.2 Density.

Screen density shall be not more than 20 threads per inch by 20 threads per inch mesh.

AH106.4 Design.

The structural design of screen enclosures shall comply with Sections AH106.4.1 through AH106.4.3.

TABLE AH106.4(1)

DESIGN WIND PRESSURES FOR SCREEN ENCLOSURE FRAMINGa, b, e, f, g, h

LOAD
CASE
	WALL	ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEED, Vult
(mph)

100	105	110	120	130	140	150	160	170	180
Exposure Category B Design Pressure (psf)
Ac	Windward and leeward walls (flow thru) and
windward wall (nonflow thru) L/W = 0-1
	6	7	8	9	11	13	14	16	18	21
Ac	Windward and leeward walls (flow thru) and
windward wall (nonflow thru) L/W = 2
	7	8	9	11	12	14	16	19	21	24
Bd	Windward: Nongable roof	9	10	11	13	15	18	21	23	26	30
Bd	Windward: Gable roof	11	13	14	16	19	22	26	29	33	37
	ROOF	
Alle	Roof-screen	2	3	3	3	4	4	5	6	7	7
Alle	Roof-solid	7	8	8	10	12	13	15	18	20	22

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.44 m/s, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Design pressure shall be not less than 10 psf in accordance with Section AH106.4.1.

b.	Loads are applicable to screen enclosures with a mean roof height of 30 feet or less in Exposure B. For screen enclosures of different heights or exposure, the pressures given shall be adjusted by multiplying the table pressure by the adjustment factor given in Table AH106.4(2).

c.	For Load Case A flow thru condition, the pressure given shall be applied simultaneously to both the upwind and downwind screen walls acting in the same direction as the wind. The structure shall also be analyzed for wind coming from the opposite direction. For the nonflow thru condition, the screen enclosure wall shall be analyzed for the load applied acting toward the interior of the enclosure.

d.	For Load Case B, the table pressure multiplied by the projected frontal area of the screen enclosure is the total drag force, including drag on screen surfaces parallel to the wind, that must be transmitted to the ground. Use Load Case A for members directly supporting the screen surface perpendicular to the wind. Load Case B loads shall be applied only to structural members that carry wind loads from more than one surface.

e.	The roof structure shall be analyzed for the pressure given occurring both upward and downward.

f.	Table pressures are MWFRS loads. The design of solid roof panels and their attachments shall be based on component and cladding loads for enclosed or partially enclosed structures as appropriate.

g.	Table pressures apply to 20-inch by 20-inch by 0.013-inch mesh screen. For 18-inch by 14-inch by 0.013-inch mesh screen, pressures on screen surfaces shall be permitted to be multiplied by 0.88. For screen densities greater than 20 inches by 20 inches by 0.013 inch, pressures for enclosed buildings shall be used.

h.	Linear interpolation shall be permitted.

TABLE AH106.4(2)

ADJUSTMENT FACTOR FOR BUILDING HEIGHT AND EXPOSURE

MEAN ROOF
HEIGHT
(feet)
	EXPOSURE
B	C	D
15	1.00	1.21	1.47
20	1.00	1.29	1.55
25	1.00	1.35	1.61
30	1.00	1.40	1.66
35	1.05	1.45	1.70
40	1.09	1.49	1.74
45	1.12	1.53	1.78
50	1.16	1.56	1.81
55	1.19	1.59	1.84
60	1.22	1.62	1.87

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

AH106.4.1 Wind load.

Structural members supporting screen enclosures shall be designed to support the minimum wind loads given in Tables AH106.4(1) and AH106.4(2) for the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, determined from Figure AH106.4.1. Where any value is less than 10 pounds per square foot (psf) (0.479 kN/m2) use 10 pounds per square foot (0.479 kN/m2).

FIGURE AH106.4.1

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS FOR PATIO COVERS AND SCREEN ENCLOSURES

AH106.4.2 Deflection limit.

For members supporting screen surfaces only, the total load deflection shall not exceed l/60. Screen surfaces shall be permitted to include not more than 25-percent solid flexible finishes.

AH106.4.3 Roof live load.

The roof live load shall be not less than 10 psf (0.479 kN/m2).

AH106.5 Footings.

In areas with a frost line depth of zero, a screen enclosure shall be permitted to be supported on a concrete slab-on-grade without footings, provided the slab conforms to the provisions of Section R506, is not less than 31/2 inches (89 mm) thick and the columns do not support loads in excess of 750 pounds (3.36 kN) per column.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-i]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX I
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AI101
GENERAL
AI101.1 Scope.

Private sewage disposal systems shall conform to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-j]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX J
EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AJ101
PURPOSE AND INTENT
AJ101.1 General.

The purpose of these provisions is to encourage the continued use or reuse of legally existing buildings and structures. These provisions are intended to permit work in existing buildings that is consistent with the purpose of this code. Compliance with these provisions shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this code.

AJ101.2 Classification of work.

For purposes of this appendix, work in existing buildings shall be classified into the categories of repair, renovation, alteration and reconstruction. Specific requirements are established for each category of work in these provisions.

AJ101.3 Multiple categories of work.

Work of more than one category shall be part of a single work project. Related work permitted within a 12-month period shall be considered to be a single work project. Where a project includes one category of work in one building area and another category of work in a separate and unrelated area of the building, each project area shall comply with the requirements of the respective category of work. Where a project with more than one category of work is performed in the same area or in related areas of the building, the project shall comply with the requirements of the more stringent category of work.

SECTION AJ102
COMPLIANCE
AJ102.1 General.

Regardless of the category of work being performed, the work shall not cause the structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building; shall not cause an existing mechanical or plumbing system to become unsafe, hazardous, insanitary or overloaded; and unless expressly permitted by these provisions, shall not make the building any less compliant with this code or to any previously approved alternative arrangements than it was before the work was undertaken.

AJ102.2 Requirements by category of work.

Repairs shall conform to the requirements of Section AJ301. Renovations shall conform to the requirements of Section AJ401. Alterations shall conform to the requirements of Section AJ501 and the requirements for renovations. Reconstructions shall conform to the requirements of Section AJ601 and the requirements for alterations and renovations.

AJ102.3 Smoke detectors.

Regardless of the category of work, smoke detectors shall be provided where required by Section R314.2.2.

AJ102.4 Replacement windows.

Regardless of the category of work, where an existing window, including the sash and glazed portion, or safety glazing is replaced, the replacement window or safety glazing shall comply with the requirements of Sections AJ102.4.1 through AJ102.4.4, as applicable.

AJ102.4.1 Energy efficiency.

Replacement windows shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 11.

AJ102.4.2 Safety glazing.

Replacement glazing in hazardous locations shall comply with the safety glazing requirements of Section R308.

AJ102.4.3 Replacement windows for emergency escape and rescue openings.

Where windows are required to provide emergency escape and rescue openings, replacement windows shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections R310.2.1, R310.2.2 and R310.2.3 provided that the replacement window meets the following conditions:

1.	The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The replacement window shall be permitted to be of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.

2.	Where the replacement window is not part of a change of occupancy.

3.	Window opening control devices and fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be permitted for use on windows serving as required emergency escape and rescue openings.

AJ102.4.3.1 Control devices.

Emergency escape and rescue openings with window opening control devices or fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090, after operation to release the control device allowing the window to fully open, shall not reduce the net clear opening area of the window unit. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools.

AJ102.4.4 Window control devices.

Window opening control devices or fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be installed where an existing window is replaced and where all of the following apply to the replacement window:

1.	The window is operable.

2.	One of the following applies:

2.1.	The window replacement includes replacement of the sash and the frame.

2.2.	The window replacement includes the sash only when the existing frame remains.

3.	The bottom of the clear opening of the window opening is at a height less than 24 inches (610 mm) above the finished floor.

4.	The window will permit openings that will allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere where the window is in its largest opened position.

5.	The vertical distance from the top of the sill of the window opening to the finished grade or other surface below, on the exterior of the building, is greater than 72 inches (1829 mm).

AJ102.5 Flood hazard areas.

Work performed in existing buildings located in a flood hazard area as established by Table R301.2(1) shall be subject to the provisions of Section R105.3.1.1.

AJ102.6 Equivalent alternatives.

Work performed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this appendix. These provisions are not intended to prevent the use of any alternative material, alternative design or alternative method of construction not specifically prescribed herein, provided that any alternative has been deemed to be equivalent and its use authorized by the building official.

AJ102.7 Other alternatives.

Where compliance with these provisions or with this code as required by these provisions is technically infeasible or would impose disproportionate costs because of construction or dimensional difficulties, the building official shall have the authority to accept alternatives. These alternatives include materials, design features and operational features.

AJ102.8 More restrictive requirements.

Buildings or systems in compliance with the requirements of this code for new construction shall not be required to comply with any more restrictive requirement of these provisions.

AJ102.9 Features exceeding code requirements.

Elements, components and systems of existing buildings with features that exceed the requirements of this code for new construction, and are not otherwise required as part of approved alternative arrangements or deemed by the building official to be required to balance other building elements not complying with this code for new construction, shall not be prevented by these provisions from being modified as long as they remain in compliance with the applicable requirements for new construction.

SECTION AJ103
PRELIMINARY MEETING
AJ103.1 General.

If a building permit is required at the request of the prospective permit applicant, the building official or his or her designee shall meet with the prospective applicant to discuss plans for any proposed work under these provisions prior to the application for the permit. The purpose of this preliminary meeting is for the building official to gain an understanding of the prospective applicant’s intentions for the proposed work, and to determine, together with the prospective applicant, the specific applicability of these provisions.

SECTION AJ104
EVALUATION OF AN EXISTING BUILDING
AJ104.1 General.

The building official shall have the authority to require an existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional in the case of proposed reconstruction of any portion of a building. The evaluation shall determine the existence of any potential nonconformities to these provisions, and shall provide a basis for determining the impact of the proposed changes on the performance of the building. The evaluation shall use the following sources of information, as applicable:

1.	Available documentation of the existing building.

1.1.	Field surveys.

1.2.	Tests (nondestructive and destructive).

1.3.	Laboratory analysis.

Exception: Detached one- or two-family dwellings that are not irregular buildings under Section R301.2.2.2.5 and are not undergoing an extensive reconstruction shall not be required to be evaluated.

SECTION AJ105
PERMIT
AJ105.1 Identification of work area.

The work area shall be clearly identified on the permits issued under these provisions.

SECTION AJ201
DEFINITIONS
AJ201.1 General.

For purposes of this appendix, the terms used are defined as follows.

ALTERATION. The reconfiguration of any space; the addition or elimination of any door or window; the reconfiguration or extension of any system; or the installation of any additional equipment.

CATEGORIES OF WORK. The nature and extent of construction work undertaken in an existing building. The categories of work covered in this appendix, listed in increasing order of stringency of requirements, are repair, renovation, alteration and reconstruction.

DANGEROUS. Where the stresses in any member; the condition of the building, or any of its components or elements or attachments; or other condition that results in an overload exceeding 150 percent of the stress allowed for the member or material in this code.

EQUIPMENT OR FIXTURE. Any plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air-conditioning, refrigerating and fire protection equipment; and elevators, dumb waiters, boilers, pressure vessels, and other mechanical facilities or installations that are related to building services.

LOAD-BEARING ELEMENT. Any column, girder, beam, joist, truss, rafter, wall, floor or roof sheathing that supports any vertical load in addition to its own weight, or any lateral load.

MATERIALS AND METHODS REQUIREMENTS. Those requirements in this code that specify material standards; details of installation and connection; joints; penetrations; and continuity of any element, component or system in the building. The required quantity, fire resistance, flame spread, acoustic or thermal performance, or other performance attribute is specifically excluded from materials and methods requirements.

RECONSTRUCTION. The reconfiguration of a space that affects an exit, a renovation or alteration where the work area is not permitted to be occupied because existing means-ofegress and fire protection systems, or their equivalent, are not in place or continuously maintained; or there are extensive alterations as defined in Section AJ501.3.

REHABILITATION. Any repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction work undertaken in an existing building.

RENOVATION. The change, strengthening or addition of load-bearing elements; or the refinishing, replacement, bracing, strengthening, upgrading or extensive repair of existing materials, elements, components, equipment or fixtures. Renovation does not involve reconfiguration of spaces. Interior and exterior painting are not considered refinishing for purposes of this definition, and are not renovation.

REPAIR. The patching, restoration or minor replacement of materials, elements, components, equipment or fixtures for the purposes of maintaining those materials, elements, components, equipment or fixtures in good or sound condition.

WORK AREA. That portion of a building affected by any renovation, alteration or reconstruction work as initially intended by the owner and indicated as such in the permit. Work area excludes other portions of the building where incidental work entailed by the intended work must be performed, and portions of the building where work not initially intended by the owner is specifically required by these provisions for a renovation, alteration or reconstruction.

SECTION AJ301
REPAIRS
AJ301.1 Materials.

Except as otherwise required herein, work shall be done using like materials or materials permitted by this code for new construction.

AJ301.1.1 Hazardous materials.

Hazardous materials no longer permitted, such as asbestos and lead-based paint, shall not be used.

AJ301.1.2 Plumbing materials and supplies.

The following plumbing materials and supplies shall not be used:

1.	All-purpose solvent cement, unless listed for the specific application.

2.	Flexible traps and tailpieces, unless listed for the specific application.

3.	Solder having more than 0.2 percent lead in the repair of potable water systems.

AJ301.2 Water closets.

Where any water closet is replaced with a newly manufactured water closet, the replacement water closet shall comply with the requirements of Section P2903.2.

AJ301.3 Electrical.

Repair or replacement of existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair with like material shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.	Replacement of electrical receptacles shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 34.

2.	Plug fuses of the Edison-base type shall be used for replacements only where there is not evidence of overfusing or tampering in accordance with the applicable requirements of Chapter 34.

3.	For replacement of nongrounding-type receptacles with grounding-type receptacles and for branch circuits that do not have an equipment grounding conductor in the branch circuitry, the grounding conductor of a grounding-type receptacle outlet shall be permitted to be grounded to any accessible point on the grounding electrode system, or to any accessible point on the grounding electrode conductor, as allowed and described in Chapter 34.

SECTION AJ401
RENOVATIONS
AJ401.1 Materials and methods.

The work shall comply with the materials and methods requirements of this code.

AJ401.2 Door and window dimensions.

Minor reductions in the clear opening dimensions of replacement doors and windows that result from the use of different materials shall be allowed, whether or not they are permitted by this code.

AJ401.3 Interior finish.

Wood paneling and textile wall coverings used as an interior finish shall comply with the flame spread requirements of Section R302.9.

AJ401.4 Structural.

Reserved.

AJ401.5 Exterior wall covering.

Exterior wall coverings shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 7. Insulated vinyl siding, polypropylene siding, and vinyl siding shall be attached to a nail-able substrate.

SECTION AJ501
ALTERATIONS
AJ501.1 Newly constructed elements.

Newly constructed elements, components and systems shall comply with the requirements of this code.

Exceptions:

1.	Openable windows may be added without requiring compliance with the light and ventilation requirements of Section R303.

2.	Newly installed electrical equipment shall comply with the requirements of Section AJ501.5.

AJ501.2 Nonconformities.

The work shall not increase the extent of noncompliance with the requirements of Section AJ601, or create nonconformity to those requirements that did not previously exist.

AJ501.3 Extensive alterations.

Where the total area of all of the work areas included in an alteration exceeds 50 percent of the area of the dwelling unit, the work shall be considered to be a reconstruction and shall comply with the requirements of these provisions for reconstruction work.

Exception: Work areas in which the alteration work is exclusively plumbing, mechanical or electrical shall not be included in the computation of the total area of all work areas.

AJ501.4 Structural.

The minimum design loads for the structure shall be the loads applicable at the time the building was constructed, provided that a dangerous condition is not created. Structural elements that are uncovered during the course of the alteration and that are found to be unsound or dangerous shall be made to comply with the applicable requirements of this code.

AJ501.5 Electrical equipment and wiring.
AJ501.5.1 Materials and methods.

Newly installed electrical equipment and wiring relating to work done in any work area shall comply with the materials and methods requirements of Chapter 34.

Exception: Electrical equipment and wiring in newly installed partitions and ceilings shall comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 34.

AJ501.5.2 Electrical service.

Service to the dwelling unit shall be not less than 100 ampere, three-wire capacity and service equipment shall be dead front having no live parts exposed that could allow accidental contact. Type “S” fuses shall be installed where fused equipment is used.

Exception: Existing service of 60 ampere, three-wire capacity, and feeders of 30 ampere or larger two- or three-wire capacity shall be accepted if adequate for the electrical load being served.

AJ501.5.3 Additional electrical requirements.

Where the work area includes any of the following areas within a dwelling unit, the requirements of Sections AJ501.5.3.1 through AJ501.5.3.5 shall apply.

AJ501.5.3.1 Enclosed areas.

Enclosed areas other than closets, kitchens, basements, garages, hallways, laundry areas and bathrooms shall have not less than two duplex receptacle outlets, or one duplex receptacle outlet and one ceiling- or wall-type lighting outlet.

AJ501.5.3.2 Kitchen and laundry areas.

Kitchen areas shall have not less than two duplex receptacle outlets. Laundry areas shall have not less than one duplex receptacle outlet located near the laundry equipment and installed on an independent circuit.

AJ501.5.3.3 Ground-fault circuit-interruption.

Ground-fault circuit-interruption shall be provided on newly installed receptacle outlets if required by Chapter 34.

AJ501.5.3.4 Lighting outlets.

Not less than one lighting outlet shall be provided in every bathroom, hallway, stairway, attached garage and detached garage with electric power to illuminate outdoor entrances and exits, and in utility rooms and basements where these spaces are used for storage or contain equipment requiring service.

AJ501.5.3.5 Clearance.

Clearance for electrical service equipment shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 34.

AJ501.6 Ventilation.

Reconfigured spaces intended for occupancy and spaces converted to habitable or occupiable space in any work area shall be provided with ventilation in accordance with Section R303.

AJ501.7 Ceiling height.

Habitable spaces created in existing basements shall have ceiling heights of not less than 6 feet, 8 inches (2032 mm), except that the ceiling height at obstructions shall be not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm) from the basement floor. Existing finished ceiling heights in nonhabitable spaces in basements shall not be reduced.

AJ501.8 Stairs.
AJ501.8.1 Stair width.

Existing basement stairs and handrails not otherwise being altered or modified shall be permitted to maintain their current clear width at, above and below existing handrails.

AJ501.8.2 Stair headroom.

Headroom height on existing basement stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing stairway finished headroom. Existing basement stairs not otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current finished headroom.

AJ501.8.3 Stair landing.

Landings serving existing basement stairs being altered or modified shall not be reduced below the existing stairway landing depth and width. Existing basement stairs not otherwise being altered shall be permitted to maintain the current landing depth and width.

SECTION AJ601
RECONSTRUCTION
AJ601.1 Stairways, handrails and guards.
AJ601.1.1 Stairways.

Stairways within the work area shall be provided with illumination in accordance with Section R303.6.

AJ601.1.2 Handrails.

Every required exit stairway that has four or more risers, is part of the means of egress for any work area, and is not provided with at least one handrail, or in which the existing handrails are judged to be in danger of collapsing, shall be provided with handrails designed and installed in accordance with Section R311 for the full length of the run of steps on not less than one side.

AJ601.1.3 Guards.

Every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below, is part of the egress path for any work area, and does not have guards, or in which the existing guards are judged to be in danger of collapsing, shall be provided with guards designed and installed in accordance with Section R312.

AJ601.2 Wall and ceiling finish.

The interior finish of walls and ceilings in any work area shall comply with the requirements of Section R302.9. Existing interior finish materials that do not comply with those requirements shall be removed or shall be treated with an approved fire-retardant coating in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions to secure compliance with the requirements of this section.

AJ601.3 Separation walls.

Where the work area is in an attached dwelling unit, walls separating dwelling units that are not continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing shall be constructed to provide a continuous fire separation using construction materials consistent with the existing wall or complying with the requirements for new structures. Performance of work shall be required only on the side of the wall of the dwelling unit that is part of the work area.

AJ601.4 Ceiling height.

Habitable spaces created in existing basements shall have ceiling heights of not less than 6 feet, 8 inches (2032 mm), except that the ceiling height at obstructions shall be not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm) from the basement floor. Existing finished ceiling heights in nonhabitable spaces in basements shall not be reduced.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-k]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX K
SOUND TRANSMISSION

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AK101
GENERAL
AK101.1 General.

Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units, including those separating adjacent townhouse units, shall provide air-borne sound insulation for walls, and both air-borne and impact sound insulation for floor-ceiling assemblies.

SECTION AK102
AIR-BORNE SOUND
AK102.1 General.

Air-borne sound insulation for wall and floor-ceiling assemblies shall meet a sound transmission class (STC) rating of 45 where tested in accordance with ASTM E90 or a Normalized Noise Isolation Class (NNIC) rating of 42 when tested in accordance with ASTM E336. Penetrations or openings in construction assemblies for piping; electrical devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating, ventilating or exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required ratings. Dwelling unit entrance doors, which share a common space, shall be tight fitting to the frame and sill.

AK102.1.1 Masonry.

The sound transmission class of concrete masonry and clay masonry assemblies shall be calculated in accordance with TMS 0302 or determined through testing in accordance with ASTM E90.

SECTION AK103
STRUCTURAL-BORNE SOUND
AK103.1 General.

Floor/ceiling assemblies between dwelling units, or between a dwelling unit and a public or service area within a structure, shall have an impact insulation class (IIC) rating of not less than 45 when tested in accordance with ASTM E492 or a Normalized Impact Sound Rating (NISR) of 42 where tested in accordance with ASTM E1007.

SECTION AK104
REFERENCED STANDARDS
ASTM
ASTM E90—04	Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Air-borne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements	AK102
ASTM E492—09	Specification for Laboratory Measurement of Impact Sound Transmission through Floor-ceiling Assemblies Using the Tapping Machine	AK103
ASTM E336—17a:	Standard Test Method for Measurement of Airborne Sound Attenuation between Rooms in Buildings	AK102.1
ASTM E1007—16:	Standard Test Method for Field Measurement of Tapping Machine Impact Sound Transmission through Floor-Ceiling Assemblies and Associated Support Structures	AK103.1
The Masonry Society
TMS 0302—12	Standard for Determining the Sound Transmission Class Rating for Masonry Walls	AK102.1.1

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-l]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX L
PERMIT FEES

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

TOTAL VALUATION	FEE
$1 to $ 500	$24
$501 to $2,000	$24 for the first $500; plus $3 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000
$2,001 to $40,000	$69 for the first $2,000; plus $11 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $40,000
$40,001 to $100,000	$487 for the first $40,000; plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $100,000
$100,001 to $500,000	$1,027 for the first $100,000; plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000
$500,001 to $1,000,000	$3,827 for the first $500,000; plus $5 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000
$1,000,001 to $5,000,000	$6,327 for the first $1,000,000; plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, up to and including $5,000,000
$5,000,001 and over	$18,327 for the first $5,000,000; plus $1 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-m]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX M
HOME DAY CARE—R-3 OCCUPANCY

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AM101
GENERAL
AM101.1 General.

This appendix shall apply to a home day care operated within a dwelling. It is to include buildings and structures occupied by persons of any age who receive custodial care for less than 24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians or relatives by blood, marriage, or adoption, and in a place other than the home of the person cared for.

SECTION AM102
DEFINITION

EXIT ACCESS. That portion of a means-of-egress system that leads from any occupied point in a building or structure to an exit.

SECTION AM103
MEANS OF EGRESS
AM103.1 Exits required.

If the occupant load of the residence is more than nine, including those who are residents, during the time of operation of the day care, two exits are required from the ground-level story. Two exits are required from a home day care operated in a manufactured home regardless of the occupant load. Exits shall comply with Section R311.

AM103.1.1 Exit access prohibited.

An exit access from the area of day care operation shall not pass through bathrooms, bedrooms, closets, garages, fenced rear yards or similar areas.

Exception: An exit may discharge into a fenced yard if the gate or gates remain unlocked during day care hours. The gates may be locked if there is an area of refuge located within the fenced yard and more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) from the dwelling. The area of refuge shall be large enough to allow 5 square feet (0.5 m2) per occupant.

AM103.1.2 Basements.

If the basement of a dwelling is to be used in the day care operation, two exits are required from the basement regardless of the occupant load. One of the exits may pass through the dwelling and the other must lead directly to the exterior of the dwelling.

Exception: An emergency and escape window complying with Section R310 and which does not conflict with Section AM103.1.1 may be used as the second means of egress from a basement.

AM103.1.3 Yards.

If the yard is to be used as part of the day care operation it shall be fenced.

AM103.1.3.1 Type of fence and hardware.

The fence shall be of durable materials and be at least 6 feet (1529 mm) tall, completely enclosing the area used for the day care operations. Each opening shall be a gate or door equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device to be installed at a minimum of 5 feet (1528 mm) above the ground.

Exception: The door of any dwelling which forms part of the enclosure need not be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices.

AM103.1.3.2 Construction of fence.

Openings in the fence, wall or enclosure required by this section shall have intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern that do not allow a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter to pass through. In addition, the following criteria must be met:

1.	The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the fence, wall or enclosure shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

2.	Solid walls or enclosures that do not have openings, such as masonry or stone walls, shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except for tooled masonry joints.

3.	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be 11/4 inches (32 mm) square, unless the fence has slats at the top or bottom which reduce the opening to no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm). The wire shall be not less than 9 gage [0.148 inch (3.8 mm)].

AM103.1.3.3 Decks.

Decks that are more than 12 inches (305 mm) above grade shall have a guard in compliance with Section R312.

AM103.2 Width and height of an exit.

The minimum width of a required exit is 36 inches (914 mm) with a net clear width of 32 inches (813 mm). The minimum height of a required exit is 6 feet, 8 inches (2032 mm).

AM103.3 Type of lock and latches for exits.

Regardless of the occupant load served, exit doors shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. When the occupant load is 10 or less, a night latch, dead bolt or security chain may be used, provided such devices are openable from the inside without the use of a key or tool, and mounted at a height not to exceed 48 inches (1219 mm) above the finished floor.

AM103.4 Landings.

Landings for stairways and doors shall comply with Section R311, except that landings shall be required for the exterior side of a sliding door when a home day care is being operated in a Group R-3 occupancy.

SECTION AM104
SMOKE DETECTION
AM104.1 General.

Smoke detectors shall be installed in dwelling units used for home day care operations. Detectors shall be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s instructions. If the current smoke detection system in the dwelling is not in compliance with the currently adopted code for smoke detection, it shall be upgraded to meet the currently adopted code requirements and Section AM103 before day care operations commence.

AM104.2 Power source.

Required smoke detectors shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when that wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. The detector shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection. Required smoke detectors shall be interconnected so if one detector is activated, all detectors are activated.

AM104.3 Location.

A detector shall be located in each bedroom and any room that is to be used as a sleeping room, and centrally located in the corridor, hallway or area giving access to each separate sleeping area. When the dwelling unit has more than one story, and in dwellings with basements, a detector shall be installed on each story and in the basement. In dwelling units where a story or basement is split into two or more levels, the smoke detector shall be installed on the upper level, except that when the lower level contains a sleeping area, a detector shall be installed on each level. When sleeping rooms are on the upper level, the detector shall be placed at the ceiling of the upper level in close proximity to the stairway. In dwelling units where the ceiling height of a room open to the hallway serving the bedrooms or sleeping areas exceeds that of the hallway by 24 inches (610 mm) or more, smoke detectors shall be installed in the hallway and the adjacent room. Detectors shall sound an alarm audible in all sleeping areas of the dwelling unit in which they are located.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-n]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX N
VENTING METHODS

(This appendix is informative and is not part of the code. This appendix provides examples of various venting methods.)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N1

TYPICAL SINGLE-BATH WET-VENT ARRANGEMENTS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N2

TYPICAL DOUBLE-BATH WET-VENT ARRANGEMENTS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N3

TYPICAL HORIZONTAL WET VENTING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N4

TYPICAL METHODS OF WET VENTING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N5

SINGLE STACK SYSTEM FOR A TWO-STORY DWELLING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N6

WASTE STACK VENTING

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE N7

CIRCUIT VENT WITH ADDITIONAL NONCIRCUIT-VENTED BRANCH

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-o]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX O
AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AO101
GENERAL
AO101.1 General.

The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of automatic vehicular gates installed on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling.

SECTION AO102
DEFINITION
AO102.1 General.

For the purposes of these requirements, the term used shall be defined as follows and as set forth in Chapter 2.

VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a vehicular entrance or exit to the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling, and that is not intended for use by pedestrian traffic.

SECTION AO103
AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES
AO103.1 Vehicular gates intended for automation.

Vehicular gates intended for automation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F2200.

AO103.2 Vehicular gate openers.

Vehicular gate openers, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-p]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX P
SIZING OF WATER PIPING SYSTEM

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION AP101
GENERAL
AP101.1 Scope.
AP101.1.1

This appendix outlines two procedures for sizing a water piping system (see Sections AP103.3 and AP201.1). The design procedures are based on the minimum static pressure available from the supply source, the head changes in the system caused by friction and elevation, and the rates of flow necessary for operation of various fixtures.

AP101.1.2

Because of the variable conditions encountered in hydraulic design, it is impractical to specify definite and detailed rules for sizing of the water piping system. Accordingly, other sizing or design methods conforming to good engineering practice standards are acceptable alternatives to those presented herein.

SECTION AP102
INFORMATION REQUIRED
AP102.1 Preliminary.

Obtain the necessary information regarding the minimum daily static service pressure in the area where the building is to be located. If the building supply is to be metered, obtain information regarding friction loss relative to the rate of flow for meters in the range of sizes likely to be used. Friction loss data can be obtained from most manufacturers of water meters.

AP102.2 Demand load.
AP102.2.1

Estimate the supply demand of the building main and the principal branches and risers of the system by totaling the corresponding demand from the applicable part of Table AP103.3(3).

AP102.2.2

Estimate continuous supply demands, in gallons per minute (gpm) (L/m), for lawn sprinklers, air conditioners, etc., and add the sum to the total demand for fixtures. The result is the estimated supply demand for the building supply.

SECTION AP103
SELECTION OF PIPE SIZE
AP103.1 General.

Decide from Table P2903.1 what is the desirable minimum residual pressure that should be maintained at the highest fixture in the supply system. If the highest group of fixtures contains flushometer valves, the pressure for the group should be not less than 15 pounds per square inch (psi) (103.4 kPa) flowing. For flush tank supplies, the available pressure should be not less than 8 psi (55.2 kPa) flowing, except blowout action fixtures must not be less than 25 psi (172.4 kPa) flowing.

AP103.2 Pipe sizing.
AP103.2.1

Pipe sizes can be selected using the following procedure or by use of other design methods conforming to acceptable engineering practice that are approved by the building official. The sizes selected must not be less than the minimum required by this code.

AP103.2.2

Water pipe sizing procedures are based on a system of pressure requirements and losses, the sum of which must not exceed the minimum pressure available at the supply source. These pressures are as follows:

1.	Pressure required at fixture to produce required flow. See Sections P2903.1 of this code and Section 604.3 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

2.	Static pressure loss or gain (due to head) is computed at 0.433 psi per foot (9.8 kPa/m) of elevation change.

Example: Assume that the highest fixture supply outlet is 20 feet (6096 mm) above or below the supply source. This produces a static pressure differential of 8.66 psi (59.8 kPa) loss [20 feet by 0.433 psi per foot (2096 mm by 9.8 kPa/m)].

3.	Loss through water meter. The friction or pressure loss can be obtained from meter manufacturers.

4.	Loss through taps in water main.

5.	Loss through special devices, such as filters, softeners, backflow prevention devices and pressure regulators. These values must be obtained from the manufacturer.

6.	Loss through valves and fittings. Losses for these items are calculated by converting to the equivalent length of piping and adding to the total pipe length.

7.	Loss caused by pipe friction can be calculated where the pipe size, pipe length and flow through the pipe are known. With these three items, the friction loss can be determined. For piping flow charts not included, use manufacturers’ tables and velocity recommendations.

Note: For all examples, the following metric conversions are applicable.

1 cubic foot per minute = 0.4719 L/s.

1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1 foot = 304.8 mm.

1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

AP103.3 Segmented loss method.

The size of water service mains, branch mains and risers by the segmented loss method, must be determined by knowing the water supply demand [gpm (L/m)], available water pressure [psi (kPa)] and friction loss caused by the water meter and developed length of pipe [feet (m)], including the equivalent length of fittings. This design procedure is based on the following parameters:

1.	The calculated friction loss through each length of pipe.

2.	A system of pressure losses, the sum of which must not exceed the minimum pressure available at the street main or other source of supply.

3.	Pipe sizing based on estimated peak demand, total pressure losses caused by difference in elevation, equipment, developed length and pressure required at the most remote fixture; loss through taps in water main; losses through fittings, filters, backflow prevention devices, valves and pipe friction.

Because of the variable conditions encountered in hydraulic design, it is impractical to specify definite and detailed rules for the sizing of the water piping system. Current sizing methods do not address the differences in the probability of use and flow characteristics of fixtures between types of occupancies. Creating an exact model of predicting the demand for a building is impossible and final studies assessing the impact of water conservation on demand are not yet complete. The following steps are necessary for the segmented loss method.

1.	Preliminary. Obtain the necessary information regarding the minimum daily static service pressure in the area where the building is to be located. If the building supply is to be metered, obtain information regarding friction loss relative to the rate of flow for meters in the range of sizes to be used. Friction loss data can be obtained from manufacturers of water meters. Enough pressure must be available to overcome all system losses caused by friction and elevation so that plumbing fixtures operate properly. Section 604.6 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing requires that the water distribution system be designed for the minimum pressure available taking into consideration pressure fluctuations. The lowest pressure must be selected to guarantee a continuous, adequate supply of water. The lowest pressure in the public main usually occurs in the summer because of lawn sprinkling and supplying water for air-conditioning cooling towers. Future demands placed on the public main as a result of large growth or expansion should be considered. The available pressure will decrease as additional loads are placed on the public system.

2.	Demand load. Estimate the supply demand of the building main and the principal branches and risers of the system by totaling the corresponding demand from the applicable part of Table AP103.3(3). When estimating peak demand, sizing methods typically use water supply fixture units (w.s.f.u.) [see Table AP103.3(2)]. This numerical factor measures the load-producing effect of a single plumbing fixture of a given kind. The use of fixture units can be applied to a single basic probability curve (or table), found in the various sizing methods [see Table AP103.3(3)]. The fixture units are then converted into a gpm (L/m) flow rate for estimating demand.

2.1.	Estimate continuous supply demand in gpm (L/m) for lawn sprinklers, air conditioners, etc., and add the sum to the total demand for fixtures. The result is the estimated supply demand for the building supply. Fixture units cannot be applied to constant-use fixtures, such as hose bibbs, lawn sprinklers and air conditioners. These types of fixtures must be assigned the gpm (L/m) value.

3.	Selection of pipe size. This water pipe sizing procedure is based on a system of pressure requirements and losses, the sum of which must not exceed the minimum pressure available at the supply source. These pressures are as follows:

3.1.	Pressure required at the fixture to produce required flow. See Section P2903.1 of this code and Section 604.3 of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

3.2.	Static pressure loss or gain (because of head) is computed at 0.433 psi per foot (9.8 kPa/m) of elevation change.

3.3.	Loss through a water meter. The friction or pressure loss can be obtained from the manufacturer.

3.4.	Loss through taps in water main [see Table AP103.3(4)].

3.5.	Loss through special devices, such as filters, softeners, backflow prevention devices and pressure regulators. These values must be obtained from the manufacturers.

3.6.	Loss through valves and fittings [see Tables AP103.3(5) and AP103.3(6)]. Losses for these items are calculated by converting to the equivalent length of piping and adding to the total pipe length.

3.7.	Loss caused by pipe friction can be calculated where the pipe size, pipe length and flow through the pipe are known. With these three items, the friction loss can be determined using Figures AP103.3(2) through AP103.3(7). Where using charts, use pipe inside diameters. For piping flow charts not included, use manufacturers’ tables and velocity recommendations. Before attempting to size any water supply system, it is necessary to gather preliminary information including available pressure, piping material, select design velocity, elevation differences and developed length to the most remote fixture. The water supply system is divided into sections at major changes in elevation or where branches lead to fixture groups. The peak demand must be determined in each part of the hot and cold water supply system. The expected flow through each section is determined in w.s.f.u. and converted to gpm (L/m) flow rate. Sizing methods require determination of the “most hydraulically remote” fixture to compute the pressure loss caused by pipe and fittings. The hydraulically remote fixture represents the most downstream fixture along the circuit of piping requiring the most available pressure to operate properly. Consideration must be given to all pressure demands and losses, such as friction caused by pipe, fittings and equipment; elevation; and the residual pressure required by Table P2903.1. The two most common and frequent complaints about water supply system operation are lack of adequate pressure and noise.

Problem: What size Type L copper water pipe, service and distribution will be required to serve a two-story factory building having on each floor, back-to-back, two toilet rooms each equipped with hot and cold water? The highest fixture is 21 feet above the street main, which is tapped with a 2-inch corporation cock at which point the minimum pressure is 55 psi. In the building basement, a 2-inch meter with a maximum pressure drop of 11 psi and 3-inch reduced pressure principle backflow preventer with a maximum pressure drop of 9 psi are to be installed. The system is shown in Figure AP103.3(1). To be determined are the pipe sizes for the service main, and the cold and hot water distribution pipes.

Solution: A tabular arrangement such as shown in Table AP103.3(1) should first be constructed. The steps to be followed are indicated by the tabular arrangement itself as they are in sequence, Columns 1 through 10 and Lines A through L.

Step 1

Columns 1 and 2: Divide the system into sections breaking at major changes in elevation or where branches lead to fixture groups. After Point B [see Figure AP103.3(1)], separate consideration will be given to the hot and cold water piping. Enter the sections to be considered in the service and cold water piping in Column 1 of the tabular arrangement. Column 1 of Table AP103.3(1) provides a line-by-line, recommended tabular arrangement for use in solving pipe sizing.

 The objective in designing the water supply system is to ensure an adequate water supply and pressure to all fixtures and equipment. Column 2 provides the psi (kPa) to be considered separately from the minimum pressure available at the main. Losses to take into consideration are the following: the differences in elevations between the water supply source and the highest water supply outlet; meter pressure losses; the tap in main loss; special fixture devices, such as water softeners and backflow prevention devices; and the pressure required at the most remote fixture outlet.

 The difference in elevation can result in an increase or decrease in available pressure at the main. Where the water supply outlet is located above the source, this results in a loss in the available pressure and is subtracted from the pressure at the water source. Where the highest water supply outlet is located below the water supply source, there will be an increase in pressure that is added to the available pressure of the water source.

Column 3: Using Table AP103.3(3), determine the gpm (L/m) of flow to be expected in each section of the system. These flows range from 28.6 to 108 gpm. Load values for fixtures must be determined as w.s.f.u. and then converted to a gpm rating to determine peak demand. Where calculating peak demands, the w.s.f.u. are added and then converted to the gpm rating. For continuous flow fixtures, such as hose bibbs and lawn sprinkler systems, add the gpm demand to the intermittent demand of fixtures. For example, a total of 120 w.s.f.u. is converted to a demand of 48 gpm. Two hose bibbs × 5 gpm demand = 10 gpm. Total gpm rating = 48.0 gpm + 10 gpm = 58.0 gpm demand.

Step 2

Line A: Enter the minimum pressure available at the main source of supply in Column 2. This is 55 psi (379.2 kPa). The local water authorities generally keep records of pressures at different times of the day and year. The available pressure can also be checked from nearby buildings or from fire department hydrant checks.

Line B: Determine from Table P2903.1 the highest pressure required for the fixtures on the system, which is 15 psi (103.4 kPa), to operate a flushometer valve. The most remote fixture outlet is necessary to compute the pressure loss caused by pipe and fittings, and represents the most downstream fixture along the circuit of piping requiring the available pressure to operate properly as indicated by Table P2903.1.

Line C: Determine the pressure loss for the meter size given or assumed. The total water flow from the main through the service as determined in Step 1 will serve to aid in the meter selected. There are three common types of water meters; the pressure losses are determined by the American Water Works Association Standards for displacement type, compound type and turbine type. The maximum pressure loss of such devices takes into consideration the meter size, safe operating capacity [gpm (L/m)] and maximum rates for continuous operations [gpm (L/m)]. Typically, equipment imparts greater pressure losses than piping.

Line D: Select from Table AP103.3(4) and enter the pressure loss for the tap size given or assumed. The loss of pressure through taps and tees in psi (kPa) is based on the total gpm (L/m) flow rate and size of the tap.

Line E: Determine the difference in elevation between the main and source of supply and the highest fixture on the system. Multiply this figure, expressed in feet (mm), by 0.43 psi. Enter the resulting psi (kPa) loss on Line E. The difference in elevation between the water supply source and the highest water supply outlet has a significant impact on the sizing of the water supply system. The difference in elevation usually results in a loss in the available pressure because the water supply outlet is generally located above the water supply source. The loss is caused by the pressure required to lift the water to the outlet. The pressure loss is subtracted from the pressure at the water source. Where the highest water supply outlet is located below the water source, there will be an increase in pressure that is added to the available pressure of the water source.

Lines F, G and H: The pressure losses through filters, backflow prevention devices or other special fixtures must be obtained from the manufacturer or estimated and entered on these lines. Equipment, such as backflow prevention devices, check valves, water softeners, instantaneous, or tankless water heaters, filters and strainers, can impart a much greater pressure loss than the piping. The pressure losses can range from 8 to 30 psi.

Step 3

Line I: The sum of the pressure requirements and losses that affect the overall system (Lines B through H) is entered on this line. Summarizing the steps, all of the system losses are subtracted from the minimum water pressure. The remainder is the pressure available for friction, defined as the energy available to push the water through the pipes to each fixture. This force can be used as an average pressure loss, as long as the pressure available for friction is not exceeded. Saving a certain amount for available water supply pressures as an area incurs growth, or because of the aging of the pipe or equipment added to the system is recommended.

Step 4

Line J: Subtract Line I from Line A. This gives the pressure that remains available from overcoming friction losses in the system. This figure is a guide to the pipe size that is chosen for each section, incorporating the total friction losses to the most remote outlet (measured length is called developed length).

Exception: Where the main is above the highest fixture, the resulting psi (kPa) must be considered a pressure gain (static head gain) and omitted from the sums of Lines B through H and added to Line J.

 The maximum friction head loss that can be tolerated in the system during peak demand is the difference between the static pressure at the highest and most remote outlet at no-flow conditions and the minimum flow pressure required at that outlet. If the losses are within the required limits, every run of pipe will be within the required friction head loss. Static pressure loss is at the most remote outlet in feet × 0.433 = loss in psi caused by elevation differences.

Step 5

Column 4: Enter the length of each section from the main to the most remote outlet (at Point E). Divide the water supply system into sections breaking at major changes in elevation or where branches lead to fixture groups.

Step 6

Column 5: Where selecting a trial pipe size, the length from the water service or meter to the most remote fixture outlet must be measured to determine the developed length. However, in systems having a flushometer valve or temperature-controlled shower at the topmost floors, the developed length would be from the water meter to the most remote flushometer valve on the system. A rule of thumb is that size will become progressively smaller as the system extends farther from the main source of supply. A trial pipe size can be arrived at by the following formula:

Line J: (Pressure available to overcome pipe friction) × 100/equivalent length of run total developed length to most remote fixture × percentage factor of 1.5 (Note: a percentage factor is used only as an estimate for friction losses imposed for fittings for initial trial pipe size) = psi (average pressure drop per 100 feet of pipe).

 For trial pipe size, see Figure AP103.3(3) (Type L copper) based on 2.77 psi and 108 gpm = 21/2 inches. To determine the equivalent length of run to the most remote outlet, the developed length is determined and added to the friction losses for fittings and valves. The developed lengths of the designated pipe sections are as follows:

A-B	54 feet
B-C	8 feet
C-D	13 feet
D-E	150 feet
Total developed length = 225 feet

 The equivalent length of the friction loss in fittings and valves must be added to the developed length (most remote outlet). Where the size of fittings and valves is not known, the added friction loss should be approximated. A general rule that has been used is to add 50 percent of the developed length to allow for fittings and valves. For example, the equivalent length of run equals the developed length of run (225 feet × 1.5 = 338 feet). The total equivalent length of run for determining a trial pipe size is 338 feet.

Example: 9.36 (pressure available to overcome pipe friction) × 100/338 (equivalent length of run = 225 × 1.5) = 2.77 psi (average pressure drop per 100 feet of pipe).

Step 7

Column 6: Select from Table AP103.3(6) the equivalent lengths for the trial pipe size of fittings and valves on each pipe section. Enter the sum for each section in Column 6. (The number of fittings to be used in this example must be an estimate). The equivalent length of piping is the developed length plus the equivalent lengths of pipe corresponding to the friction head losses for fittings and valves. Where the size of fittings and valves is not known, the added friction head losses must be approximated. An estimate for this example is found in Table AP.1.

Step 8

Column 7: Add the figures from Columns 4 and 6, and enter in Column 7. Express the sum in hundreds of feet.

Step 9

Column 8: Select from Figure AP103.3(3) the friction loss per 100 feet of pipe for the gpm flow in a section (Column 3) and trial pipe size (Column 5). Maximum friction head loss per 100 feet is determined on the basis of the total pressure available for friction head loss and the longest equivalent length of run. The selection is based on the gpm demand, uniform friction head loss and maximum design velocity. Where the size indicated by the hydraulic table indicates a velocity in excess of the selected velocity, a size must be selected that produces the required velocity.

Step 10

Column 9: Multiply the figures in Columns 7 and 8 for each section and enter in Column 9.

 Total friction loss is determined by multiplying the friction loss per 100 feet for each pipe section in the total developed length by the pressure loss in fittings expressed as equivalent length in feet (mm). Note: Section C-F should be considered in the total pipe friction losses only if greater loss occurs in Section C-F than in pipe Section D-E. Section C-F is not considered in the total developed length. Total friction loss in equivalent length is determined in Table AP.2.

Step 11

Line K: Enter the sum of the values in Column 9. The value is the total friction loss in equivalent length for each designated pipe section.

Step 12

Line L: Subtract Line J from Line K and enter in Column 10.

 The result should always be a positive or plus figure. If it is not, repeat the operation using Columns 5, 6, 8 and 9 until a balance or near balance is obtained. If the difference between Lines J and K is a high positive number, it is an indication that the pipe sizes are too large and should be reduced, thus saving materials. In such a case, the operations using Columns 5, 6, 8 and 9 should be repeated.

 The total friction losses are determined and subtracted from the pressure available to overcome pipe friction for the trial pipe size. This number is critical because it provides a guide to whether the pipe size selected is too large and the process should be repeated to obtain an economically designed system.

Answer: The final figures entered in Column 5 become the design pipe size for the respective sections. Repeating this operation a second time using the same sketch but considering the demand for hot water, it is possible to size the hot water distribution piping. This has been worked up as a part of the overall problem in the tabular arrangement used for sizing the service and water distribution piping. Note that consideration must be given to the pressure losses from the street main to the water heater (Section A-B) in determining the hot water pipe sizes.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

FIGURE AP103.3(1)

EXAMPLE—SIZING

Note: Fluid velocities in excess of 5 to 8 feet per second are not usually recommended.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to smooth new copper tubing with recessed (streamline) soldered joints and to the actual sizes of types indicated on the diagram.

FIGURE AP103.3(2)

FRICTION LOSS IN SMOOTH PIPEa (TYPE K, ASTM B88 COPPER TUBING)

Note: Fluid velocities in excess of 5 to 8 feet per second are not usually recommended.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to smooth new copper tubing with recessed (streamline) soldered joints and to the actual sizes of types indicated on the diagram.

FIGURE AP103.3(3)

FRICTION LOSS IN SMOOTH PIPEa (TYPE L, ASTM B88 COPPER TUBING)

Note: Fluid velocities in excess of 5 to 8 feet per second are not usually recommended.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to smooth new copper tubing with recessed (streamline) soldered joints and to the actual sizes of types indicated on the diagram.

FIGURE AP103.3(4)

FRICTION LOSS IN SMOOTH PIPEa (TYPE M, ASTM B88 COPPER TUBING)

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to smooth new steel (fairly smooth) pipe and to actual diameters of standard-weight pipe.

FIGURE AP103.3(5)

FRICTION LOSS IN FAIRLY SMOOTH PIPEa

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to fairly rough pipe and to actual diameters which, in general, will be less than the actual diameters of the new pipe of the same kind.

FIGURE AP103.3(6)

FRICTION LOSS IN FAIRLY ROUGH PIPEa

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 foot per second = 0.305 m/s.

a.	This figure applies to very rough pipe and existing pipe, and to their actual diameters.

FIGURE AP103.3(7)

FRICTION LOSS IN ROUGH PIPEa

TABLE AP103.3(1)

RECOMMENDED TABULAR ARRANGEMENT FOR USE IN SOLVING PIPE SIZING PROBLEMS

COLUMN	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
Line	Description	Pounds
per
square
inch
	Gallons
per min
through
section
	Length of
section
(feet)
	Trial
pipe
size
(inches)
	Equivalent
length of
fittings and
valves (feet)
	
Total
equivalent
length
[(Col. 4 +
Col. 6)/100
feet)]
	Friction
loss per
100 feet of
trial size
pipe (psi)
	Friction
loss in
equivalent
length
Column 8 x
Column 7
(psi)	Excess
pressure
over
friction
losses (psi)
A	Service and cold
water distribution
pipinga
	Minimum pressure available at main	55.00								
B	Highest pressure required at a fixture
(see Table P2903.1)
	15.00
C	Meter loss 2” meter	11.00
D	Tap in main loss 2” tap [see Table AP103.3(4)]	1.61
E	Static head loss 21 ft × 0.43 psi/ft	9.03
F	Special fixture loss backflow preventer	9.00
G	Special fixture loss—Filter	0.00
H	Special fixture loss—Other	0.00
I	Total overall losses and requirements
(Sum of Lines B through H)
	45.64
J	Pressure available to overcome pipe friction
(Line A minus Line I)
	9.36
	Pipe section (from diagram)
cold water distribution piping
	A-B	288	108.0	54	21/2	15.00	0.69	3.2	2.21	—
B-C	264	104.5	8	21/2	0.5	0.085	3.1	0.26	—
C-D	132	77.0	13	21/2	7.00	0.20	1.9	0.38	—
C-Fb	132	77.0	150	21/2	12.00	1.62	1.9	3.08	—
D-Eb	132	77.0	150	21/2	12.00	1.62	1.9	3.08	—
K	Total pipe friction losses (cold)	—	—	—	—	—	—	5.93	—
L	Difference (Line J minus Line K)	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	3.43
	Pipe section (from diagram)
Hot water Distribution Piping
	A’B’	288	108.0	54	21/2	12.00	0.69	3.3	2.21	—
B’C’	24	38.0	8	2	7.5	0.16	1.4	0.22	—
C’D’	12	28.6	13	11/2	4.0	0.17	3.2	0.54	—
C’F’b	12	28.6	150	11/2	7.00	1.57	3.2	5.02	—
D’E’b	12	28.6	150	11/2	7.00	1.57	3.2	5.02	—
K	Total pipe friction losses (hot)	—	—	—	—	—	—	7.99	—
L	Difference (Line J minus Line K)	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	1.37

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

a.	To be considered as pressure gain for fixtures below main (to consider separately, omit from “I” and add to “J”).

b.	To consider separately, in Line K use Section C-F only if greater loss than the loss in Section D-E.

TABLE AP103.3(2)

LOAD VALUES ASSIGNED TO FIXTURESa

FIXTURE	OCCUPANCY	TYPE OF SUPPLY
CONTROL
	LOAD VALUES, IN WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNITS (w.s.f.u.)
Cold	Hot	Total
Bathroom group	Private	Flush tank	2.7	1.5	3.6
Bathroom group	Private	Flushometer valve	6.0	3.0	8.0
Bathtub	Private	Faucet	1.0	1.0	1.4
Bathtub	Public	Faucet	3.0	3.0	4.0
Bidet	Private	Faucet	1.5	1.5	2.0
Combination fixture	Private	Faucet	2.25	2.25	3.0
Dishwashing machine	Private	Automatic	—	1.4	1.4
Drinking fountain	Offices, etc.	3/8″ valve	0.25	—	0.25
Kitchen sink	Private	Faucet	1.0	1.0	1.4
Kitchen sink	Hotel, restaurant	Faucet	3.0	3.0	4.0
Laundry trays (1 to 3)	Private	Faucet	1.0	1.0	1.4
Lavatory	Private	Faucet	0.5	0.5	0.7
Lavatory	Public	Faucet	1.5	1.5	2.0
Service sink	Offices, etc.	Faucet	2.25	2.25	3.0
Shower head	Public	Mixing valve	3.0	3.0	4.0
Shower head	Private	Mixing valve	1.0	1.0	1.4
Urinal	Public	1″ flushometer valve	10.0	—	10.0
Urinal	Public	3/4″ flushometer valve	5.0	—	5.0
Urinal	Public	Flush tank	3.0	—	3.0
Washing machine (8 lb)	Private	Automatic	1.0	1.0	1.4
Washing machine (8 lb)	Public	Automatic	2.25	2.25	3.0
Washing machine (15 lb)	Public	Automatic	3.0	3.0	4.0
Water closet	Private	Flushometer valve	6.0	—	6.0
Water closet	Private	Flush tank	2.2	—	2.2
Water closet	Public	Flushometer valve	10.0	—	10.0
Water closet	Public	Flush tank	5.0	—	5.0
Water closet	Public or private	Flushometer tank	2.0	—	2.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	For fixtures not listed, loads should be assumed by comparing the fixture to one listed using water in similar quantities and at similar rates. The assigned loads for fixtures with both hot and cold water supplies are given for separate hot and cold water loads, and for total load. The separate hot and cold water loads are three-fourths of the total load for the fixture in each case.

TABLE AP103.3(3)

TABLE FOR ESTIMATING DEMAND

SUPPLY SYSTEMS PREDOMINANTLY FOR FLUSH TANKS	SUPPLY SYSTEMS PREDOMINANTLY FOR FLUSHOMETERS
Load	Demand	Load	Demand
(w.s.f.u.)	(gpm)	(cfm)	(w.s.f.u.)	(gpm)	(cfm)
1	3.0	0.04104	—	—	—
2	5.0	0.0684	—	—	—
3	6.5	0.86892	—	—	—
4	8.0	1.06944	—	—	—
5	9.4	1.256592	5	15.0	2.0052
6	10.7	1.430376	6	17.4	2.326032
7	11.8	1.577424	7	19.8	2.646364
8	12.8	1.711104	8	22.2	2.967696
9	13.7	1.831416	9	24.6	3.288528
10	14.6	1.951728	10	27.0	3.60936
11	15.4	2.058672	11	27.8	3.716304
12	16.0	2.13888	12	28.6	3.823248
13	16.5	2.20572	13	29.4	3.930192
14	17.0	2.27256	14	30.2	4.037136
15	17.5	2.3394	15	31.0	4.14408
16	18.0	2.90624	16	31.8	4.241024
17	18.4	2.459712	17	32.6	4.357968
18	18.8	2.513184	18	33.4	4.464912
19	19.2	2.566656	19	34.2	4.571856
20	19.6	2.620128	20	35.0	4.6788
25	21.5	2.87412	25	38.0	5.07984
30	23.3	3.114744	30	42.0	5.61356
35	24.9	3.328632	35	44.0	5.88192
40	26.3	3.515784	40	46.0	6.14928
45	27.7	3.702936	45	48.0	6.41664
50	29.1	3.890088	50	50.0	6.684
60	32.0	4.27776	60	54.0	7.21872
70	35.0	4.6788	70	58.0	7.75344
80	38.0	5.07984	80	61.2	8.181216
90	41.0	5.48088	90	64.3	8.595624
100	43.5	5.81508	100	67.5	9.0234
120	48.0	6.41664	120	73.0	9.75864
140	52.5	7.0182	140	77.0	10.29336
160	57.0	7.61976	160	81.0	10.82808
180	61.0	8.15448	180	85.5	11.42964
200	65.0	8.6892	200	90.0	12.0312
225	70.0	9.3576	225	95.5	12.76644
250	75.0	10.026	250	101.0	13.50168
275	80.0	10.6944	275	104.5	13.96956
300	85.0	11.3628	300	108.0	14.43744
400	105.0	14.0364	400	127.0	16.97736
500	124.0	16.57632	500	143.0	19.11624
750	170.0	22.7256	750	177.0	23.66136
1,000	208.0	27.80544	1,000	208.0	27.80544
1,250	239.0	31.94952	1,250	239.0	31.94952
1,500	269.0	35.95992	1,500	269.0	35.95992
1,750	297.0	39.70296	1,750	297.0	39.70296
2,000	325.0	43.446	2,000	325.0	43.446
2,500	380.0	50.7984	2,500	380.0	50.7984
3,000	433.0	57.88344	3,000	433.0	57.88344
4,000	535.0	70.182	4,000	525.0	70.182
5,000	593.0	79.27224	5,000	593.0	79.27224

For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.000471 m3/s.

TABLE AP103.3(4)

LOSS OF PRESSURE THROUGH TAPS AND TEES IN POUNDS PER SQUARE INCH (psi)

GALLONS PER MINUTE	SIZE OF TAP OR TEE (inches)
5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	3
10	1.35	0.64	0.18	0.08	—	—	—
20	5.38	2.54	0.77	0.31	0.14	—	—
30	12.10	5.72	1.62	0.69	0.33	0.10	—
40	—	10.20	3.07	1.23	0.58	0.18	—
50	—	15.90	4.49	1.92	0.91	0.28	—
60	—	—	6.46	2.76	1.31	0.40	—
70	—	—	8.79	3.76	1.78	0.55	0.10
80	—	—	11.50	4.90	2.32	0.72	0.13
90	—	—	14.50	6.21	2.94	0.91	0.16
100	—	—	17.94	7.67	3.63	1.12	0.21
120	—	—	25.80	11.00	5.23	1.61	0.30
140	—	—	35.20	15.00	7.12	2.20	0.41
150	—	—	—	17.20	8.16	2.52	0.47
160	—	—	—	19.60	9.30	2.92	0.54
180	—	—	—	24.80	11.80	3.62	0.68
200	—	—	—	30.70	14.50	4.48	0.84
225	—	—	—	38.80	18.40	5.60	1.06
250	—	—	—	47.90	22.70	7.00	1.31
275	—	—	—	—	27.40	7.70	1.59
300	—	—	—	—	32.60	10.10	1.88

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

TABLE AP103.3(5)

ALLOWANCE IN EQUIVALENT LENGTHS OF PIPE FOR FRICTION LOSS IN VALVES AND THREADED FITTINGS (feet)

FITTING OR VALVE	PIPE SIZE (inches)
1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3
45-degree elbow	1.2	1.5	1.8	2.4	3.0	4.0	5.0	6.0
90-degree elbow	2.0	2.5	3.0	4.0	5.0	7.0	8.0	10.0
Tee, run	0.6	0.8	0.9	1.2	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0
Tee, branch	3.0	4.0	5.0	6.0	7.0	10.0	12.0	15.0
Gate valve	0.4	0.5	0.6	0.8	1.0	1.3	1.6	2.0
Balancing valve	0.8	1.1	1.5	1.9	2.2	3.0	3.7	4.5
Plug-type cock	0.8	1.1	1.5	1.9	2.2	3.0	3.7	4.5
Check valve, swing	5.6	8.4	11.2	14.0	16.8	22.4	28.0	33.6
Globe valve	15.0	20.0	25.0	35.0	45.0	55.0	65.0	80.0
Angle valve	8.0	12.0	15.0	18.0	22.0	28.0	34.0	40.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

TABLE AP103.3(6)

PRESSURE LOSS IN FITTINGS AND VALVES EXPRESSED AS EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF TUBEa (feet)

NOMINAL OR
STANDARD
SIZE (inches)
	FITTINGS	Coupling	VALVES
Standard EII	90-degree Tee	Ball	Gate	Butterfly	Check
90 Degree	45 Degree	Side Branch	Straight Run
3/8	0.5	—	1.5	—	—	—	—	—	1.5
1/2	1	0.5	2	—	—	—	—	—	2
5/8	1.5	0.5	2	—	—	—	—	—	2.5
3/4	2	0.5	3	—	—	—	—	—	3
1	2.5	1	4.5	—	—	0.5	—	—	4.5
11/4	3	1	5.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	—	—	5.5
11/2	4	1.5	7	0.5	0.5	0.5	—	—	6.5
2	5.5	2	9	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	7.5	9
21/2	7	2.5	12	0.5	0.5	—	1	10	11.5
3	9	3.5	15	1	1	—	1.5	15.5	14.5
31/2	9	3.5	14	1	1	—	2	—	12.5
4	12.5	5	21	1	1	—	2	16	18.5
5	16	6	27	1.5	1.5	—	3	11.5	23.5
6	19	7	34	2	2	—	3.5	13.5	26.5
8	29	11	50	3	3	—	5	12.5	39

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

a.	Allowances are for streamlined soldered fittings and recessed threaded fittings. For threaded fittings, double the allowances shown in the table. The equivalent lengths presented in the table are based on a C factor of 150 in the Hazen-Williams friction loss formula. The lengths shown are rounded to the nearest half-foot.

SECTION AP201
SELECTION OF PIPE SIZE
AP201.1 Size of water-service mains, branch mains and risers.

The minimum size water service pipe shall be 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). The size of water service mains, branch mains and risers shall be determined according to water supply demand [gpm (L/m)], available water pressure [psi (kPa)] and friction loss caused by the water meter and developed length of pipe [feet (m)], including the equivalent length of fittings. The size of each water distribution system shall be determined according to the procedure outlined in this section or by other design methods conforming to acceptable engineering practice and approved by the building official:

1.	Supply load in the building water distribution system shall be determined by the total load on the pipe being sized, in terms of w.s.f.u., as shown in Table AP103.3(2). For fixtures not listed, choose a w.s.f.u. value of a fixture with similar flow characteristics.

2.	Obtain the minimum daily static service pressure [psi (kPa)] available (as determined by the local water authority) at the water meter or other source of supply at the installation location. Adjust this minimum daily static pressure [psi (kPa)] for the following conditions:

2.1.	Determine the difference in elevation between the source of supply and the highest water supply outlet. Where the highest water supply outlet is located above the source of supply, deduct 0.5 psi (3.4 kPa) for each foot (0.3 m) of difference in elevation. Where the highest water supply outlet is located below the source of supply, add 0.5 psi (3.4 kPa) for each foot (0.3 m) of difference in elevation.

2.2.	Where a water pressure-reducing valve is installed in the water distribution system, the minimum daily static water pressure available is 80 percent of the minimum daily static water pressure at the source of supply or the set pressure downstream of the water pressure-reducing valve, whichever is smaller.

2.3.	Deduct all pressure losses caused by special equipment, such as a backflow preventer, water filter and water softener. Pressure loss data for each piece of equipment shall be obtained through the manufacturer of the device.

2.4.	Deduct the pressure in excess of 8 psi (55 kPa) resulting from the installation of the special plumbing fixture, such as temperature-controlled shower and flushometer tank water closet. Using the resulting minimum available pressure, find the corresponding pressure range in Table AP201.1.

3.	The maximum developed length for water piping is the actual length of pipe between the source of supply and the most remote fixture, including either hot (through the water heater) or cold water branches multiplied by a factor of 1.2 to compensate for pressure loss through fittings. Select the appropriate column in Table AP201.1 equal to or greater than the calculated maximum developed length.

4.	To determine the size of the water service pipe, meter and main distribution pipe to the building using the appropriate table, follow down the selected “maximum developed length” column to a fixture unit equal to or greater than the total installation demand calculated by using the “combined” w.s.f.u. column of Table AP201.1. Read the water service pipe and meter sizes in the first left-hand column and the main distribution pipe to the building in the second left-hand column on the same row.

5.	To determine the size of each water distribution pipe, start at the most remote outlet on each branch (either hot or cold branch) and, working back toward the main distribution pipe to the building, add up the w.s.f.u. demand passing through each segment of the distribution system using the related hot or cold column of Table AP201.1. Knowing demand, the size of each segment shall be read from the second left-hand column of the same table and the maximum developed length column selected in Steps 1 and 2, under the same or next smaller size meter row. In no case does the size of any branch or main need to be larger than the size of the main distribution pipe to the building established in Step 4.

TABLE AP201.1

MINIMUM SIZE OF WATER METERS, MAINS AND DISTRIBUTION PIPING BASED ON WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNIT VALUES (w.s.f.u.)

METER AND SERVICE PIPE
(inches)
	DISTRIBUTION PIPE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT LENGTH (feet)
Pressure Range 30 to 39 psi	40	60	80	100	150	200	250	300	400	500
3/4	1/2a	2.5	2	1.5	1.5	1	1	0.5	0.5	0	0
3/4	3/4	9.5	7.5	6	5.5	4	3.5	3	2.5	2	1.5
3/4	1	32	25	20	16.5	11	9	7.8	6.5	5.5	4.5
1	1	32	32	27	21	13.5	10	8	7	5.5	5
3/4	11/4	32	32	32	32	30	24	20	17	13	10.5
1	11/4	80	80	70	61	45	34	27	22	16	12
11/2	11/4	80	80	80	75	54	40	31	25	17.5	13
1	11/2	87	87	87	87	84	73	64	56	45	36
11/2	11/2	151	151	151	151	117	92	79	69	54	43
2	11/2	151	151	151	151	128	99	83	72	56	45
1	2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	86
11/2	2	275	275	275	275	258	223	196	174	144	122
2	2	365	365	365	365	318	266	229	201	160	134
2	21/2	533	533	533	533	533	495	448	409	353	311
METER AND SERVICE PIPE
(inches)
	DISTRIBUTION PIPE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT LENGTH (feet)
Pressure Range 40 to 49 psi	40	60	80	100	150	200	250	300	400	500
3/4	1/2a	3	2.5	2	1.5	1.5	1	1	0.5	0.5	0.5
3/4	3/4	9.5	9.5	8.5	7	5.5	4.5	3.5	3	2.5	2
3/4	1	32	32	32	26	18	13.5	10.5	9	7.5	6
1	1	32	32	32	32	21	15	11.5	9.5	7.5	6.5
3/4	11/4	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	27	21	16.5
1	11/4	80	80	80	80	65	52	42	35	26	20
11/2	11/4	80	80	80	80	75	59	48	39	28	21
1	11/2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	78	65	55
11/2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	130	109	93	75	63
2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	139	115	98	77	64
1	2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87
11/2	2	275	275	275	275	275	275	264	238	198	169
2	2	365	365	365	365	365	349	304	270	220	185
2	21/2	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	528	456	403
METER AND SERVICE
PIPE (inches)
	DISTRIBUTION PIPE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT LENGTH (feet)
Pressure Range 50 to 60 psi	40	60	80	100	150	200	250	300	400	500
3/4	1/2a	3	3	2.5	2	1.5	1	1	1	0.5	0.5
3/4	3/4	9.5	9.5	9.5	8.5	6.5	5	4.5	4	3	2.5
3/4	1	32	32	32	32	25	18.5	14.5	12	9.5	8
1	1	32	32	32	32	30	22	16.5	13	10	8
3/4	11/4	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	29	24
1	11/4	80	80	80	80	80	68	57	48	35	28
11/2	11/4	80	80	80	80	80	75	63	53	39	29
1	11/2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	82	70
11/2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	151	139	120	94	79
2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	151	146	126	97	81
1	2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87
11/2	2	275	275	275	275	275	275	275	275	247	213
2	2	365	365	365	365	365	365	365	329	272	232
2	21/2	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	486
METER AND SERVICE PIPE
(inches)
	DISTRIBUTION PIPE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT LENGTH (feet)
Pressure Range Over 60	40	60	80	100	150	200	250	300	400	500
3/4	1/2a	3	3	3	2.5	2	1.5	1.5	1	1	0.5
3/4	3/4	9.5	9.5	9.5	9.5	7.5	6	5	4.5	3.5	3
3/4	1	32	32	32	32	32	24	19.5	15.5	11.5	9.5
1	1	32	32	32	32	32	28	28	17	12	9.5
3/4	11/4	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	32	30
1	11/4	80	80	80	80	80	80	69	60	46	36
11/2	11/4	80	80	80	80	80	80	76	65	50	38
1	11/2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	84
11/2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	151	151	144	114	94
2	11/2	151	151	151	151	151	151	151	151	118	97
1	2	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87	87
11/2	2	275	275	275	275	275	275	275	275	275	252
2	2	365	368	368	368	368	368	368	368	318	273
2	21/2	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	533	533

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Minimum size for building supply is a 3/4-inch pipe.

TABLE AP.1

COLD WATER PIPE
SECTION
	FITTINGS/VALVES	PRESSURE LOSS
EXPRESSED AS
EQUIVALENT LENGTH
OF TUBE (feet)
	HOT WATER PIPE
SECTION
	FITTINGS/VALVES	PRESSURE LOSS
EXPRESSED AS
EQUIVALENT OF TUBE
(feet)

A-B	3 – 21/2″ Gate valves	3	A-B	3 – 21/2″ Gate valves	3
1 – 21/2″ Side branch tee	12	—	1 – 21/2″ Side branch tee	12
B-C	1 – 21/2″ Straight run tee	0.5	B-C	1 – 2″ Straight run tee	7
—	—	—	1 – 2″ 90-degree ell	0.5
C-F	1 – 21/2″ Side branch tee	12	C-F	1 – 11/2″ Side branch tee	7
C-D	1 – 21/2″ 90-degree ell	7	C-D	1 – 1/2″ 90-degree ell	4
D-E	1 – 21/2″ Side branch tee	12	D-E	1 – 11/2″ Side branch tee	7

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

TABLE AP.2

PIPE SECTIONS	FRICTION LOSS EQUIVALENT LENGTH (feet)
Cold Water	Hot Water
A-B	0.69 × 3.2 = 2.21	0.69 × 3.2 = 2.21
B-C	0.085 × 3.1 = 0.26	0.16 × 1.4 = 0.22
C-D	0.20 × 1.9 = 0.38	0.17 × 3.2 = 0.54
D-E	1.62 × 1.9 = 3.08	1.57 × 3.2 = 5.02
Total pipe friction losses (Line K)	5.93	7.99

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-q]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX Q
TINY HOUSES
SECTION AQ101
GENERAL
AQ101.1 Scope.

This appendix shall be applicable to tiny houses used as single dwelling units. Tiny houses shall comply with this code except as otherwise stated in this appendix.

SECTION AQ102
DEFINITIONS
AQ102.1 General.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

EGRESS ROOF ACCESS WINDOW. A skylight or roof window designed and installed to satisfy the emergency escape and rescue opening requirements of Section R310.2.

LANDING PLATFORM. A landing provided as the top step of a stairway accessing a loft.

LOFT. A floor level located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the main floor, open to the main floor on one or more sides with a ceiling height of less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) and used as a living or sleeping space.

TINY HOUSE. A dwelling that is 400 square feet (37 m2) or less in floor area excluding lofts.

SECTION AQ103
CEILING HEIGHT
AQ103.1 Minimum ceiling height.

Habitable space and hallways in tiny houses shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms and kitchens shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1930 mm). Obstructions including, but not limited to, beams, girders, ducts and lighting shall not extend below these minimum ceiling heights.

Exception: Ceiling heights in lofts are permitted to be less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).

SECTION AQ104
LOFTS
AQ104.1 Minimum loft area and dimensions.

Lofts used as a sleeping or living space shall meet the minimum area and dimension requirements of Sections AQ104.1.1 through AQ104.1.3.

AQ104.1.1 Minimum area.

Lofts shall have a floor area of not less than 35 square feet (3.25 m2).

AQ104.1.2 Minimum horizontal dimensions.

Lofts shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in any horizontal dimension.

AQ104.1.3 Height effect on loft area.

Portions of a loft with a sloped ceiling measuring less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft. See Figure AQ104.1.3.

Exception: Under gable roofs with a minimum slope of 6 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (50-percent slope), portions of a loft with a sloped ceiling measuring less than 16 inches (406 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required area for the loft. See Figure AQ104.1.3.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE AQ104.1.3

LOFT CEILING HEIGHT

AQ104.2 Loft access and egress.

The access to and primary egress from lofts shall be of any type described in Sections AQ104.2.1 through AQ104.2.4. The loft access and egress element along its required minimum width shall meet the loft where its ceiling height is not less than 3 feet (914 mm).

AQ104.2.1 Stairways.

Stairways accessing lofts shall comply with this code or with Sections AQ104.2.1.1 through AQ104.2.1.7.

AQ104.2.1.1 Width.

Stairways accessing a loft shall be not less than 17 inches (432 mm) in clear width at or above the handrail. The width below the handrail shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).

AQ104.2.1.2 Headroom.

The headroom above stairways accessing a loft shall be not less than 6 feet 2 inches (1880 mm), as measured vertically from a sloped line connecting the tread, landing or platform nosings in the center of their width, and vertically from the landing platform along the center of its width.

AQ104.2.1.3 Treads and risers.

Risers for stairs accessing a loft shall be not less than 7 inches (178 mm) and not more than 12 inches (305 mm) in height. Tread depth and riser height shall be calculated in accordance with one of the following formulas:

1.	The tread depth shall be 20 inches (508 mm) minus four-thirds of the riser height.

2.	The riser height shall be 15 inches (381 mm) minus three-fourths of the tread depth.

AQ104.2.1.4 Landings.

Intermediate landings and landings at the bottom of stairways shall comply with Section R311.7.6, except that the depth in the direction of travel shall be not less than 24 inches (610 mm).

AQ104.2.1.5 Landing platforms.

The top tread and riser of stairways accessing lofts shall be constructed as a landing platform where the loft ceiling height is less than 6 feet 2 inches (1880 mm) where the stairway meets the loft. The landing platform shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) in width and depth measured horizontally from and perpendicular to the nosing of the landing platform. The landing platform riser height to the loft floor shall be not less than 16 inches (406 mm) and not greater than 18 inches (457 mm).

AQ104.2.1.6 Handrails.

Handrails shall comply with Section R311.7.8.

AQ104.2.1.7 Stairway guards.

Guards at open sides of stairways, landings and landing platforms shall comply with Section R312.1.

AQ104.2.2 Ladders.

Ladders accessing lofts shall comply with Sections AQ104.2.1 and AQ104.2.2.

AQ104.2.2.1 Size and capacity.

Ladders accessing lofts shall have a rung width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), and 10-inch (254 mm) to 14-inch (356 mm) spacing between rungs. Ladders shall be capable of supporting a 300-pound (136 kg) load on any rung. Rung spacing shall be uniform within 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

AQ104.2.2.2 Incline.

Ladders shall be installed at 70 to 80 degrees from horizontal.

AQ104.2.3 Alternating tread devices.

Alternating tread devices accessing lofts shall comply with Sections R311.7.11.1 and R311.7.11.2. The clear width at and below the handrails shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).

AQ104.2.4 Ships ladders.

Ships ladders accessing lofts shall comply with Sections R311.7.12.1 and R311.7.12.2. The clear width at and below handrails shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).

AQ104.2.5 Loft guards.

Loft guards shall be located along the open side(s) of lofts. Loft guards shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height or one-half of the clear height to the ceiling, whichever is less. Loft guards shall comply with Section R312.1.3 and Table R301.5 for their components.

SECTION AQ105
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
AQ105.1 General.

Tiny houses shall meet the requirements of Section R310 for emergency escape and rescue openings.

Exception: Egress roof access windows in lofts used as sleeping rooms shall be deemed to meet the requirements of Section R310 where installed such that the bottom of the opening is not more than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the loft floor, provided the egress roof access window complies with the minimum opening area requirements of Section R310.2.1.

SECTION AQ106
ENERGY CONSERVATION
AQ106.1 Air leakage testing.

The air leakage rate for tiny houses shall not exceed 0.30 cubic feet per minute at 50 Pascals of pressure per square foot of the dwelling unit enclosure area. The air leakage testing shall be in accordance with the testing methods required in Section R402.4.1.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation. The dwelling unit enclosure area shall be the sum of the areas of ceilings, floors and walls that separate the conditioned space of a dwelling unit from the exterior, its adjacent unconditioned spaces and adjacent dwelling units.

AQ106.1.1 Whole-house mechanical ventilation.

Where the air leakage rate is in accordance with Section AQ106.1, the tiny house shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3.

AQ106.2 Alternative compliance.

Tiny houses shall be deemed to be in compliance with Chapter 11 of this code and Chapter R4 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation, provided that the following conditions are met:

1.	The insulation and fenestration meet the requirements of Table R402.1.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

2.	The thermal envelope meets the requirements of Section R402.4.1.1 and Table R402.4.1.1 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

3.	Solar, wind or other renewable energy source supplies not less than 90 percent of the energy use for the structure.

4.	Solar, wind or other renewable energy source supplies not less than 90 percent of the energy for service water heating.

5.	Permanently installed lighting is in accordance with Section R404 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

6.	Mechanical ventilation is provided in accordance with Section M1507 and operable fenestration is not used to meet ventilation requirements

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-r]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX R
LIGHT STRAW-CLAY CONSTRUCTION

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION AR101
GENERAL
AR101.1 Scope.

This appendix shall govern the use of light straw-clay as a nonbearing building material and wall infill system.

SECTION AR102
DEFINITIONS
AR102.1 General.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of the Florida Building Code, Residential for general definitions.

CLAY. Inorganic soil with particle sizes of less than 0.00008 inch (0.002 mm) having the characteristics of high to very high dry strength and medium to high plasticity.

CLAY SLIP. A suspension of clay or clay subsoil particles in water.

CLAY SOIL. Inorganic soil containing 50 percent or more clay by volume.

CLAY SUBSOIL. Subsoil sourced directly from the earth or refined, containing clay and not more than trace amounts of organic matter.

INFILL. Light straw-clay that is placed between the structural members of a building.

LIGHT STRAW-CLAY. A mixture of straw and clay compacted to form insulation and plaster substrate between or around structural and nonstructural members in a wall.

NONBEARING. Not bearing the weight of the building other than the weight of the light straw-clay itself and its finish.

STRAW. The dry stems of cereal grains after the seed heads have been removed.

VOID. Any space in a light straw-clay wall in which a 2-inch (51 mm) sphere can be inserted.

SECTION AR103
NONBEARING LIGHT STRAW-CLAY
CONSTRUCTION
AR103.1 General.

Light straw-clay shall be limited to infill between or around structural and nonstructural wall framing members.

AR103.2 Structure.

The structure of buildings using light straw-clay shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential or shall be in accordance with an approved design by a registered design professional.

AR103.2.1 Number of stories.

Use of light straw-clay infill shall be limited to buildings that are not more than one story above grade plane.

Exception: Buildings using light straw-clay infill that are greater than one story above grade plane shall be in accordance with an approved design by a registered design professional.

AR103.2.2 Bracing.

Wind bracing shall be in accordance with Section R602.10 and shall use Method LIB. Walls with light straw-clay infill shall not be sheathed with solid sheathing.

AR103.2.3 Weight of light straw-clay.

Light straw-clay shall be deemed to have a design dead load of 40 pounds per cubic foot (640 kg per cubic meter) unless otherwise demonstrated to the building official.

AR103.2.4 Reinforcement of light straw-clay.

Light straw-clay shall be reinforced as follows:

1.	Vertical reinforcing shall be not less than nominal 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) wood members at not more than 32 inches (813 mm) on center where the vertical reinforcing is nonload bearing and at 24 inches (610 mm) on center where it is load bearing. The vertical reinforcing shall not exceed an unrestrained height of 10 feet (3048 mm) and shall be attached at top and bottom in accordance with Chapter 6 of the this code. In lieu of these requirements, vertical reinforcing shall be in accordance with an approved design by a registered design professional.

2.	Horizontal reinforcing shall be installed in the center of the wall at not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center and shall be secured to vertical members. Horizontal reinforcing shall be of any of the following: 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) bamboo, 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) fiberglass rod, 1-inch (25 mm) wood dowel or nominal 1-inch by 2-inch (25 mm by 51 mm) wood.

AR103.3 Materials.

The materials used in light straw-clay construction shall be in accordance with Sections AR103.3.1 through AR103.3.4.

AR103.3.1 Straw.

Straw shall be wheat, rye, oats, rice or barley, and shall be free of visible decay and insects.

AR103.3.2 Clay soil.

Suitability of clay soil shall be determined in accordance with the Figure 2 Ribbon Test or the Figure 3 Ball Test of the Appendix to ASTM E2392/E2392M.

AR103.3.3 Clay slip.

Clay slip shall be of sufficient viscosity such that a finger dipped in the slip and withdrawn remains coated with an opaque coating.

AR103.3.4 Light straw-clay mixture.

Light straw-clay shall contain not less than 65 percent and not more than 85 percent straw, by volume of bale-compacted straw to clay soil. Loose straw shall be mixed and coated with clay slip such that there is not more than 5 percent uncoated straw.

AR103.4 Wall construction.

Light straw-clay wall construction shall be in accordance with the requirements of Sections AR103.4.1 through AR103.4.7.

AR103.4.1 Light straw-clay maximum thickness.

Light straw-clay shall be not more than 12 inches (305 mm) thick, to allow adequate drying of the installed material.

AR103.4.2 Distance above grade.

Light straw-clay and its exterior finish shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above exterior finished grade.

AR103.4.3 Moisture barrier.

An approved moisture barrier shall separate the bottom of light straw-clay walls from any masonry or concrete foundation or slab that directly supports the walls. Penetrations and joints in the barrier shall be sealed with an approved sealant.

AR103.4.4 Contact with wood members.

Light straw-clay shall be permitted to be in contact with untreated wood members.

AR103.4.5 Contact with nonwood structural members.

Nonwood structural members in contact with light straw-clay shall be resistant to corrosion or shall be coated to prevent corrosion with an approved coating.

AR103.4.6 Installation.

Light straw-clay shall be installed in accordance with the following:

1.	Formwork shall be sufficiently strong to resist bowing where the light straw-clay is compacted into the forms.

2.	Light straw-clay shall be uniformly placed into forms and evenly tamped to achieve stable walls free of voids. Light straw-clay shall be placed in lifts of not more than 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be thoroughly tamped before additional material is added.

3.	Formwork shall be removed from walls within 24 hours after tamping, and walls shall remain exposed until moisture content is in accordance with Section AR103.5.1. Visible voids shall be patched with light straw-clay prior to plastering.

AR103.4.7 Openings in walls.

Openings in walls shall be in accordance with the following:

1.	Rough framing for doors and windows shall be fastened to structural members in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential. Windows and doors shall be flashed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential.

2.	An approved moisture barrier shall be installed at window sills in light straw-clay walls prior to installation of windows.

AR103.5 Wall finishes.

The interior and exterior surfaces of light straw-clay walls shall be protected with a finish in accordance with Sections AR103.5.1 through AR103.5.5.

AR103.5.1 Moisture content of light straw-clay prior to application of finish.

Light straw-clay walls shall be dry to a moisture content of not more than 20 percent at a depth of 4 inches (102 mm), as measured from each side of the wall, prior to the application of finish on either side of the wall. Moisture content shall be measured with a moisture meter equipped with a probe that is designed for use with baled straw or hay.

AR103.5.2 Plaster finish.

Exterior plaster finishes shall be clay plaster or lime plaster. Interior plaster finishes shall be clay plaster, lime plaster or gypsum plaster. Plasters shall be permitted to be applied directly to the surface of the light straw-clay walls without reinforcement, except that the juncture of dissimilar substrates shall be in accordance with Section AR103.5.4. Plasters shall have a thickness of not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) and not more than 1 inch (25 mm) and shall be installed in not less than two coats. Exterior clay plaster shall be finished with a lime-based or silicate-mineral coating.

AR103.5.3 Separation of wood and plaster.

Where wood framing occurs in light straw-clay walls, such wood surfaces shall be separated from exterior plaster with No.15 asphalt felt, Grade D paper or other approved material except where the wood is preservative treated or naturally durable.

Exception: Exterior clay plasters shall not be required to be separated from wood.

AR103.5.4 Bridging across dissimilar substrates.

Bridging shall be installed across dissimilar substrates prior to the application of plaster. Acceptable bridging materials include: expanded metal lath, woven wire mesh, welded wire mesh, fiberglass mesh, reed matting or burlap. Bridging shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm), on both sides of the juncture.

AR103.5.5 Exterior siding.

Exterior wood, metal or composite material siding shall be spaced not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) from the light straw-clay such that a ventilation space is created to allow for moisture diffusion. The siding shall be fastened to wood furring strips in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Furring strips shall be spaced not more than 32 inches (813 mm) on center, and shall be securely fastened to the vertical wall reinforcing or structural framing. Insect screening shall be provided at the top and bottom of the ventilation space. An air barrier consisting of not more than 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) clay plaster or lime plaster shall be applied to the light strawclay prior to the application of siding.

SECTION AR104
THERMAL INSULATION
AR104.1 R-value.

Light straw-clay, where installed in accordance with this appendix, shall be deemed to have an R-value of 1.6 per inch.

SECTION AR105
REFERENCED STANDARD
ASTM E2392/E2392M—10	Standard Guide for Design of Earthen Wall Building Systems	AR103.3.2

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-s]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX S
STRAWBALE CONSTRUCTION

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

SECTION AS101
GENERAL
AS101.1 Scope.

This appendix provides prescriptive and performance-based requirements for the use of baled straw as a building material. Other methods of strawbale construction shall be subject to approval in accordance with Section R104.11 of this code. Buildings using strawbale walls shall comply with the this code except as otherwise stated in this appendix.

SECTION AS102
DEFINITIONS
AS102.1 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of the Florida Building Code, Residential for general definitions.

BALE. Equivalent to straw bale.

CLAY. Inorganic soil with particle sizes less than 0.00008 inch (0.002 mm) having the characteristics of high to very high dry strength and medium to high plasticity.

CLAY SLIP. A suspension of clay particles in water.

FINISH. Completed compilation of materials on the interior or exterior faces of stacked bales.

FLAKE. An intact section of compressed straw removed from an untied bale.

LAID FLAT. The orientation of a bale with its largest faces horizontal, its longest dimension parallel with the wall plane, its ties concealed in the unfinished wall and its straw lengths oriented across the thickness of the wall.

LOAD-BEARING WALL. A strawbale wall that supports more than 100 pounds per linear foot (1459 N/m) of vertical load in addition its own weight.

MESH. An openwork fabric of linked strands of metal, plastic, or natural or synthetic fiber, embedded in plaster.

NONSTRUCTURAL WALL. Walls other than load-bearing walls or shear walls.

ON-EDGE. The orientation of a bale with its largest faces vertical, its longest dimension parallel with the wall plane, its ties on the face of the wall and its straw lengths oriented vertically.

PIN. A vertical metal rod, wood dowel or bamboo, driven into the center of stacked bales, or placed on opposite surfaces of stacked bales and through-tied.

PLASTER. Gypsum or cement plaster, as defined in Sections R702 and AS104, or clay plaster, soil-cement plaster, lime plaster or cement-lime plaster as defined in Section AS104.

PRECOMPRESSION. Vertical compression of stacked bales before the application of finish.

REINFORCED PLASTER. A plaster containing mesh reinforcement.

RUNNING BOND. The placement of straw bales such that the head joints in successive courses are offset not less than one-quarter the bale length.

SHEAR WALL. A strawbale wall designed and constructed to resist lateral wind forces parallel to the plane of the wall in accordance with Section AS106.13.

SKIN. The compilation of plaster and reinforcing, if any, applied to the surface of stacked bales.

STRUCTURAL WALL. A wall that meets the definition for a load-bearing wall or shear wall.

STACK BOND. The placement of straw bales such that head joints in successive courses are vertically aligned.

STRAW. The dry stems of cereal grains after the seed heads have been removed.

STRAW BALE. A rectangular compressed block of straw, bound by ties.

STRAWBALE. The adjective form of straw bale.

STRAW-CLAY. Loose straw mixed and coated with clay slip.

TIE. A synthetic fiber, natural fiber or metal wire used to confine a straw bale.

TRUTH WINDOW. An area of a strawbale wall left without its finish, to allow view of the straw otherwise concealed by its finish.

SECTION AS103
BALES
AS103.1 Shape.

Bales shall be rectangular in shape.

AS103.2 Size.

Bales shall have a height and thickness of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), except as otherwise permitted or required in this appendix. Bales used within a continuous wall shall be of consistent height and thickness to ensure even distribution of loads within the wall system.

AS103.3 Ties.

Bales shall be confined by synthetic fiber, natural fiber or metal ties sufficient to maintain required bale density. Ties shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) and not more than 6 inches (152 mm) from the two faces without ties and shall be spaced not more than 12 inches (305 mm) apart. Bales with broken ties shall be retied with sufficient tension to maintain required bale density.

AS103.4 Moisture content.

The moisture content of bales at the time of application of the first coat of plaster or the installation of another finish shall not exceed 20 percent of the weight of the bale. The moisture content of bales shall be determined by use of a moisture meter designed for use with baled straw or hay, equipped with a probe of sufficient length to reach the center of the bale. Not less than 5 percent and not less than 10 bales used shall be randomly selected and tested.

AS103.5 Density.

Bales shall have a dry density of not less than 6.5 pounds per cubic foot (104 kg/cubic meter). The dry density shall be calculated by subtracting the weight of the moisture in pounds (kg) from the actual bale weight and dividing by the volume of the bale in cubic feet (cubic meters). Not less than 2 percent and not less than five bales to be used shall be randomly selected and tested on site.

AS103.6 Partial bales.

Partial bales made after original fabrication shall be retied with ties complying with Section AS103.3.

AS103.7 Types of straw.

Bales shall be composed of straw from wheat, rice, rye, barley or oat.

AS103.8 Other baled material.

The dry stems of other cereal grains shall be acceptable where approved by the building official.

SECTION AS104
FINISHES
AS104.1 General.

Finishes applied to strawbale walls shall be any type permitted by this code, and shall comply with this section and with Chapters 3 and 7 of this code unless stated otherwise in this section.

AS104.2 Purpose, and where required.

Strawbale walls shall be finished so as to provide mechanical protection, fire resistance and protection from weather and to restrict the passage of air through the bales, in accordance with this appendix and this code. Vertical strawbale wall surfaces shall receive a coat of plaster not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) thick, or greater where required elsewhere in this appendix, or shall fit tightly against a solid wall panel. The tops of strawbale walls shall receive a coat of plaster not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) thick where straw would otherwise be exposed.

Exception: Truth windows shall be permitted where a fire-resistance rating is not required. Weather-exposed truth windows shall be fitted with a weather-tight cover. Interior truth windows in Climate Zones 5, 6, 7, 8 and Marine 4 shall be fitted with an air-tight cover.

AS104.3 Vapor retarders.

Class I and II vapor retarders shall not be used on a strawbale wall, nor shall any other material be used that has a vapor permeance rating of less than 3 perms, except as permitted or required elsewhere in this appendix.

AS104.4 Plaster.

Plaster applied to bales shall be any type described in this section, and as required or limited in this appendix. Plaster thickness shall not exceed 2 inches (51 mm).

AS104.4.1 Plaster and membranes.

Plaster shall be applied directly to strawbale walls to facilitate transpiration of moisture from the bales, and to secure a mechanical bond between the skin and the bales, except where a membrane is allowed or required elsewhere in this appendix.

AS104.4.2 Lath and mesh for plaster.

The surface of the straw bales functions as lath, and other lath or mesh shall not be required, except as required for out-of-plane resistance by Table AS105.4 or for structural walls by Tables AS106.12 and AS106.13(1).

AS104.4.3 Clay plaster.

Clay plaster shall comply with Sections AS104.4.3.1 through AS104.4.3.6.

AS104.4.3.1 General.

Clay plaster shall be any plaster having a clay or clay-soil binder. Such plaster shall contain sufficient clay to fully bind the plaster, sand or other inert granular material, and shall be permitted to contain reinforcing fibers. Acceptable reinforcing fibers include chopped straw, sisal and animal hair.

AS104.4.3.2 Lath and mesh.

Clay plaster shall not be required to contain reinforcing lath or mesh except as required in Tables AS105.4 and AS106.13(1). Where provided, mesh shall be natural fiber, corrosion-resistant metal, nylon, high-density polypropylene or other approved material.

AS104.4.3.3 Thickness and coats.

Clay plaster shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) thick, except where required to be thicker for structural walls as described elsewhere in this appendix, and shall be applied in not less than two coats.

AS104.4.3.4 Rain-exposed.

Clay plaster, where exposed to rain, shall be finished with lime wash, lime plaster, linseed oil or other approved erosion-resistant finish.

AS104.4.3.5 Prohibited finish coat.

Plaster containing Portland cement shall not be permitted as a finish coat over clay plasters.

AS104.4.3.6 Plaster additives.

Additives shall be permitted to increase plaster workability, durability, strength or water resistance.

AS104.4.4 Soil-cement plaster.

Soil-cement plaster shall comply with Sections AS104.4.4.1 through AS104.4.4.3.

AS104.4.4.1 General.

Soil-cement plaster shall be composed of soil (free of organic matter), sand and not less than 10 percent and not more than 20 percent Portland cement by volume, and shall be permitted to contain reinforcing fibers.

AS104.4.4.2 Lath and mesh.

Soil-cement plaster shall use any corrosion-resistant lath or mesh permitted by this code, or as required in Section AS106 where used on structural walls.

AS104.4.4.3 Thickness.

Soil-cement plaster shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) thick.

AS104.4.5 Gypsum plaster.

Gypsum plaster shall comply with Section R702. Gypsum plaster shall be limited to use on interior surfaces of nonstructural walls, and as an interior finish coat over a structural plaster that complies with this appendix.

AS104.4.6 Lime plaster.

Lime plaster shall comply with Sections AS104.4.6.1 and AS104.4.6.3.

AS104.4.6.1 General.

Lime plaster is any plaster with a binder that is composed of calcium hydroxide (CaOH) including Type N or S hydrated lime, hydraulic lime, natural hydraulic lime or quicklime. Hydrated lime shall comply with ASTM C206. Hydraulic lime shall comply with ASTM C1707. Natural hydraulic lime shall comply with ASTM C141 and EN 459. Quicklime shall comply with ASTM C5.

AS104.4.6.2 Thickness and coats.

Lime plaster shall be not less than 7/8 inch (22 mm) thick, and shall be applied in not less than three coats.

AS104.4.6.3 On structural walls.

Lime plaster on strawbale structural walls in accordance with Table AS106.12 or Table AS106.13(1) shall use a binder of hydraulic or natural hydraulic lime.

AS104.4.7 Cement-lime plaster.

Cement-lime plaster shall be plaster mixes CL, F or FL, as described in ASTM C926.

AS104.4.8 Cement plaster.

Cement plaster shall conform to ASTM C926 and shall comply with Sections R703.7.2, R703.7.4 and R703.7.5, except that the amount of lime in plaster coats shall be not less than 1 part lime to 6 parts cement to allow a minimum acceptable vapor permeability. The combined thickness of plaster coats shall be not more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) thick.

SECTION AS105
STRAWBALE WALLS—GENERAL
AS105.1 General.

Strawbale walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Strawbale structural walls shall be in accordance with the additional requirements of Section AS106.

AS105.2 Building requirements for use of strawbale nonstructural walls.

Buildings using strawbale nonstructural walls shall be subject to the following limitations and requirements:

1.	Number of stories: not more than one, except that two stories shall be allowed with an approved engineered design.

2.	Building height: not more than 25 feet (7620 mm).

3.	Wall height: in accordance with Table AS105.4.

AS105.3 Sill plates.

Sill plates shall support and be flush with each face of the straw bales above and shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood where required by this code. Sill plates shall be not less than nominal 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 mm) with anchoring complying with Section R403.1.6 and the additional requirements of Tables AS105.4 and AS106.6(1), where applicable.

AS105.4 Out-of-plane resistance and unrestrained wall dimensions.

Strawbale walls shall employ a method of out-of-plane resistance in accordance with Table AS105.4, and comply with its associated limits and requirements.

TABLE AS105.4

OUT-OF-PLANE RESISTANCE AND UNRESTRAINED WALL DIMENSIONS

METHOD OF
OUT-OF-PLANE RESISTANCEa
	FOR WIND DESIGN
SPEEDS
(mph)	UNRESTRAINED WALL DIMENSIONS, Hb	MESH STAPLE
SPACING AT
BOUNDARY RESTRAINTS
Absolute limit
in feet
	Limit based on bale
thickness Tc
in feet (mm)
Nonplaster finish or unreinforced plaster	≤ 100	H ≤ 8	H ≤ 5T	None required
Pins per Section AS105.4.2	≤ 100	H ≤ 12	H ≤ 8T	None required
Pins per Section AS105.4.2	≤ 110	H ≤ 10	H ≤ 7T	None required
Reinforcedc clay plaster	≤ 110	H ≤ 10	H ≤ 8T0.5
(H ≤ 140T0.5)
	≤ 6 inches
Reinforcedc clay plaster	≤ 110	10 < H ≤ 12	H ≤ 8T0.5
(H ≤ 140T0.5)
	≤ 4 inchese
Reinforcedc cement, cement-lime, lime
or soil-cement plaster
	≤ 110	H ≤ 10	H ≤ 9T0.5
(H ≤ 157T0.5)
	≤ 6 inches
Reinforcedc cement, cement-lime, lime
or soil-cement plaster
	≤ 120	H ≤ 12	H ≤ 9T0.5
(H ≤ 157T0.5)
	≤ 4 inchese

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Finishes applied to both sides of stacked bales. Where different finishes are used on opposite sides of a wall, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.

b.	H = Stacked bale height in feet (mm) between sill plate and top plate or other approved horizontal restraint, or the horizontal distance in feet (mm) between approved vertical restraints. For load-bearing walls, H refers to vertical height only.

c.	T = Bale thickness in feet (mm).

d.	Plaster reinforcement shall be any mesh allowed in Table AS106.16 for the matching plaster type, and with staple spacing in accordance with this table. Mesh shall be installed in accordance with Section AS106.9.

e.	Sill plate attachment shall be with 5/8-inch anchor bolts or approved equivalent at not more than 48 inches on center where staple spacing is required to be ≤ 4 inches.

AS105.4.1 Determination of out-of-plane loading.

Out-of-plane loading for the use of Table AS105.4 shall be in terms of the design wind speed as determined in accordance with Sections R301.2.1 of this code.

AS105.4.2 Pins.

Pins used for out-of-plane resistance shall comply with the following or shall be in accordance with an approved engineered design. Pins shall be external, internal or a combination of the two.

1.	Pins shall be 1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) steel, 3/4-inch-diameter (19.1 mm) wood or 1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) bamboo.

2.	External pins shall be installed vertically on both sides of the wall at a spacing of not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center. External pins shall have full lateral bearing on the sill plate and the top plate or roof-bearing element, and shall be tightly tied through the wall to an opposing pin with ties spaced not more than 32 inches (813 mm) apart and not more than 8 inches (203 mm) from each end of the pins.

3.	Internal pins shall be installed vertically within the center third of the bales, at spacing of not more than 24 inches (610 mm) and shall extend from top course to bottom course. The bottom course shall be similarly connected to its support and the top course shall be similarly connected to the roof- or floor-bearing member above with pins or other approved means. Internal pins shall be continuous or shall overlap through not less than one bale course.

AS105.5 Connection of light-framed walls to strawbale walls.

Light-framed walls perpendicular to, or at an angle to a straw bale wall assembly, shall be fastened to the bottom and top wood members of the strawbale wall in accordance with requirements for wood or cold-formed steel light-framed walls in this code, or the abutting stud shall be connected to alternating straw bale courses with a 1/2-inch diameter (12.7 mm) steel, 3/4-inch-diameter (19.1 mm) wood or 5/8-inch-diameter (15.9 mm) bamboo dowel, with not less than 8-inch (203 mm) penetration.

AS105.6 Moisture control.

Strawbale walls shall be protected from moisture intrusion and damage in accordance with Sections AS105.6.1 through AS105.6.8.

AS105.6.1 Water-resistant barriers and vapor permeance ratings.

Plastered bale walls shall be constructed without any membrane barrier between straw and plaster to facilitate transpiration of moisture from the bales, and to secure a structural bond between straw and plaster, except as permitted or required elsewhere in this appendix. Where a water-resistant barrier is placed behind an exterior finish, it shall have a vapor permeance rating of not less than 5 perms, except as permitted or required elsewhere in this appendix.

AS105.6.2 Vapor retarders.

Wall finishes shall have an equivalent vapor permeance rating of a Class III vapor retarder on the interior side of exterior strawbale walls in Climate Zones 5, 6, 7, 8 and Marine 4, as defined in Chapter 11. Bales in walls enclosing showers or steam rooms shall be protected on the interior side by a Class I or Class II vapor retarder.

AS105.6.3 Penetrations in exterior strawbale walls.

Penetrations in exterior strawbale walls shall be sealed with an approved sealant or gasket on the exterior side of the wall in all climate zones, and on the interior side of the wall in Climate Zones 5, 6, 7, 8 and Marine 4, as defined in Chapter 11.

AS105.6.4 Horizontal surfaces.

Bale walls and other bale elements shall be provided with a water-resistant barrier at weather-exposed horizontal surfaces. The water-resistant barrier shall be of a material and installation that will prevent water from entering the wall system. Horizontal surfaces shall include exterior window sills, sills at exterior niches and buttresses. The finish material at such surfaces shall be sloped not less than 1 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope) and shall drain away from bale walls and elements. Where the water-resistant barrier is below the finish material, it shall be sloped not less than 1 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope) and shall drain to the outside surface of the bales wall’s vertical finish.

AS105.6.5 Separation of bales and concrete.

A sheet or liquid-applied Class II vapor retarder shall be installed between bales and supporting concrete or masonry. The bales shall be separated from the vapor retarder by not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm), and that space shall be filled with an insulating material such as wood or rigid insulation, or a material that allows vapor dispersion such as gravel, or other approved insulating or vapor dispersion material. Sill plates shall be installed at this interface in accordance with Section AS105.3. Where bales abut a concrete or masonry wall that retains earth, a Class II vapor retarder shall be provided between such wall and the bales.

AS105.6.6 Separation of bales and earth.

Bales shall be separated from earth by not less than 8 inches (203 mm).

AS105.6.7 Separation of exterior plaster and earth.

Exterior plaster applied to straw bales shall be located not less than 6 inches (102 mm) above earth or 3 inches (51 mm) above paved areas.

AS105.6.8 Separation of wood and plaster.

Where wood framing or wood sheathing occurs on the exterior face of strawbale walls, such wood surfaces shall be separated from exterior plaster with two layers of Grade D paper, No. 15 asphalt felt or other approved material in accordance with Section R703.7.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the wood is preservative treated or naturally durable and is not greater than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in width.

2.	Clay plaster shall not be required to be separated from untreated wood that is not greater than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in width.

AS105.7 Inspections.

The building official shall inspect the following aspects of strawbale construction in accordance with Section 109.1 of the Florida Building Code, Building:

1.	Sill plate anchors, as part of and in accordance with Section 109.1.1 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

2.	Mesh placement and attachment, where mesh is required by this appendix.

3.	Pins, where required by and in accordance with Section AS105.4.

SECTION AS106
STRAWBALE WALLS—STRUCTURAL
AS106.1 General.

Plastered strawbale walls shall be permitted to be used as structural walls in one-story buildings in accordance with the prescriptive provisions of this section.

AS106.2 Loads and other limitations.

Live and dead loads and other limitations shall be in accordance with Section R301 of the Florida Building Code, Residential. Strawbale wall dead loads shall not exceed 60 psf (2872 N/m2) per face area of wall.

AS106.3 Foundations.

Foundations for plastered strawbale walls shall be in accordance with Chapter 4.

AS106.4 Configuration of bales.

Bales in strawbale structural walls shall be laid flat or on-edge and in a running bond or stack bond, except that bales in structural walls with unreinforced plasters shall be laid in a running bond only.

AS106.5 Voids and stuffing.

Voids between bales in strawbale structural walls shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm) in width, and such voids shall be stuffed with flakes of straw or straw-clay, before application of finish.

AS106.6 Plaster on structural walls.

Plaster on load-bearing walls shall be in accordance with Table AS106.12. Plaster on shear walls shall be in accordance with Table AS106.13(1).

AS106.6.1 Compressive strength.

For plaster on strawbale structural walls, the building official is authorized to require a 2-inch (51mm) cube test conforming to ASTM C109 to demonstrate a minimum compressive strength in accordance with Table AS106.6.1.

TABLE AS106.6.1

MINIMUM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH FOR PLASTERS ON STRUCTURAL WALLS

PLASTER TYPE	MINIMUM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
(psi)

Clay	100
Soil-cement	1000
Lime	600
Cement-lime	1000
Cement	1400

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 6894.76 N/m2.

AS106.7 Straightness of plaster.

Plaster on strawbale structural walls shall be straight, as a function of the bale wall surfaces they are applied to, in accordance with all of the following:

1.	As measured across the face of a bale, straw bulges shall not protrude more than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) across 2 feet (610 mm) of its height or length.

2.	As measured across the face of a bale wall, straw bulges shall not protrude from the vertical plane of a bale wall more than 2 inches (51 mm) over 8 feet (2438 mm).

3.	The vertical faces of adjacent bales shall not be offset more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

AS106.8 Plaster and membranes.

Strawbale structural walls shall not have a membrane between straw and plaster, or shall have attachment through the bale wall from one plaster skin to the other in accordance with an approved engineered design.

AS106.9 Mesh.

Mesh in plasters on strawbale structural walls, and where required by Table AS105.4, shall be installed in accordance with Sections AS106.9.1 through AS106.9.4.

AS106.9.1 Mesh laps.

Mesh required by Table AS105.4 or AS106.12 shall be installed with not less than 4-inch (102 mm) laps. Mesh required by Table AS106.13(1) or in walls designed to resist wind uplift of more than 100 plf (1459 N/m), shall run continuous vertically from sill plate to the top plate or roof-bearing element, or shall lap not less than 8 inches (203 mm). Horizontal laps in such mesh shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

AS106.9.2 Mesh attachment.

Mesh shall be attached with staples to top plates or roof-bearing elements and to sill plates in accordance with all of the following:

1.	Staples. Staples shall be pneumatically driven, stainless steel or electro-galvanized, 16 gage with 11/2-inch (38 mm) legs, 7/16-inch (11.1 mm) crown; or manually driven, galvanized, 15 gage with 1-inch (25 mm) legs. Other staples shall be permitted to be used as designed by a registered design professional. Staples into preservative-treated wood shall be stainless steel.

2.	Staple orientation. Staples shall be firmly driven diagonally across mesh intersections at the required spacing.

3.	Staple spacing. Staples shall be spaced not more than 4 inches (102 mm) on center, except where a lesser spacing is required by Table AS106.13(1) or Section AS106.14, as applicable.

AS106.9.3 Steel mesh.

Steel mesh shall be galvanized, and shall be separated from preservative-treated wood by Grade D paper, No. 15 roofing felt or other approved barrier.

AS106.9.4 Mesh in plaster.

Required mesh shall be embedded in the plaster except where staples fasten the mesh to horizontal boundary elements.

AS106.10 Support of plaster skins.

Plaster skins on strawbale structural walls shall be continuously supported along their bottom edge. Acceptable supports include: a concrete or masonry stem wall, a concrete slab-on-grade, a wood-framed floor blocked with an approved engineered design or a steel angle anchored with an approved engineered design. A weep screed as described in Section R702.7.2.1 is not an acceptable support.

AS106.11 Transfer of loads to and from plaster skins.

Where plastered strawbale walls are used to support superimposed vertical loads, such loads shall be transferred to the plaster skins by continuous direct bearing or by an approved engineered design. Where plastered strawbale walls are used to resist in-plane lateral loads, such loads shall be transferred to the reinforcing mesh from the structural member or assembly above and to the sill plate in accordance with Table AS106.12(2).

AS106.12 Load-bearing walls.

Plastered strawbale walls shall be permitted to be used as load-bearing walls in one-story buildings to support vertical loads imposed in accordance with Section R301, in accordance with and not more than the allowable bearing capacities indicated in Table AS106.12.

TABLE AS106.12

ALLOWABLE SUPERIMPOSED VERTICAL LOADS (LBS/FOOT) FOR PLASTERED LOAD-BEARING STRAWBALE WALLS

WALL DESIGNATION	PLASTERa
(both sides) Minimum
thickness in inches each side
	MESHb	STAPLESc	ALLOWABLE
BEARING CAPACITYd
(plf)

A	Clay 11/2	None required	None required	400
B	Soil-cement 1	Required	Required	800
C	Lime 7/8	Required	Required	500
D	Cement-lime 7/8	Required	Required	800
E	Cement 7/8	Required	Required	800

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per foot = 14.5939 N/m.

a.	Plasters shall conform to Sections AS104.4.3 through AS104.4.8, AS106.7 and AS106.10.

b.	Any metal mesh allowed by this appendix and installed in accordance with Section AS106.9.

c.	In accordance with Section AS106.9.2, except as required to transfer roof loads to the plaster skins in accordance with Section AS106.11.

d.	For walls with a different plaster on each side, the lower value shall be used.

AS106.12.1 Precompression of load-bearing strawbale walls.

Prior to application of plaster, walls designed to be load bearing shall be precompressed by a uniform load of not less than 100 plf (1459 N/m).

AS106.12.2 Concentrated loads.

Concentrated loads shall be distributed by structural elements capable of distributing the loads to the bearing wall within the allowable bearing capacity listed in Table AS106.12 for the plaster type used.

AS106.13 Braced panels.

Plastered strawbale walls shall be permitted to be used as braced wall panels for one-story buildings in accordance with Section R602 of the Florida Building Code, Residential and with Tables AS106.13(1) and AS106.13(2). Wind design criteria shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.1.

TABLE AS106.13(1)

PLASTERED STRAWBALE BRACED WALL PANEL TYPES

WALL
DESIGNATION
	PLASTERa (both sides)	SILL PLATESb
(nominal size in
inches)
	ANCHOR BOLTc
SPACING
(inches on center)
	MESHd
(inches)
	STAPLE
SPACINGe
(inches on center)

Type	Thickness
(minimum in inches
each side)

A1	Clay	1.5	2 × 4	32	None	None
A2	Clay	1.5	2 × 4	32	2 × 2 high-density
polypropylene
	2
A3	Clay	1.5	2 × 4	32	2 × 2 × 14 gage	4
B	Soil-cement	1	4 × 4	24	2 × 2 × 14 gage	2
C1	Lime	7/8	2 × 4	32	17-gage woven wire	3
C2	Lime	7/8	4 × 4	24	2 × 2 × 14 gage	2
D1	Cement-lime	7/8	4 × 4	32	17 gage woven wire	2
D2	Cement-lime	7/8	4 × 4	24	2 × 2 × 14 gage	2
E1	Cement	7/8	4 × 4	32	2 × 2 × 14 gage	2
E2	Cement	1.5	4 × 4	24	2 × 2 × 14 gage	2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Plasters shall conform with Sections AS104.4.3 through AS104.4.8, AS106.7, AS106.8 and AS106.12.

b.	Sill plates shall be Douglas fir-larch or southern pine and shall be preservative treated where required by the Florida Building Code, Residential.

c.	Anchor bolts shall be in accordance with Section AS106.13.3 at the spacing shown in this table.

d.	Installed in accordance with Section AS106.9.

e.	Staples shall be in accordance with Section AS106.9.2 at the spacing shown in this table.

TABLE AS106.13(2)

BRACING REQUIREMENTS FOR STRAWBALE BRACED WALL PANELS BASED ON WIND SPEED

• EXPOSURE CATEGORY Bd
• 25-FOOT MEAN ROOF HEIGHT
• 10-FOOT EAVE-TO-RIDGE HEIGHTd
• 10-FOOT WALL HEIGHTd
• 2 BRACED WALL LINESd
	MINIMUM TOTAL LENGTH (FEET) OF STRAWBALE BRACED WALL
PANELS REQUIRED ALONG EACH BRACED WALL LINEa, b, c, d

Basic wind speed
(mph)
	Story location	Braced wall line
spacing (feet)
	Strawbale braced wall
panele A2, A3
	Strawbale braced wall
panele C1, C2, D1
	Strawbale braced wall
panele D2, E1, E2

≤ 85	One-story building	10	6.4	3.8	3.0
20	8.5	5.1	4.0
30	10.2	6.1	4.8
40	13.3	6.9	5.5
50	16.3	7.7	6.1
60	19.4	8.3	6.6
≤ 90	One-story building	10	6.4	3.8	3.0
20	9.0	5.4	4.3
30	11.2	6.4	5.1
40	15.3	7.4	5.9
50	18.4	8.1	6.5
60	21.4	8.8	7.0
≤ 100	One-story building	10	7.1	4.3	3.4
20	10.2	6.1	4.8
30	14.3	7.2	5.7
40	18.4	8.1	6.5
50	22.4	9.0	7.1
60	26.5	9.8	7.8
≤ 110	One-story building	10	7.8	4.7	3.7
20	12.2	6.6	5.3
30	17.3	7.9	6.3
40	22.4	9.0	7.1
50	26.5	9.8	7.8
60	31.6	11.4	8.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 305 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	Linear interpolation shall be permitted.

b.	All braced wall panels shall be without openings and shall have an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1.

c.	Tabulated minimum total lengths are for braced wall lines using single braced wall panels with an aspect ratio (H:L) ≤ 2:1, or using multiple braced wall panels with aspect ratios (H:L) ≤ 1:1. For braced wall lines using two or more braced wall panels with an aspect ratio (H:L) > 1:1, the minimum total length shall be multiplied by the largest aspect ratio (H:L) of braced wall panels in that line.

d.	Subject to applicable wind adjustment factors associated with “All methods” in Table R602.10.3(2)

e.	Strawbale braced panel types indicated shall comply with Sections AS106.13.1 through AS106.13.3 and with Table AS106.13(1).

AS106.13.1 Bale wall thickness.

The thickness of the stacked bale wall without its plaster shall be not less than 15 inches (381 mm).

AS106.13.2 Sill plates.

Sill plates shall be in accordance with Table AS106.13(1).

AS106.13.3 Sill plate fasteners.

Sill plates shall be fastened with not less than 5/8-inch-diameter (15.9 mm) steel anchor bolts with 3-inch by 3-inch by 3/16-inch (76.2 mm by 76.2 mm by 4.8 mm) steel washers, with not less than 7-inch (177.8 mm) embedment in a concrete or masonry foundation, or shall be an approved equivalent, with the spacing shown in Table AS106.13(1). Anchor bolts or other fasteners into framed floors shall be of an approved engineered design.

AS106.14 Resistance to wind uplift forces.

Plaster mesh in skins of strawbale walls that resist uplift forces from the roof assembly, as determined in accordance with Section R802.11, shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1.	Plaster shall be any type and thickness allowed in Section AS104.

2.	Mesh shall be any type allowed in Table AS106.13(1), and shall be attached to top plates or roof-bearing elements and to sill plates in accordance with Section AS106.9.2.

3.	Sill plates shall be not less than nominal 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) with anchoring complying with Section R403.1.6.

4.	Mesh attached with staples at 4 inches (51 mm) on center shall be considered to be capable of resisting uplift forces of 100 plf (1459 N/m) for each plaster skin.

5.	Mesh attached with staples at 2 inches (51 mm) on center shall be considered to be capable of resisting uplift forces of 200 plf (2918 N/m) for each plaster skin.

SECTION AS107
FIRE RESISTANCE
AS107.1 Fire-resistance rating.

Strawbale walls shall be considered to be nonrated, except for walls constructed in accordance with Section AS107.1.1 or AS107.1.2. Alternately, fire-resistance ratings of strawbale walls shall be determined in accordance with Section R302 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

AS107.1.1 One-hour rated clay plastered wall.

One-hour fire-resistance-rated nonload-bearing clay plastered strawbale walls shall comply with all of the following:

1.	Bales shall be laid flat or on-edge in a running bond.

2.	Bales shall maintain thickness of not less than 18 inches (457 mm).

3.	Bales shall have a minimum density of 7.5 pounds per cubic foot.

4.	Gaps shall be stuffed with straw-clay.

5.	Clay plaster on each side of the wall shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) thick and shall be composed of a mixture of 3 parts clay, 2 parts chopped straw and 6 parts sand, or an alternative approved clay plaster.

6.	Plaster application shall be in accordance with Section AS104.4.3.3 for the number and thickness of coats.

AS107.1.2 Two-hour rated cement plastered wall.

Two-hour fire-resistance-rated nonload-bearing cement plastered strawbale walls shall comply with all of the following:

1.	Bales shall be laid flat or on-edge in a running bond.

2.	Bales shall maintain a thickness of not less than 14 inches (356 mm).

3.	Bales shall have a minimum density of 7.5 pounds per cubic foot.

4.	Gaps shall be stuffed with straw-clay.

5.	One 11/2-inch (38 mm) by 17-gage galvanized woven wire mesh shall be attached to wood members with 11/2-inch (38 mm) staples at 6 inches (152 mm) on center. No. 9 gage U-pins with not less than 8-inch (203 mm) legs shall be installed at 18 inches (457 mm) on center to fasten the mesh to the bales.

6.	Cement plaster on each side of the wall shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) thick.

7.	Plaster application shall be in accordance with SectionAS104.4.8 for the number and thickness of coats.

AS107.2 Openings in rated walls.

Openings and penetrations in bale walls required to have a fire-resistance rating shall satisfy the same requirements for openings and penetrations as prescribed in the Florida Building Code, Residential.

AS107.3 Clearance to fireplaces and chimneys.

Strawbale surfaces adjacent to fireplaces or chimneys shall be finished with not less than 3/8-inch (10 mm) thick plaster of any type permitted by this appendix. Clearance from the face of such plaster to fireplaces and chimneys shall be maintained as required from fireplaces and chimneys to combustibles in Chapter 10, or as required by manufacturer’s instructions, whichever is more restrictive.

SECTION AS108
THERMAL INSULATION
AS108.1 R-value.

The unit R-value of a strawbale wall with bales laid flat is R-1.3 per inch of bale thickness. The unit R-value of a strawbale wall with bales on-edge is R-2 per inch of bale thickness.

SECTION AS109
REFERENCED STANDARDS
ASTM
C5—10	Standard Specification for Quicklimefor Structural PurposesAS104.4.6.1
C109/C109M—12	Standard Test Method for Compressive Strength of Hydraulic Cement MortarsAS106.6.1
C141/C141M—09	Standard Specification for Hydrated Hydraulic Lime for Structural PurposesAS104.4.6.1
C206—03	Standard Specification for FinishingHydrated LimeAS104.4.6.1
C926—12a	Standard Specification for Application of Portland Cement Based PlasterAS104.4.7, AS104.4.8
C1707—11	Standard Specification for Pozzolanic Hydraulic Lime for Structural PurposesAS104.4.6.1
EN
459—2010	Part 1: Building Lime. Definitions, Specifications and Conformity Criteria; Part 2: Test MethodsAS104.4.6.1

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-t]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX T
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR WORST-CASE TESTING
OF ATMOSPHERIC VENTING SYSTEMS UNDER
N1102.4 OR N1105 CONDITIONS ≤ 5ACH50

(This appendix is informative and is not part of the code.)

SECTION T101
SCOPE
T101.1 General.

This appendix is intended to provide guidelines for worst-case testing of atmospheric venting systems. Worst-case testing is recommended to identify problems that weaken draft and restrict combustion air.

SECTION T202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS

COMBUSTION APPLIANCE ZONE (CAZ). A contiguous air volume within a building that contains a Category I or II atmospherically vented appliance or a Category III or IV direct-vent or integral vent appliance drawing combustion air from inside the building or dwelling unit. The CAZ includes, but is not limited to, a mechanical closet, a mechanical room or the main body of a house or dwelling unit.

DRAFT. The pressure difference existing between the appliance or any component part and the atmosphere that causes a continuous flow of air and products of combustion through the gas passages of the appliance to the atmosphere.

Mechanical or induced draft. The pressure difference created by the action of a fan, blower or ejector that is located between the appliance and the chimney or vent termination.

Natural draft. The pressure difference created by a vent or chimney because of its height and the temperature difference between the flue gases and the atmosphere.

SPILLAGE. Combustion gases emerging from an appliance or venting system into the combustion appliance zone during burner operation.

SECTION T301
TESTING PROCEDURE
T301.1 Worst-case testing of atmospheric venting systems.

Buildings or dwelling units containing a Category I or II atmospherically vented appliance; or a Category III or IV direct-vent or integral vent appliance drawing combustion air from inside of the building or dwelling unit, shall have the Combustion Appliance Zone (CAZ) tested for spillage, acceptable draft and carbon monoxide (CO) in accordance with this Section. Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope and prior to final inspection.

Exception: Buildings or dwelling units containing only Category III or IV direct-vent or integral vent appliances that do not draw combustion air from inside of the building or dwelling unit.

The enumerated test procedure as follows shall be complied with during testing:

1.	Set combustion appliances to the pilot setting or turn off the service disconnects for combustion appliances. Close exterior doors and windows and the fireplace damper. With the building or dwelling unit in this configuration, measure and record the baseline ambient pressure inside the building or dwelling unit CAZ. Compare the baseline ambient pressure of the CAZ to that of the outside ambient pressure and record the difference (Pa).

2.	Establish worst case by turning on the clothes dryer and all exhaust fans. Close interior doors that make the CAZ pressure more negative. Turn on the air handler, where present, and leave on if, as a result, the pressure in the CAZ becomes more negative. Check interior door positions again, closing only the interior doors that make the CAZ pressure more negative. Measure net change in pressure from the CAZ to outdoor ambient pressure, correcting for the base ambient pressure inside the home. Record “worst case depressurization” pressure and compare to Table T301.1(1).

 Where CAZ depressurization limits are exceeded under worst-case conditions in accordance with Table T301.1(1), additional combustion air shall be provided or other modifications to building air-leakage performance or exhaust appliances such that depressurization is brought within the limits prescribed in Table T301.1(1).

3.	Measure worst-case spillage, acceptable draft and carbon monoxide (CO) by firing the fuel-fired appliance with the smallest Btu capacity first.

a.	Test for spillage at the draft diverter with a mirror or smoke puffer. An appliance that continues to spill flue gases for more than 60 seconds fails the spillage test.

b.	Test for CO measuring undiluted flue gases in the throat or flue of the appliance using a digital gauge in parts per million (ppm) at the 10-minute mark. Record CO ppm readings to be compared with Table T301.1(3) upon completion of Step 4. Where the spillage test fails under worst case, go to Step 4.

c.	Where spillage ends within 60 seconds, test for acceptable draft in the connector not less than 1 foot (305 mm), but not more than 2 feet (610 mm) downstream of the draft diverter. Record draft pressure and compare to Table T301.1(2).

d.	Fire all other CONNECTED appliances simultaneously and test again at the draft diverter of each appliance for spillage, CO and acceptable draft using procedures 3a through 3c.

4.	Measure spillage, acceptable draft, and carbon monoxide (CO) under natural conditions—without clothes dryer and exhaust fans on—in accordance with the procedure outlined in Step 3, measuring the net change in pressure from worst case condition in Step 3 to natural in the CAZ to confirm the worst case depressurization taken in Step 2. Repeat the process for each appliance, allowing each vent system to cool between tests.

5.	Monitor indoor ambient CO in the breathing zone continuously during testing, and abort the test where indoor ambient CO exceeds 35 ppm by turning off the appliance, ventilating the space, and evacuating the building. The CO problem shall be corrected prior to completing combustion safety diagnostics.

6.	Make recommendations based on test results and the retrofit action prescribed in Table T301.1(3).

TABLE T301.1(1)

CAZ DEPRESSURIZATION LIMITS

VENTING CONDITION	LIMIT (Pa)
Category I, atmospherically vented water heater	–2.0
Category I or II atmospherically vented boiler or furnace common vented with a Category I atmospherically
vented water heater
	–3.0
Category I or II atmospherically vented boiler or furnace, equipped with a flue damper, and common vented
with a Category I atmospherically vented water heater
	–5.0
Category I or II atmospherically vented boiler or furnace alone
Category I or II atmospherically vented, fan-assisted boiler or furnace common vented with a Category I
atmospherically vented water heater

Decorative vented, gas appliance
Power vented or induced-draft boiler or furnace alone, or fan-assisted water heater alone	–15.0
Category IV direct-vented appliances and sealed combustion appliances	–50.0

For SI: 6894.76 Pa = 1.0 psi.

TABLE T301.1(2)

ACCEPTABLE DRAFT TEST CORRECTION

OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE (°F)	MINIMUM DRAFT PRESSURE REQUIRED (Pa)
< 10	–2.5
10 – 90	(Outside Temperature ÷ 40) – 2.75
> 90	–0.5

For SI: 6894.76 Pa = 1.0 psi.

TABLE T301.1(3)

ACCEPTABLE DRAFT TEST CORRECTION

CARBON MONOXIDE LEVEL
(ppm)
	AND
OR
	SPILLAGE AND ACCEPTABLE DRAFT
TEST RESULTS
	RETROFIT ACTION
0 – 25	and	Passes	Proceed with work
25 < × ≤ 100	and	Passes	Recommend that CO problem be resolved
25 < × ≤ 100	and	Fails in worst case only	Recommend an appliance service call and repairs
to resolve the problem

100 < × ≤ 400	or	Fails under natural conditions	Stop! Work shall not proceed until appliance is
serviced and problem resolved

> 400	and	Passes	Stop! Work shall not proceed until appliance is
serviced and problem resolved

> 400	and	Fails under any condition	Emergency! Shut off fuel to appliance and call
for service immediately

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-v]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX V
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION AV101
GENERAL
AV101.1 Scope.

A board of appeals shall be established within the jurisdiction for the purpose of hearing applications for modification of the requirements of this code pursuant to appeals. The board shall be established and operated in accordance with this section, and shall be authorized to hear evidence from appellants and the code official pertaining to the application and intent of this code for the purpose of issuing orders pursuant to these provisions.

AV101.2 Application for appeal.

Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the building official within 20 days after the notice was served.

AV101.2.1 Limitation of authority.

The board shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code or interpret the administration of this code.

AV101.2.2 Stays of enforcement.

Appeals of notice and orders, other than Imminent Danger notices, shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the board.

AV101.3 Membership of board.

The board shall consist of five voting members appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction. Each member shall serve for [INSERT NUMBER OF YEARS] years or until a successor has been appointed. The board member’s terms shall be staggered at intervals, so as to provide continuity. The building official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall not vote on any matter before the board.

AV101.3.1 Qualifications.

The board shall consist of five individuals, who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

AV101.3.2 Alternate members.

The chief appointing authority is authorized to appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership, and shall be appointed for the same term or until a successor has been appointed.

AV101.3.3 Vacancies.

Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made.

AV101.3.4 Chairperson.

The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.

AV101.3.5 Secretary.

The chief appointing authority shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings which shall set forth the reasons for the board’s decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote.

AV101.3.6 Conflict of interest.

A member with any personal, professional or financial interest in a matter before the board shall declare such interest and refrain from participating in discussions, deliberations and voting on such matters.

AV101.3.7 Compensation of members.

Compensation of members shall be determined by law.

AV101.3.8 Removal from the board.

A member shall be removed from the board prior to the end of their terms only for cause. Any member with continued absence from regular meeting of the board may be removed at the discretion of the chief appointing authority.

AV101.4 Rules and procedures.

The board shall establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties consistent with the provisions of this code and applicable state law. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be presented.

AV101.5 Notice of meeting.

The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic intervals.

AV101.5.1 Open hearing.

All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

AV101.5.2 Quorum.

Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum.

AV101.5.3 Postponed hearing.

When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

AV101.6 Legal counsel.

The jurisdiction shall furnish legal counsel to the board to provide members with general legal advice concerning matters before them for consideration. Members shall be represented by legal counsel at the jurisdiction’s expense in all matters arising from service within the scope of their duties.

AV101.7 Board decision.

The board shall only modify or reverse the decision of the building official by a concurring vote of three or more members.

AV101.7.1 Resolution.

The decision of the board shall be by resolution. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official within 3 days and shall be open to the public for inspection. A certified copy shall be furnished to the appellant or the appellant’s representative and to the building official.

AV101.7.2 Administration.

The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.

AV101.8 Court review.

Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-w]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX W
3D-PRINTED BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION W101
GENERAL
W101.1 Scope.

Buildings, structures and building elements fabricated in whole or in part using 3D printed construction techniques shall be designed, constructed and inspected in accordance with the provisions contained in this Appendix and other applicable requirements in this code.

W101.2 Definitions.

The words and terms in Section AW102 shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

SECTION W102
DEFINITIONS
W102.1 Definitions.

The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

3D-PRINTED BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. A process for fabricating buildings, structures and building elements from 3D model data using automated equipment that deposits construction material in a layer-upon-layer fashion.

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING MATERIALS. Materials used by the 3D printer to produce the building structure or system components of the building.

FABRICATION PROCESS. Preparation of the job site and construction material, and the deposition, curing, finishing, insertion of components and other methods used to construct building elements such as walls, partitions, roof assemblies and structural components, and the means used to connect assemblies together.

PRODUCTION EQUIPMENT. The equipment, including the 3D printer, its settings, nozzles and other accessories used in the fabrication process.

SYSTEM COMPONENTS. Devices, equipment and appliances that are installed in the building elements as part of the wiring, plumbing, HVAC and other systems. These include, but are not limited to, electrical outlet boxes, conduit, wiring, piping, tubing and HVAC ducts, each of which is covered by a product standard or installation code requirement.

SECTION W103
BUILDING DESIGN
W103.1 Design organization.

3D-printed buildings, structures and building elements shall be designed by an organization certified in accordance with UL 3401 by an approved agency and approved by the building official in accordance with this section.

W103.2 Design approval.

The structural design, construction documents, and UL 3401 report of findings shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with Section 104.11 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION W104
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
W104.1 Construction.

3D-printed buildings, structures, and building elements shall be constructed in accordance with this section.

W104.2 Construction method.

The building construction method, consisting of the manufacturer’s production equipment and fabrication process shall be in accordance with the UL 3401 report of findings. The unique identifier of the construction method used shall match the identifier in the UL 3401 report of findings.

W104.3 Additive manufacturing materials.

Only the listed additive manufacturing materials identified in the UL 3401 report of findings shall be used to fabricate the building structure or system components. Containers of the additive manufacturing materials shall be labeled.

W104.4 Depositing of manufacturing materials.

Manufacturing materials shall only be deposited where ambient temperature and environmental conditions at the job site are within limits specified in the UL 3401 report of findings. The maximum number of layers permitted, specified curing time and any surface preparation or finishing shall be performed as specified in the UL 3401 report of findings.

SECTION W105
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS
W105.1 Initial inspection.

An initial inspection of the production equipment, including 3D printer, and the fabrication process shall be performed after the production equipment is located onsite and before building fabrication has begun. The inspection shall be conducted by representatives of the approved agency that evaluated the fabrication process for compliance with UL 3401. The inspection shall verify that the fabrications process, including production equipment, 3D-printing parameters and additive manufacturing materials are in accordance with the UL 3401 report of findings, and the proprietary information in the UL 3401 detailed report of findings.

Exception: Where approved by the building official, inspections of the production equipment, including 3D printer, and the fabrication process used in a single housing tract shall be conducted on the first building to be constructed, and on a selected number of subsequent buildings, where the same equipment, equipment operators and fabrication process are used on all buildings. The number of inspections to be performed shall be determined by the building official.

SECTION AW106
REFERENCED STANDARDS
AW106.1 General.

See Table AW106.1 for standards that are referenced in various sections of this appendix. Standards are listed by the standard identification with the effective date, the standard title and the section or sections of this appendix that reference the standard.

TABLE AW106.1

REFERENCED STANDARDS

STANDARD
ACRONYM
	STANDARD NAME	SECTIONS HEREIN
REFERENCED

UL 3401—19	Outline of Investigation for 3D Printed Building Construction	AW103.2, AW104.2, AW104.3, AW104.4, AW105.1

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-appendix-x]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPENDIX X
SOLAR-READY PROVISIONS—DETACHED ONE- AND
TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS, MULTIPLE SINGLE-
FAMILY DWELLINGS (TOWNHOUSES)

(The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.)

SECTION UX101
SCOPE
UX101.1 General.

These provisions shall be applicable for new construction where solar-ready provisions are required.

SECTION UX102
GENERAL DEFINITION

SOLAR-READY ZONE. A section or sections of the roof or building overhang designated and reserved for the future installation of a solar photovoltaic or solar thermal system.

SECTION UX103
SOLAR-READY ZONE
UX103.1 General.

New detached one- and two-family dwellings, and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) with not less than 600 square feet (55.74 m2) of roof area oriented between 110 degrees and 270 degrees of true north shall comply with sections U103.2 through U103.8.

Exceptions:

1.	New residential buildings with a permanently installed on-site renewable energy system.

2.	A building with a solar-ready zone that is shaded for more than 70 percent of daylight hours annually.

UX103.2 Construction document requirements for solar ready zone.

Construction documents shall indicate the solar-ready zone.

UX103.3 Solar-ready zone area.

The total solar-ready zone area shall be not less than 300 square feet (27.87 m2) exclusive of mandatory access or set back areas as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code. New multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) three stories or less in height above grade plane and with a total floor area less than or equal to 2,000 square feet (185.8 m2) per dwelling shall have a solarready zone area of not less than 150 square feet (13.94 m2). The solar-ready zone shall be composed of areas not less than 5 feet (1.52 m) in width and not less than 80 square feet (7.44 m2) exclusive of access or set back areas as required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

UX103.4 Obstructions.

Solar-ready zones shall be free from obstructions, including but not limited to vents, chimneys, and roof-mounted equipment.

UX103.5 Roof load documentation.

The structural design loads for roof dead load and roof live load shall be clearly indicated on the construction documents.

UX103.6 Interconnection pathway.

Construction documents shall indicate pathways for routing of conduit or plumbing from the solar-ready zone to the electrical service panel or service hot water system.

UX103.7 Electrical service reserved space.

The main electrical service panel shall have a reserved space to allow installation of a dual pole circuit breaker for future solar electric installation and shall be labeled “For Future Solar Electric.” The reserved space shall be positioned at the opposite (load) end from the input feeder location or main circuit location.

UX103.8 Construction documentation certificate.

A permanent certificate, indicating the solar-ready zone and other requirements of this section, shall be posted near the electrical distribution panel, water heater or other conspicuous location by the builder or registered design professional.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-1]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
PART 1—SCOPE AND APPLICATION
SECTIONR101
SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
R101.1 Title.

These provisions shall be known as the Florida Building Code, Residential, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”

R101.2 Scope.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Residential shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures not more than three stories above grade plane in height.

Exceptions:

1.	Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the requirements of Section 508.5 of the Florida Building Code, Building shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential. Fire suppression required by Section 419.5 of the Florida Building Code, Building where constructed under the Florida Building Code, Residential shall conform to Section P2904.

2.	Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Residential where equipped with a fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904.

3.	Existing buildings undergoing repair, alteration, additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Existing Building.

R101.2.1

The provisions of Chapter 1, Florida Building Code, Building, shall govern the administration and enforcement of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

R101.3 Intent.

Reserved.

SECTIONR102
APPLICABILITY
RESERVED
PART 2—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTIONR103
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
RESERVED
SECTIONR104
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL
RESERVED
SECTIONR105
PERMITS
RESERVED
SECTIONR106
CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
RESERVED
SECTIONR107
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
RESERVED
SECTIONR108
FEES
RESERVED
SECTIONR109
INSPECTIONS
RESERVED
SECTIONR110
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
RESERVED
SECTIONR111
SERVICE UTILITIES
RESERVED
SECTIONR112
BOARD OF APPEALS
RESERVED
SECTIONR113
VIOLATIONS
RESERVED
SECTIONR114
STOP WORK ORDER
RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-10]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 10
CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES
SECTION R1001
MASONRY FIREPLACES
R1001.1 General.

Masonry fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the applicable provisions of Chapters 3 and 4.

TABLE R1001.1

SUMMARY OF REQUIREMENTS FOR MASONRY FIREPLACES AND CHIMNEYS

ITEM	LETTERa	REQUIREMENTS
Hearth slab thickness	A	4″
Hearth extension
 (each side of opening)
	B	8″ fireplace opening < 6 square foot.
12″ fireplace opening ≥ 6 square foot.

Hearth extension
 (front of opening)
	C	16″ fireplace opening < 6 square foot.
20″ fireplace opening ≥ 6 square foot.

Hearth slab reinforcing	D	Reinforced to carry its own weight and all imposed loads.
Thickness of wall of firebox	E	10″ solid brick or 8″ where a firebrick lining is used.
Joints in firebrick 1/4″ maximum.

Distance from top of opening to throat	F	8″
Smoke chamber wall thickness
 Unlined walls
	G	6″
8″

Horizontal reinforcing	J	1/4″ ties at 18″ and two ties at each bend in vertical steel.
Bond beams	K	No specified requirements.
Fireplace lintel	L	Noncombustible material.
Chimney walls with flue lining	M	Solid masonry units or hollow masonry units grouted solid with
not less than 4-inch nominal thickness.

Distances between adjacent flues	—	See Section R1003.13.
Effective flue area (based on area of fireplace opening)	P	See Section R1003.15.
Clearances
 Combustible material
 Mantel and trim
 Above roof
	R	See Sections R1001.11 and R1003.18.
See Section R1001.11, Exception 4.
3′ at roofline and 2′ at 10′.
Footing
 Thickness
 Width	T	
12″ min.
6″ each side of fireplace wall.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

Note: This table provides a summary of major requirements for the construction of masonry chimneys and fireplaces. Letter references are to Figure R1001.1, which shows examples of typical construction. This table does not cover all requirements, nor does it cover all aspects of the indicated requirements. For the actual mandatory requirements of the code, see the indicated section of text.

a.	The letters refer to Figure R1001.1.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R1001.1

FIREPLACE AND CHIMNEY DETAILS

R1001.2 Footings and foundations.

Footings for masonry fireplaces and their chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry not less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend not less than 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the face of the fireplace or foundation wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural, undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.

R1001.2.1 Ash dump cleanout.

Cleanout openings located within foundation walls below fireboxes, when provided, shall be equipped with ferrous metal or masonry doors and frames constructed to remain tightly closed except when in use. Cleanouts shall be located to allow access and so that ash removal will not create a hazard to combustible materials.

R1001.3 Seismic reinforcing.

Reserved.

R1001.4 Seismic anchorage.

Reserved.

R1001.5 Firebox walls.

Masonry fireboxes shall be constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. Where a lining of firebrick not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick or other approved lining is provided, the minimum thickness of back and sidewalls shall each be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. The width of joints between firebricks shall not be greater than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Where a lining is not provided, the total minimum thickness of back and side walls shall be 10 inches (254 mm) of solid masonry. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C27 or C1261 and shall be laid with medium duty refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199.

R1001.5.1 Steel fireplace units.

Installation of steel fireplace units with solid masonry to form a masonry fireplace is permitted when installed either in accordance with the requirements of their listing or the requirements of this section. Steel fireplace units incorporating a steel firebox lining shall be constructed with steel not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick, and an air-circulating chamber that is ducted to the interior of the building. The firebox lining shall be encased with solid masonry to provide a total thickness at the back and sides of not less than 8 inches (203 mm), of which not less than 4 inches (102 mm) shall be of solid masonry or concrete. Circulating air ducts used with steel fireplace units shall be constructed of metal or masonry.

R1001.6 Firebox dimensions.

The firebox of a concrete or masonry fireplace shall have a minimum depth of 20 inches (508 mm). The throat shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the fireplace opening. The throat opening shall not be less than 4 inches (102 mm) deep. The cross-sectional area of the passageway above the firebox, including the throat, damper and smoke chamber, shall not be less than the cross-sectional area of the flue.

Exception: Rumford fireplaces shall be permitted provided that the depth of the fireplace is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and not less than one-third of the width of the fireplace opening, that the throat is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the lintel and is not less than 1/20 the cross-sectional area of the fireplace opening.

R1001.7 Lintel and throat.

Masonry over a fireplace opening shall be supported by a lintel of noncombustible material. The minimum required bearing length on each end of the fireplace opening shall be 4 inches (102 mm). The fireplace throat or damper shall be located not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the lintel.

R1001.7.1 Damper.

Masonry fireplaces shall be equipped with a ferrous metal damper located not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the fireplace opening. Dampers shall be installed in the fireplace or the chimney venting the fireplace, and shall be operable from the room containing the fireplace.

R1001.8 Smoke chamber.

Smoke chamber walls shall be constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete. The total minimum thickness of front, back and side walls shall be 8 inches (203 mm) of solid masonry. The inside surface shall be parged smooth with refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199. Where a lining of firebrick not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick, or a lining of vitrified clay not less than 5/8 inch (16 mm) thick, is provided, the total minimum thickness of front, back and side walls shall be 6 inches (152 mm) of solid masonry, including the lining. Firebrick shall conform to ASTM C1261 and shall be laid with medium duty refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199. Vitrified clay linings shall conform to ASTM C315.

R1001.8.1 Smoke chamber dimensions.

The inside height of the smoke chamber from the fireplace throat to the beginning of the flue shall not be greater than the inside width of the fireplace opening. The inside surface of the smoke chamber shall not be inclined more than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from vertical where prefabricated smoke chamber linings are used or where the smoke chamber walls are rolled or sloped rather than corbeled. Where the inside surface of the smoke chamber is formed by corbeled masonry, the walls shall not be corbeled more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical.

R1001.9 Hearth and hearth extension.

Masonry fireplace hearths and hearth extensions shall be constructed of concrete or masonry, supported by noncombustible materials, and reinforced to carry their own weight and all imposed loads. Combustible material shall not remain against the underside of hearths and hearth extensions after construction.

R1001.9.1 Hearth thickness.

The minimum thickness of fireplace hearths shall be 4 inches (102 mm).

R1001.9.2 Hearth extension thickness.

The minimum thickness of hearth extensions shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

Exception: Where the bottom of the firebox opening is raised not less than 8 inches (203 mm) above the top of the hearth extension, a hearth extension of not less than 3/8-inch-thick (10 mm) brick, concrete, stone, tile or other approved noncombustible material is permitted.

R1001.10 Hearth extension dimensions.

Hearth extensions shall extend not less than 16 inches (406 mm) in front of and not less than 8 inches (203 mm) beyond each side of the fireplace opening. Where the fireplace opening is 6 square feet (0.6 m2) or larger, the hearth extension shall extend not less than 20 inches (508 mm) in front of and not less than 12 inches (305 mm) beyond each side of the fireplace opening.

R1001.11 Fireplace clearance.

Wood beams, joists, studs and other combustible material shall have a clearance of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) from the front faces and sides of masonry fireplaces and not less than 4 inches (102 mm) from the back faces of masonry fireplaces. The airspace shall not be filled, except to provide fireblocking in accordance with Section R1001.12.

Exceptions:

1.	Masonry fireplaces listed and labeled for use in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 127 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions are permitted to have combustible material in contact with their exterior surfaces.

2.	Where masonry fireplaces are part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete walls less than 12 inches (306 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.

3.	Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing materials such as wood siding, flooring and gypsum board shall be permitted to abut the masonry fireplace sidewalls and hearth extension in accordance with Figure R1001.11, provided such combustible trim or sheathing is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest firebox lining.

4.	Exposed combustible mantels or trim may be placed directly on the masonry fireplace front surrounding the fireplace opening providing such combustible materials are not placed within 6 inches (152 mm) of a fireplace opening. Combustible material within 12 inches (306 mm) of the fireplace opening shall not project more than 1/8 inch (3 mm) for each 1-inch (25 mm) distance from such an opening.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R1001.11

CLEARANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLES

R1001.12 Fireplace fireblocking.

Fireplace fireblocking shall comply with the provisions of Section R302.11.

R1001.13 Fireplace accessories.

Listed and labeled fireplace accessories shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions. Fireplace accessories shall comply with UL 907.

SECTION R1002
MASONRY HEATERS
R1002.1 Definition.

A masonry heater is a heating appliance constructed of concrete or solid masonry, hereinafter referred to as masonry, that is designed to absorb and store heat from a solid-fuel fire built in the firebox by routing the exhaust gases through internal heat exchange channels in which the flow path downstream of the firebox includes flow in a horizontal or downward direction before entering the chimney and that delivers heat by radiation from the masonry surface of the heater.

R1002.2 Installation.

Masonry heaters shall be installed in accordance with this section and comply with one of the following:

1.	Masonry heaters shall comply with the requirements of ASTM E1602.

2.	Masonry heaters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1482 or CEN 15250 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1002.3 Footings and foundation.

The firebox floor of a masonry heater shall be a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) of noncombustible material and be supported on a noncombustible footing and foundation in accordance with Section R1003.2.

R1002.4 Seismic reinforcing.

Reserved.

R1002.5 Masonry heater clearance.

Combustible materials shall not be placed within 36 inches (914 mm) of the outside surface of a masonry heater in accordance with NFPA 211 Section 8-7 (clearances for solid-fuel-burning appliances), and the required space between the heater and combustible material shall be fully vented to permit the free flow of air around all heater surfaces.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the masonry heater wall is not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick of solid masonry and the wall of the heat exchange channels is not less than 5 inches (127 mm) thick of solid masonry, combustible materials shall not be placed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the outside surface of a masonry heater. A clearance of not less than 8 inches (203 mm) shall be provided between the gas-tight capping slab of the heater and a combustible ceiling.

2.	Masonry heaters listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1482 or CEN 15250 shall be installed in accordance with the listing specifications and the manufacturer’s written instructions.

SECTION R1003
MASONRY CHIMNEYS
R1003.1 Definition.

A masonry chimney is a chimney constructed of solid masonry units, hollow masonry units grouted solid, stone or concrete, hereinafter referred to as masonry. Masonry chimneys shall be constructed, anchored, supported and reinforced as required in this chapter.

R1003.2 Footings and foundations.

Footings for masonry chimneys shall be constructed of concrete or solid masonry not less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick and shall extend not less than 6 inches (152 mm) beyond the face of the foundation or support wall on all sides. Footings shall be founded on natural undisturbed earth or engineered fill below frost depth. In areas not subjected to freezing, footings shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below finished grade.

R1003.3 Seismic reinforcing.

Reserved.

R1003.4 Seismic anchorage.

Reserved.

R1003.5 Corbeling.

Masonry chimneys shall not be corbeled more than one-half of the chimney’s wall thickness from a wall or foundation, nor shall a chimney be corbeled from a wall or foundation that is less than 12 inches (305 mm) thick unless it projects equally on each side of the wall, except that on the second story of a two-story dwelling, corbeling of chimneys on the exterior of the enclosing walls may equal the wall thickness. The projection of a single course shall not exceed one-half the unit height or one-third of the unit bed depth, whichever is less.

R1003.6 Changes in dimension.

The chimney wall or chimney flue lining shall not change in size or shape within 6 inches (152 mm) above or below where the chimney passes through floor components, ceiling components or roof components.

R1003.7 Offsets.

Where a masonry chimney is constructed with a fireclay flue liner surrounded by one wythe of masonry, the maximum offset shall be such that the centerline of the flue above the offset does not extend beyond the center of the chimney wall below the offset. Where the chimney offset is supported by masonry below the offset in an approved manner, the maximum offset limitations shall not apply. Each individual corbeled masonry course of the offset shall not exceed the projection limitations specified in Section R1003.5.

R1003.8 Additional load.

Chimneys shall not support loads other than their own weight unless they are designed and constructed to support the additional load. Construction of masonry chimneys as part of the masonry walls or reinforced concrete walls of the building shall be permitted.

R1003.9 Termination.

Chimneys shall extend not less than 2 feet (610 mm) higher than any portion of a building within 10 feet (3048 mm), but shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the highest point where the chimney passes through the roof.

R1003.9.1 Chimney caps.

Masonry chimneys shall have a concrete, metal or stone cap, a drip edge and a caulked bond break around any flue liners in accordance with ASTM C1283. The concrete, metal or stone cap shall be sloped to shed water.

R1003.9.2 Spark arrestors.

Where a spark arrestor is installed on a masonry chimney, the spark arrestor shall meet all of the following requirements:

1.	The net free area of the arrestor shall be not less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney flue it serves.

2.	The arrestor screen shall have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 19-gage galvanized steel or 24-gage stainless steel.

3.	Openings shall not permit the passage of spheres having a diameter greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) nor block the passage of spheres having a diameter less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

4.	The spark arrestor shall be located with access for cleaning and the screen or chimney cap shall be removable to allow for cleaning of the chimney flue.

R1003.9.3 Rain caps.

Where a masonry or metal rain cap is installed on a masonry chimney, the net free area under the cap shall be not less than four times the net free area of the outlet of the chimney flue it serves.

R1003.10 Wall thickness.

Masonry chimney walls shall be constructed of solid masonry units or hollow masonry units grouted solid with not less than a 4-inch (102 mm) nominal thickness.

R1003.10.1 Masonry veneer chimneys.

Where masonry is used to veneer a frame chimney, through-flashing and weep holes shall be installed as required by Section R703.

R1003.11 Flue lining (material).

Masonry chimneys shall be lined. The lining material shall be appropriate for the type of appliance connected, in accordance with the terms of the appliance listing and manufacturer’s instructions.

R1003.11.1 Residential-type appliances (general).

Flue lining systems shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Clay flue lining complying with the requirements of ASTM C315.

2.	Listed and labeled chimney lining systems complying with UL 1777.

3.	Factory-built chimneys or chimney units listed for installation within masonry chimneys.

4.	Other approved materials that will resist corrosion, erosion, softening or cracking from flue gases and condensate at temperatures up to 1,800°F (982°C).

R1003.11.2 Flue linings for specific appliances.

Flue linings other than these covered in Section R1003.11.1, intended for use with specific types of appliances, shall comply with Sections R1003.11.3 through R1003.11.6.

R1003.11.3 Gas appliances.

Flue lining systems for gas appliances shall be in accordance with Chapter 24.

R1003.11.4 Pellet fuel-burning appliances.

Flue lining and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with pellet fuel-burning appliances shall be limited to the following:

1.	Flue lining systems complying with Section R1003.11.1.

2.	Pellet vents listed for installation within masonry chimneys (see Section R1003.11.6 for marking).

R1003.11.5 Oil-fired appliances approved for use with Type L vent.

Flue lining and vent systems for use in masonry chimneys with oil-fired appliances approved for use with Type L vent shall be limited to the following:

1.	Flue lining systems complying with Section R1003.11.1.

2.	Listed chimney liners complying with UL 641 (see Section R1003.11.6 for marking).

R1003.11.6 Notice of usage.

When a flue is relined with a material not complying with Section R1003.11.1, the chimney shall be plainly and permanently identified by a label attached to a wall, ceiling or other conspicuous location adjacent to where the connector enters the chimney. The label shall include the following message or equivalent language:

THIS CHIMNEY FLUE IS FOR USE ONLY WITH [TYPE OR CATEGORY OF APPLIANCE] APPLIANCES THAT BURN [TYPE OF FUEL]. DO NOT CONNECT OTHER TYPES OF APPLIANCES.

R1003.12 Clay flue lining (installation).

Clay flue liners shall be installed in accordance with ASTM C1283 and extend from a point not less than 8 inches (203 mm) below the lowest inlet or, in the case of fireplaces, from the top of the smoke chamber to a point above the enclosing walls. The lining shall be carried up vertically, with a maximum slope not greater than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from the vertical.

Clay flue liners shall be laid in medium-duty water insoluble refractory mortar conforming to ASTM C199 with tight mortar joints left smooth on the inside and installed to maintain an airspace or insulation not to exceed the thickness of the flue liner separating the flue liners from the interior face of the chimney masonry walls. Flue liners shall be supported on all sides. Only enough mortar shall be placed to make the joint and hold the liners in position.

R1003.12.1 Listed materials.

Listed materials used as flue linings shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listings and manufacturer’s instructions.

R1003.12.2 Space around lining.

The space surrounding a chimney lining system or vent installed within a masonry chimney shall not be used to vent any other appliance.

Exception: This shall not prevent the installation of a separate flue lining in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1003.13 Multiple flues.

Where two or more flues are located in the same chimney, masonry wythes shall be built between adjacent flue linings. The masonry wythes shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) thick and bonded into the walls of the chimney.

Exception: Where venting only one appliance, two flues shall be permitted to adjoin each other in the same chimney with only the flue lining separation between them. The joints of the adjacent flue linings shall be staggered not less than 4 inches (102 mm).

R1003.14 Flue area (appliance).

Chimney flues shall not be smaller in area than that of the area of the connector from the appliance [see Tables R1003.14(1) and R1003.14(2)]. The sizing of a chimney flue to which multiple appliance venting systems are connected shall be in accordance with Section M1805.3.

TABLE R1003.14(1)

NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF ROUND FLUE SIZESa

FLUE SIZE, INSIDE DIAMETER
(inches)
	CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA
(square inches)

6	28
7	38
8	50
10	78
103/4	90
12	113
15	176
18	254

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

a.	Flue sizes are based on ASTM C315.

TABLE R1003.14(2)

NET CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA OF SQUARE AND RECTANGULAR FLUE SIZES

FLUE SIZE, OUTSIDE NOMINAL
DIMENSIONS (inches)
	CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA
(square inches)

4.5 × 8.5	23
4.5 × 13	34
8 × 8	42
8.5 × 8.5	49
8 × 12	67
8.5 × 13	76
12 × 12	102
8.5 × 18	101
13 × 13	127
12 × 16	131
13 × 18	173
16 × 16	181
16 × 20	222
18 × 18	233
20 × 20	298
20 × 24	335
24 × 24	431

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

R1003.15 Flue area (masonry fireplace).

Flue sizing for chimneys serving fireplaces shall be in accordance with Section R1003.15.1 or R1003.15.2.

R1003.15.1 Option 1.

Round chimney flues shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of not less than 1/12 of the fireplace opening. Square chimney flues shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio less than 2 to 1 shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of 1/10 of the fireplace opening. Rectangular chimney flues with an aspect ratio of 2 to 1 or more shall have a minimum net cross-sectional area of 1/8 of the fireplace opening. Cross-sectional areas of clay flue linings are shown in Tables R1003.14(1) and R1003.14(2) or as provided by the manufacturer or as measured in the field.

R1003.15.2 Option 2.

The minimum net cross-sectional area of the chimney flue shall be determined in accordance with Figure R1003.15.2. A flue size providing not less than the equivalent net cross-sectional area shall be used. Cross-sectional areas of clay flue linings are shown in Tables R1003.14(1) and R1003.14(2) or as provided by the manufacturer or as measured in the field. The height of the chimney shall be measured from the firebox floor to the top of the chimney flue.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2.

FIGURE R1003.15.2

FLUE SIZES FOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS

R1003.16 Inlet.

Inlets to masonry chimneys shall enter from the side. Inlets shall have a thimble of fireclay, rigid refractory material or metal that will prevent the connector from pulling out of the inlet or from extending beyond the wall of the liner.

R1003.17 Masonry chimney cleanout openings.

Cleanout openings shall be provided within 6 inches (152 mm) of the base of each flue within every masonry chimney. The upper edge of the cleanout shall be located not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the lowest chimney inlet opening. The height of the opening shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm). The cleanout shall be provided with a noncombustible cover.

Exception: Chimney flues serving masonry fireplaces where cleaning is possible through the fireplace opening.

R1003.18 Chimney clearances.

Any portion of a masonry chimney located in the interior of the building or within the exterior wall of the building shall have a minimum airspace clearance to combustibles of 2 inches (51 mm). Chimneys located entirely outside the exterior walls of the building, including chimneys that pass through the soffit or cornice, shall have a minimum airspace clearance of 1 inch (25 mm). The airspace shall not be filled, except to provide fire blocking in accordance with Section R1003.19.

Exceptions:

1.	Masonry chimneys equipped with a chimney lining system listed and labeled for use in chimneys in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 1777 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions are permitted to have combustible material in contact with their exterior surfaces.

2.	Where masonry chimneys are constructed as part of masonry or concrete walls, combustible materials shall not be in contact with the masonry or concrete wall less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining.

3.	Exposed combustible trim and the edges of sheathing materials, such as wood siding and flooring, shall be permitted to abut the masonry chimney side walls, in accordance with Figure R1003.18, provided such combustible trim or sheathing is not less than 8 inches (203 mm) from the inside surface of the nearest flue lining.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R1003.18

CLEARANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLES

R1003.19 Chimney fireblocking.

Spaces between chimneys and floors and ceilings through which chimneys pass shall be fireblocked with noncombustible material securely fastened in place. The fireblocking of spaces between chimneys and wood joists, beams or headers shall be self-supporting or be placed on strips of metal or metal lath laid across the spaces between combustible material and the chimney.

R1003.20 Chimney crickets.

Chimneys shall be provided with crickets where the dimension parallel to the ridgeline is greater than 30 inches (762 mm) and does not intersect the ridgeline. The intersection of the cricket and the chimney shall be flashed and counterflashed in the same manner as normal roof-chimney intersections. Crickets shall be constructed in compliance with Figure R1003.20 and Table R1003.20.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R1003.20

CHIMNEY CRICKET

TABLE R1003.20

CRICKET DIMENSIONS

ROOF SLOPE	H
12 - 12	1/2 of W
8 - 12	1/3 of W
6 - 12	1/4 of W
4 - 12	1/6 of W
3 - 12	1/8 of W
SECTION R1004
FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES
R1004.1 General.

Factory-built fireplaces shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing. Factory-built fireplaces shall be tested in accordance with UL 127.

R1004.2 Hearth extensions.

Hearth extensions of approved factory-built fireplaces shall be installed in accordance with the listing of the fireplace. The hearth extension shall be readily distinguishable from the surrounding floor area. Listed and labeled hearth extensions shall comply with UL 1618.

R1004.3 Decorative shrouds.

Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of chimneys for factory-built fireplaces except where the shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific factory-built fireplace system and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1004.4 Unvented gas log heaters.

An unvented gas log heater shall not be installed in a factory-built fireplace unless the fireplace system has been specifically tested, listed and labeled for such use in accordance with UL 127.

R1004.5 Gasketed fireplace doors.

A gasketed fireplace door shall not be installed on a factory-built fireplace except where the fireplace system has been specifically tested, listed and labeled for such use in accordance with UL 127.

SECTION R1005
FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEYS
R1005.1 Listing.

Factory-built chimneys shall be listed and labeled and shall be installed and terminated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1005.2 Decorative shrouds.

Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of factory-built chimneys except where the shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific factory-built chimney system and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1005.3 Solid-fuel appliances.

Factory-built chimneys installed in dwelling units with solid-fuel-burning appliances shall comply with the Type HT requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked “Type HT and “Residential Type and Building Heating Appliance Chimney.”

Exception: Chimneys for use with open combustion chamber fireplaces shall comply with the requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked “Residential Type and Building Heating Appliance Chimney.”

Chimneys for use with open combustion chamber appliances installed in buildings other than dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of UL 103 and shall be marked “Building Heating Appliance Chimney” or “Residential Type and Building Heating Appliance Chimney.”

R1005.4 Factory-built fireplaces.

Chimneys for use with factory-built fireplaces shall comply with the requirements of UL 127.

R1005.5 Support.

Where factory-built chimneys are supported by structural members, such as joists and rafters, those members shall be designed to support the additional load.

R1005.6 Medium-heat appliances.

Factory-built chimneys for medium-heat appliances producing flue gases having a temperature above 1,000°F (538°C), measured at the entrance to the chimney, shall comply with UL 959.

R1005.7 Factory-built chimney offsets.

Where a factory-built chimney assembly incorporates offsets, no part of the chimney shall be at an angle of more than 30 degrees (0.52 rad) from vertical at any point in the assembly and the chimney assembly shall not include more than four elbows.

R1005.8 Insulation shield.

Where factory-built chimneys pass through insulated assemblies, an insulation shield constructed of steel having a minimum thickness of 0.0187 inch (0.4712 mm) (No. 26 gage) shall be installed to provide clearance between the chimney and the insulation material.

The clearance shall not be less than the clearance to combustibles specified by the chimney manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where chimneys pass through attic space, the shield shall terminate not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the insulation materials and shall be secured in place to prevent displacement. Insulation shields provided as part of a listed chimney system shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

SECTION R1006
EXTERIOR AIR SUPPLY
R1006.1 Exterior air.

Factory-built or masonry fireplaces covered in this chapter shall be equipped with an exterior air supply to ensure proper fuel combustion unless the room is mechanically ventilated and controlled so that the indoor pressure is neutral or positive.

R1006.1.1 Factory-built fireplaces.

Exterior combustion air ducts for factory-built fireplaces shall be a listed component of the fireplace and shall be installed in accordance with the fireplace manufacturer’s instructions.

R1006.1.2 Masonry fireplaces.

Listed combustion air ducts for masonry fireplaces shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

R1006.2 Exterior air intake.

The exterior air intake shall be capable of supplying all combustion air from the exterior of the dwelling or from spaces within the dwelling ventilated with outdoor air such as nonmechanically ventilated crawl or attic spaces. The exterior air intake shall not be located within the garage or basement of the dwelling. The exterior air intake, for other than listed factory-built fireplaces, shall not be located at an elevation higher than the firebox. The exterior air intake shall be covered with a corrosion-resistant screen of 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) mesh.

R1006.3 Clearance.

Unlisted combustion air ducts shall be installed with a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) clearance to combustibles for all parts of the duct within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the duct outlet.

R1006.4 Passageway.

The combustion air passageway shall be not less than 6 square inches (3870 mm2) and not more than 55 square inches (0.035 m2), except that combustion air systems for listed fireplaces shall be constructed in accordance with the fireplace manufacturer’s instructions.

R1006.5 Outlet.

The exterior air outlet shall be located in the back or side of the firebox chamber or shall be located outside of the firebox, at the level of the hearth and not greater than 24 inches (610 mm) from the firebox opening. The outlet shall be closable and designed to prevent burning material from dropping into concealed combustible spaces.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-11]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 11 [RE]
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
SECTION N1101
GENERAL
N1101.1 Energy efficiency.

The provisions of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation, shall govern the energy efficiency of residential construction.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-12]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 12
MECHANICAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION M1201
GENERAL
M1201.1 Scope.

The provisions of Chapters 12 through 24 shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and used to control environmental conditions within buildings. These chapters shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically addressed in this code.

M1201.2 Application.

In addition to the general administration requirements of Chapter 1, the administrative provisions of this chapter shall also apply to the mechanical requirements of Chapters 13 through 24.

SECTION M1202
EXISTING MECHANICAL SYSTEMS
M1202.1 Additions, alterations or repairs.

Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to a mechanical system shall conform to the requirements for a new mechanical system without requiring the existing mechanical system to comply with all of the requirements of this code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing mechanical system to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations or repairs to existing mechanical systems shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is not hazardous, and is approved.

M1202.2 Existing installations.

Except as otherwise provided for in this code, a provision in this code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued use and maintenance of, an existing mechanical system lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code.

M1202.3 Maintenance.

Mechanical systems, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe and sanitary condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by this code shall be maintained in compliance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of the mechanical systems. To determine compliance with this provision, the building official shall have the authority to require a mechanical system to be reinspected.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-13]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 13
GENERAL MECHANICAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
SECTION M1301
GENERAL
M1301.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation of mechanical systems not specifically covered in other chapters applicable to mechanical systems. Installations of mechanical appliances, equipment and systems not addressed by this code shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical and the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas Code.

M1301.1.1 Flood-resistant installation.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), mechanical appliances, equipment and systems shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

M1301.2 Identification.

Each length of pipe and tubing and each pipe fitting utilized in a mechanical system shall bear the identification of the manufacturer.

M1301.3 Installation of materials.

Materials shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards under which the materials are accepted and approved. In the absence of such installation procedures, the manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed. Where the requirements of referenced standards or manufacturer’s instructions do not conform to minimum provisions of this code, the provisions of this code shall apply.

M1301.4 Plastic pipe, fittings and components.

Plastic pipe, fittings and components shall be third-party certified as conforming to NSF 14.

M1301.5 Third-party testing and certification.

Piping, tubing and fittings shall comply with the applicable referenced standards, specifications and performance criteria of this code and shall be identified in accordance with Section M1301.2. Piping, tubing and fittings shall either be tested by an approved third-party testing agency or certified by an approved third-party certification agency.

SECTION M1302
APPROVAL
M1302.1 Listed and labeled.

Appliances regulated by this code shall be listed and labeled for the application in which they are installed and used, unless otherwise approved in accordance with Section R104.11.

SECTION M1303
LABELING OF APPLIANCES
M1303.1 Label information.

A permanent factory-applied nameplate(s) shall be affixed to appliances on which shall appear, in legible lettering, the manufacturer’s name or trademark, the model number, a serial number and the seal or mark of the testing agency. A label also shall include the following:

1.	Electrical appliances. Electrical rating in volts, amperes and motor phase; identification of individual electrical components in volts, amperes or watts and motor phase; and in Btu/h (W) output and required clearances.

2.	Absorption units. Hourly rating in Btu/h (W), minimum hourly rating for units having step or automatic modulating controls, type of fuel, type of refrigerant, cooling capacity in Btu/h (W) and required clearances.

3.	Fuel-burning units. Hourly rating in Btu/h (W), type of fuel approved for use with the appliance and required clearances.

4.	Electric comfort-heating appliances. The electric rating in volts, amperes and phase; Btu/h (W) output rating; individual marking for each electrical component in amperes or watts, volts and phase; and required clearances from combustibles.

5.	Maintenance instructions. Required regular maintenance actions and title or publication number for the operation and maintenance manual for that particular model and type of product.

SECTION M1304
TYPE OF FUEL
M1304.1 Fuel types.

Fuel-fired appliances shall be designed for use with the type of fuel to which they will be connected and the altitude at which they are installed. Appliances that comprise parts of the building mechanical system shall not be converted for the use of a different fuel, except where approved and converted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The fuel input rate shall not be increased or decreased beyond the limit rating for the altitude at which the appliance is installed.

SECTION M1305
APPLIANCE ACCESS
M1305.1 Appliance access for inspection service, repair and replacement.

Appliances shall be located to allow for access for inspection, service, repair and replacement without removing permanent construction, other appliances, or any other piping or ducts not connected to the appliance being inspected, serviced, repaired or replaced. A level working space not less than 30 inches deep and 30 inches wide (762 mm by 762 mm) shall be provided in front of the control side to service an appliance.

M1305.1.1 Furnaces and air handlers.

Furnaces and air handlers within compartments or alcoves shall have a minimum working space clearance of 3 inches (76 mm) along the sides, back and top with a total width of the enclosing space being not less than 12 inches (305 mm) wider than the furnace or air handler. Furnaces having a firebox open to the atmosphere shall have not less than a 6-inch (152 mm) working space along the front combustion chamber side. Combustion air openings at the rear or side of the compartment shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.

Exception: This section shall not apply to replacement appliances installed in existing compartments and alcoves where the working space clearances are in accordance with the equipment or appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions.

M1305.1.2 Appliances in rooms.

Appliances installed in a compartment, alcove, basement or similar space shall be accessed by an opening or door and an unobstructed passageway measuring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance in the space, provided there is a level service space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and the height of the appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm), at the front or service side of the appliance with the door open.

M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics.

Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and a clear and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) long measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring in accordance with Chapter 5 not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present along all sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be not less than of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance.

Exceptions:

1.	The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening.

2.	Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway shall be not more than 50 feet (15 250 mm) long.

M1305.1.3.1 Electrical requirements.

A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be installed at or near the appliance location in accordance with Section E3401.1. Exposed lamps shall be protected from damage by location or lamp guards.

M1305.1.4 Appliances under floors.

Underfloor spaces containing appliances shall be provided with an unobstructed passageway large enough to remove the largest appliance, but not less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide, nor more than 20 feet (6096 mm) long measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the appliance. If the depth of the passageway or the service space exceeds 12 inches (305 mm) below the adjoining grade, the walls of the passageway shall be lined with concrete or masonry extending 4 inches (102 mm) above the adjoining grade in accordance with Chapter 4. The rough-framed access opening dimensions shall be not less than 22 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to remove the largest appliance.

Exceptions:

1.	The passageway is not required where the level service space is present when the access is open, and the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening.

2.	Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet high (1929 mm) and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway shall not be limited in length.

M1305.1.4.1 Ground clearance.

Equipment and appliances supported from the ground shall be level and firmly supported on a concrete slab or other approved material extending not less than 3 inches (76 mm) above the adjoining ground. Such support shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Appliances suspended from the floor shall have a clearance of not less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the ground.

M1305.1.4.2 Excavations.

Excavations for appliance installations shall extend to a depth of 6 inches (152 mm) below the appliance and 12 inches (305 mm) on all sides, except that the control side shall have a clearance of 30 inches (762 mm).

M1305.1.4.3 Electrical requirements.

A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be installed at or near the appliance location in accordance with Section E3401.1. Exposed lamps shall be protected from damage by location or lamp guards.

SECTION M1306
CLEARANCES FROM
COMBUSTIBLE CONSTRUCTION
M1306.1 Appliance clearance.

Appliances shall be installed with the clearances from unprotected combustible materials as indicated on the appliance label and in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Note: “A” equals the required clearance with no protection. “B” equals the reduced clearance permitted in accordance with Table M1306.2. The protection applied to the construction using combustible material shall extend far enough in each direction to make “C” equal to “A.”

FIGURE M1306.1

REDUCED CLEARANCE DIAGRAM

M1306.2 Clearance reduction.

The reduction of required clearances to combustible assemblies or combustible materials shall be based on Section M1306.2.1 or Section M1306.2.2.

TABLE M1306.2

REDUCTION OF CLEARANCES WITH SPECIFIED FORMS OF PROTECTIONa, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l

TYPE OF PROTECTION APPLIED TO
AND COVERING ALL SURFACES OF
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL WITHIN THE
DISTANCE SPECIFIED AS THE
REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITH NO
PROTECTION (See Figures M1306.1 and
M1306.2)	WHERE THE REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITHOUT PROTECTION FROM APPLIANCE,
VENT CONNECTOR, OR SINGLE WALL METAL PIPE IS:

36 inches	18 inches	12 inches	9 inches	6 inches
Allowable clearances with specified protection (Inches)b
Use column 1 for clearances above an appliance or horizontal connector.
Use column 2 for clearances from an appliance, vertical connector and single-wall metal pipe.

Above
column 1
	Sides and
rear
column 2	Above
column 1
	Sides and
rear
column 2	Above
column 1
	Sides and
rear
column 2
	Above
column 1
	Sides and
rear
column 2	Above
column 1
	Sides and
rear
column 2
31/2-inch-thick masonry wall
without ventilated air space
	—	24	—	12	—	9	—	6	—	5
1/2-inch insulation board over 1-inch
glass fiber or mineral wool batts
	24	18	12	9	9	6	6	5	4	3
Galvanized sheet steel having a
minimum thickness of
0.0236-inch (No. 24 gage) over
1-inch glass fiber or mineral
wool batts reinforced with
wire or rear face with a ventilated
air space	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
31/2-inch-thick masonry wall with
ventilated air space
	—	12	—	6	—	6	—	6	—	6
Galvanized sheet steel having a
minimum thickness of
0.0236-inch (No. 24 gage) with
a ventilated air space 1-inch off
the combustible assembly	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	2
1/2-inch-thick insulation board with
ventilated air space
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
Galvanized sheet steel having a
minimum thickness of
0.0236-inch (No. 24 gage) with
ventilated air space over 24 gage
sheet steel with a ventilated space	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
1-inch glass fiber or mineral wool
batts sandwiched between two
sheets of galvanized sheet steel
having a minimum thickness of
0.0236-inch (No. 24 gage) with a
ventilated air space
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.019 kg/m3, °C = [(°F)-32/1.8], 1 Btu/(h × ft2 × °F/in.) = 0.001442299 (W/cm2 × °C/cm).

a.	Reduction of clearances from combustible materials shall not interfere with combustion air, draft hood clearance and relief, and accessibility of servicing.

b.	Clearances shall be measured from the surface of the heat producing appliance or equipment to the outer surface of the combustible material or combustible assembly.

c.	Spacers and ties shall be of noncombustible material. Spacers and ties shall not be used directly opposite appliance or connector.

d.	Where all clearance reduction systems use a ventilated air space, adequate provision for air circulation shall be provided as described. (See Figures M1306.1 and M1306.2.)

e.	There shall be not less than 1 inch between clearance reduction systems and combustible walls and ceilings for reduction systems using ventilated air space.

f.	If a wall protector is mounted on a single flat wall away from corners, adequate air circulation shall be permitted to be provided by leaving only the bottom and top edges or only the side and top edges open with not less than a 1-inch air gap.

g.	Mineral wool and glass fiber batts (blanket or board) shall have a minimum density of 8 pounds per cubic foot and a minimum melting point of 1,500°F.

h.	Insulation material used as part of a clearance reduction system shall have a thermal conductivity of 1.0 Btu inch per square foot per hour °F or less. Insulation board shall be formed of noncombustible material.

i.	There shall be not less than 1 inch between the appliance and the protector. The clearance between the appliance and the combustible surface shall not be reduced below that allowed in this table.

j.	All clearances and thicknesses are minimum; larger clearances and thicknesses are acceptable.

k.	Listed single-wall connectors shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with the terms of their listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

l.	For limitations on clearance reduction for solid-fuel-burning appliances see Section M1306.2.3.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE M1306.2

WALL PROTECTOR CLEARANCE REDUCTION SYSTEM

M1306.2.1 Labeled assemblies.

The allowable clearance shall be based on an approved reduced clearance protective assembly that is listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1618.

M1306.2.2 Reduction table.

Reduction of clearances shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions and Table M1306.2. Forms of protection with ventilated air space shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Not less than 1-inch (25 mm) air space shall be provided between the protection and combustible wall surface.

2.	Air circulation shall be provided by having edges of the wall protection open not less than 1 inch (25 mm).

3.	If the wall protection is mounted on a single flat wall away from corners, air circulation shall be provided by having the bottom and top edges, or the side and top edges not less than 1 inch (25 mm).

4.	Wall protection covering two walls in a corner shall be open at the bottom and top edges not less than 1 inch (25 mm).

M1306.2.3 Solid-fuel appliances.

Table M1306.2 shall not be used to reduce the clearance required for solid-fuel appliances listed for installation with minimum clearances of 12 inches (305 mm) or less. For appliances listed for installation with minimum clearances greater than 12 inches (305 mm), Table M1306.2 shall not be used to reduce the clearance to less than 12 inches (305 mm).

SECTION M1307
APPLIANCE INSTALLATION
M1307.1 General.

Installation of appliances shall conform to the conditions of their listing and label and the manufacturer’s instructions. The manufacturer’s operating and installation instructions shall remain attached to the appliance.

M1307.2 Anchorage of appliances.

Appliances designed to be fixed in position shall be fastened or anchored in an approved manner.

M1307.3 Elevation of ignition source.

Appliances having an ignition source shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the garage.

Exception: Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed as flammable-vapor-ignition resistant.

M1307.3.1 Protection from impact.

Appliances shall not be installed in a location subject to vehicle damage except where protected by approved barriers.

M1307.4 Hydrogen generating and refueling operations.

Ventilation shall be required in accordance with Section M1307.4.1, M1307.4.2 or M1307.4.3 in private garages that contain hydrogen-generating appliances or refueling systems. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage.

M1307.4.1 Natural ventilation.

Indoor locations intended for hydrogen-generating or refueling operations shall be limited to a maximum floor area of 850 square feet (79 m2) and shall communicate with the outdoors in accordance with Sections M1307.4.1.1 and M1307.4.1.2. The maximum rated output capacity of hydrogen-generating appliances shall not exceed 4 standard cubic feet per minute (1.9 L/s) of hydrogen for each 250 square feet (23 m2) of floor area in such spaces. The minimum cross-sectional dimension of air openings shall be 3 inches (76 mm). Where ducts are used, they shall be of the same cross-sectional area as the free area of the openings to which they connect. In those locations, equipment and appliances having an ignition source shall be located so that the source of ignition is not within 12 inches (305 mm) of the ceiling.

M1307.4.1.1 Two openings.

Two permanent openings shall be constructed within the garage. The upper opening shall be located entirely within 12 inches (305 mm) of the ceiling of the garage. The lower opening shall be located entirely within 12 inches (305 mm) of the floor of the garage. Both openings shall be constructed in the same exterior wall. The openings shall communicate directly with the outdoors and shall have a minimum free area of 1/2 square foot per 1,000 cubic feet (1.7 m2/1000 m3) of garage volume.

M1307.4.1.2 Louvers and grilles.

In calculating free area required by Section M1307.4.1, the required size of openings shall be based on the net free area of each opening. If the free area through a design of louver or grille is known, it shall be used in calculating the size opening required to provide the free area specified. If the design and free area are not known, it shall be assumed that wood louvers will have a 25-percent free area and metal louvers and grilles will have a 75-percent free area. Louvers and grilles shall be fixed in the open position.

M1307.4.2 Mechanical ventilation.

Indoor locations intended for hydrogen-generating or refueling operations shall be ventilated in accordance with Section 502.16 of the Florida Building Code, Mechanical Code. In these locations, equipment and appliances having an ignition source shall be located so that the source of ignition is below the mechanical ventilation outlet(s).

M1307.4.3 Specially engineered installations.

As an alternative to the provisions of Sections M1307.4.1 and M1307.4.2, the necessary supply of air for ventilation and dilution of flammable gases shall be provided by an approved engineered system.

M1307.5 Electrical appliances.

Electrical appliances shall be installed in accordance with Chapters 14, 15, 19, 20 and 34 of this code.

M1307.6 Plumbing connections.

Potable water and drainage system connections to equipment and appliances regulated by this code shall be in accordance with Chapters 29 and 30.

M1307.7 Prohibited support.

Gypsum board shall not be used as a support base under an appliance.

SECTION M1308
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS INSTALLATION
M1308.1 Drilling and notching.

Wood-framed structural members shall be drilled, notched or altered in accordance with the provisions of Sections R502.2, R602.3 and R802.7. Holes in load-bearing members of cold-formed steel lightframe construction shall be permitted only in accordance with Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1. In accordance with the provisions of Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1, cutting and notching of flanges and lips of load-bearing members of cold-formed steel light frame construction shall not be permitted. Structural insulated panels (SIPs) shall be drilled and notched or altered in accordance with the provisions of Section R610.7.

M1308.2 Protection against physical damage.

Where piping will be concealed within light-frame construction assemblies, the piping shall be protected against penetration by fasteners in accordance with Sections M1308.2.1 through M1308.2.3.

Exception: Cast iron piping and galvanized steel piping shall not be required to be protected.

M1308.2.1 Piping through bored holes or notches.

Where piping is installed through holes or notches in framing members and is located less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached, the pipe shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width of the pipe and the framing member and that extend 2 inches (51 mm) to each side of the framing member. Where the framing member that the piping passes through is a bottom plate, bottom track, top plate or top track, the shield plates shall cover the framing member and extend 2 inches (51 mm) above the bottom framing member and 2 inches (51 mm) below the top framing member.

M1308.2.2 Piping in other locations.

Where piping is located within a framing member and is less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached, the piping shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width and length of the piping. Where piping is located outside of a framing member and is located less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the nearest edge of the face of the framing member to which the membrane will be attached, the piping shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width and length of the piping.

M1308.2.3 Shield plates.

Shield plates shall be of steel material having a thickness of not less than 0.0575 inch (1.463 mm) (No. 16 gage).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-14]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 14
HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT AND APPLIANCES
SECTION M1401
GENERAL
M1401.1 Installation.

Heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements of this code. Air-handling units installed in attics shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation Section R403.3.6.

M1401.2 Access.

Heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be located with respect to building construction and other equipment and appliances to permit maintenance, servicing and replacement. Clearances shall be maintained to permit cleaning of heating and cooling surfaces; replacement of filters, blowers, motors, controls and vent connections; lubrication of moving parts; and adjustments.

Exception: Access shall not be required for ducts, piping, or other components approved for concealment.

M1401.3 Equipment and appliance sizing.

Heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be sized in accordance with ACCA Manual S or other approved sizing methodologies based on building loads calculated in accordance with ACCA Manual J or other approved heating and cooling calculation methodologies.

Exception: Heating and cooling equipment and appliance sizing shall not be limited to the capacities determined in accordance with Manual S where either of the following conditions applies:

1.	The specified equipment or appliance utilizes multistage technology or variable refrigerant flow technology and the loads calculated in accordance with the approved heating and cooling calculation methodology are within the range of the manufacturer’s published capacities for that equipment or appliance.

2.	The specified equipment or appliance manufacturer’s published capacities cannot satisfy both the total and sensible heat gains calculated in accordance with the approved heating and cooling calculation methodology and the next larger standard size unit is specified.

M1401.4 Exterior installations.

Equipment and appliances installed outdoors shall be listed and labeled for outdoor installation. Supports and foundations shall prevent excessive vibration, settlement or movement of the equipment. Supports and foundations shall be in accordance with Section M1305.1.4.1.

M1401.5 Flood hazard.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

SECTION M1402
CENTRAL FURNACES
M1402.1 General.

Oil-fired central furnaces shall conform to ANSI/UL 727. Electric furnaces shall conform to UL 1995.

M1402.2 Clearances.

Clearances shall be provided in accordance with the listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

M1402.3 Combustion air.

Combustion air shall be supplied in accordance with Chapter 17. Combustion air openings shall be unobstructed for a distance of not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in front of the openings.

SECTION M1403
HEAT PUMP EQUIPMENT
M1403.1 Heat pumps.

Electric heat pumps shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1995 or UL/CSA/ANCE 60335-2-40.

SECTION M1404
REFRIGERATION COOLING EQUIPMENT
M1404.1 Compliance.

Refrigeration cooling equipment shall comply with Section M1411.

SECTION M1405
BASEBOARD CONVECTORS
M1405.1 General.

Electric baseboard convectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and Chapter 34 of this code. Electric baseboard heaters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1042.

SECTION M1406
RADIANT HEATING SYSTEMS
M1406.1 General.

Electric radiant heating systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and Chapter 34 of this code and shall be listed for the application.

M1406.2 Clearances.

Clearances for radiant heating panels or elements to any wiring, outlet boxes and junction boxes used for installing electrical devices or mounting luminaires shall comply with Chapter 34 of this code.

M1406.3 Installation of radiant panels.

Radiant panels installed on wood framing shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Heating panels shall be installed parallel to framing members and secured to the surface of framing members or mounted between framing members.

2.	Mechanical fasteners shall penetrate only the unheated portions provided for this purpose. Panels shall not be fastened at any point closer than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) to an element. Other methods of attachment of the panels shall be in accordance with the panel manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	Unless listed and labeled for field cutting, heating panels shall be installed as complete units.

M1406.4 Installation in concrete or masonry.

Radiant heating systems installed in concrete or masonry shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Radiant heating systems shall be identified as being suitable for the installation, and shall be secured in place as specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2.	Radiant heating panels or radiant heating panel sets shall not be installed where they bridge expansion joints unless protected from expansion and contraction.

M1406.5 Finish surfaces.

Finish materials installed over radiant heating panels or systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Surfaces shall be secured so that nails or other fastenings do not pierce the radiant heating elements.

SECTION M1407
DUCT HEATERS
M1407.1 General.

Electric duct heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and Chapter 34 of this code. Electric duct heaters shall comply with UL 1996.

M1407.2 Installation.

Electric duct heaters shall be installed so that they will not create a fire hazard. Class 1 ducts, duct coverings and linings shall be interrupted at each heater to provide the clearances specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Such interruptions are not required for duct heaters listed and labeled for zero clearance to combustible materials. Insulation installed in the immediate area of each heater shall be classified for the maximum temperature produced on the duct surface.

M1407.3 Installation with heat pumps and air conditioners.

Duct heaters located within 4 feet (1219 mm) of a heat pump or air conditioner shall be listed and labeled for such installations. The heat pump or air conditioner shall additionally be listed and labeled for such duct heater installations.

M1407.4 Access.

Duct heaters shall be located to allow access for servicing, and clearance shall be maintained to permit adjustment, servicing and replacement of controls and heating elements.

M1407.5 Fan interlock.

The fan circuit shall be provided with an interlock to prevent heater operation when the fan is not operating.

SECTION M1408
VENTED FLOOR FURNACES
M1408.1 General.

Oil-fired vented floor furnaces shall comply with UL 729 and shall be installed in accordance with their listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements of this code.

M1408.2 Clearances.

Vented floor furnaces shall be installed in accordance with their listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1408.3 Location.

Location of floor furnaces shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Floor registers of floor furnaces shall be installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm) from a wall.

2.	Wall registers of floor furnaces shall be installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the adjoining wall at inside corners.

3.	The furnace register shall be located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) from doors in any position, draperies or similar combustible objects.

4.	The furnace register shall be located not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) below any projecting combustible materials.

5.	The floor furnace burner assembly shall not project into an occupied under-floor area.

6.	The floor furnace shall not be installed in concrete floor construction built on grade.

7.	The floor furnace shall not be installed where a door can swing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the grille opening.

M1408.4 Access.

An opening in the foundation not less than 18 inches by 24 inches (457 mm by 610 mm), or a trap door not less than 22 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm) shall be provided for access to a floor furnace. The opening and passageway shall be large enough to allow replacement of any part of the equipment.

M1408.5 Installation.

Floor furnace installations shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Thermostats controlling floor furnaces shall be located in the room in which the register of the floor furnace is located.

2.	Floor furnaces shall be supported independently of the furnace floor register.

3.	Floor furnaces shall be installed not closer than 6 inches (152 mm) to the ground. The minimum clearance shall be 2 inches (51 mm), where the lower 6 inches (152 mm) of the furnace is sealed to prevent water entry.

4.	Where excavation is required for a floor furnace installation, the excavation shall extend 30 inches (762 mm) beyond the control side of the floor furnace and 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the remaining sides. Excavations shall slope outward from the perimeter of the base of the excavation to the surrounding grade at an angle not exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from horizontal.

5.	Floor furnaces shall not be supported from the ground.

SECTION M1409
VENTED WALL FURNACES
M1409.1 General.

Oil-fired vented wall furnaces shall comply with UL 730 and shall be installed in accordance with their listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements of this code.

M1409.2 Location.

The location of vented wall furnaces shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Vented wall furnaces shall be located where they will not cause a fire hazard to walls, floors, combustible furnishings or doors. Vented wall furnaces installed between bathrooms and adjoining rooms shall not circulate air from bathrooms to other parts of the building.

2.	Vented wall furnaces shall not be located where a door can swing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the furnace air inlet or outlet measured at right angles to the opening. Doorstops or door closers shall not be installed to obtain this clearance.

M1409.3 Installation.

Vented wall furnace installations shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Required wall thicknesses shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2.	Ducts shall not be attached to a wall furnace. Casing extensions or boots shall be installed only where listed as part of a listed and labeled appliance.

3.	A manual shut off valve shall be installed ahead of all controls.

M1409.4 Access.

Vented wall furnaces shall be provided with access for cleaning of heating surfaces; removal of burners; replacement of sections, motors, controls, filters and other working parts; and for adjustments and lubrication of parts requiring such attention. Panels, grilles and access doors that must be removed for normal servicing operations shall not be attached to the building construction.

SECTION M1410
VENTED ROOM HEATERS
M1410.1 General.

Vented room heaters shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E1509 for pellet-fuel burning, UL 896 for oil-fired or UL 1482 for solid fuel-fired and installed in accordance with their listing, the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the requirements of this code.

M1410.2 Floor mounting.

Room heaters shall be installed on noncombustible floors or approved assemblies constructed of noncombustible materials that extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) beyond the appliance on all sides.

Exceptions:

1.	Listed room heaters shall be installed on noncombustible floors, assemblies constructed of noncombustible materials or floor protectors listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1618. The materials and dimensions shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Room heaters listed for installation on combustible floors without floor protection shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION M1411
HEATING AND COOLING EQUIPMENT
M1411.1 Approved refrigerants.

Refrigerants used in direct refrigerating systems shall conform to the applicable provisions of ANSI/ASHRAE 34.

M1411.2 Refrigeration coils in warm-air furnaces.

Where a cooling coil is located in the supply plenum of a warm-air furnace, the furnace blower shall be rated at not less than 0.5-inch water column (124 Pa) static pressure unless the furnace is listed and labeled for use with a cooling coil. Cooling coils shall not be located upstream from heat exchangers unless listed and labeled for such use. Conversion of existing furnaces for use with cooling coils shall be permitted provided the furnace will operate within the temperature rise specified for the furnace.

M1411.3 Condensate disposal.

Condensate from cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of discharge of not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope). Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley or other areas where it would cause a nuisance.

M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems.

In addition to the requirements of Section M1411.3, a secondary drain or auxiliary drain pan shall be required for each cooling or evaporator coil where damage to any building components will occur as a result of overflow from the equipment drain pan or stoppage in the condensate drain piping. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of discharge of not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope). Drain piping shall be not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) nominal pipe size. One of the following methods shall be used:

1.	An auxiliary drain pan with a separate drain shall be installed under the coils on which condensation will occur. The auxiliary pan drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The pan shall have a minimum depth of 1.5 inches (38 mm), shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) larger than the unit or the coil dimensions in width and length and shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material. Galvanized sheet steel pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0236-inch (0.6010 mm) (No. 24 Gage). Nonmetallic pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0625 inch (1.6 mm).

2.	A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan installed with the equipment. This overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection.

3.	An auxiliary drain pan without a separate drain line shall be installed under the coils on which condensation will occur. This pan shall be equipped with a water level detection device conforming to UL 508 that will shut off the equipment served prior to overflow of the pan. The pan shall be equipped with a fitting to allow for drainage. The auxiliary drain pan shall be constructed in accordance with Item 1 of this section.

4.	A water level detection device conforming to UL 508 shall be installed that will shut off the equipment served in the event that the primary drain is blocked. The device shall be installed in the primary drain line, the overflow drain line or the equipment-supplied drain pan, located at a point higher than the primary drain line connection and below the overflow rim of such pan.

M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices.

On down-flow units and other coils that do not have secondary drain or provisions to install a secondary or auxiliary drain pan, a water-level monitoring device shall be installed inside the primary drain pan. This device shall shut off the equipment served in the event that the primary drain becomes restricted. Devices shall not be installed in the drain line.

M1411.3.1.2 Appliance, equipment and insulation in pans.

Where appliances, equipment or insulation are subject to water damage when auxiliary drain pans fill, that portion of the appliance, equipment and insulation shall be installed above the rim of the pan. Supports located inside of the pan to support the appliance or equipment shall be water resistant and approved.

M1411.3.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes.

Components of the condensate disposal system shall be ABS, cast iron, copper, cross-linked polyethylene, CPVC, galvanized steel, PE-RT, polyethylene, polypropylene or PVC pipe or tubing. Components shall be selected for the pressure and temperature rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 30. Condensate waste and drain line size shall be not less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) nominal diameter from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with an approved method.

M1411.3.3 Drain line maintenance.

Condensate drain lines shall be configured to permit the clearing of blockages and performance of maintenance without requiring the drain line to be cut.

M1411.3.4 Appliances, equipment and insulation in pans.

Where appliances, equipment or insulation are subject to water damage when auxiliary drain pans fill, those portions of the appliances, equipment and insulation shall be installed above the flood level rim of the pan. Supports located inside of the pan to support the appliance or equipment shall be water resistant and approved.

M1411.4 Condensate pumps.

Condensate pumps located in uninhabitable spaces, such as attics and crawl spaces, shall be connected to the appliance or equipment served such that when the pump fails, the appliance or equipment will be prevented from operating. Pumps shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1411.5 Auxiliary drain pan.

Category IV condensing appliances shall have an auxiliary drain pan where damage to any building component will occur as a result of stoppage in the condensate drainage system. These pans shall be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section M1411.3.

Exception: Fuel-fired appliances that automatically shut down operation in the event of a stoppage in the condensate drainage system.

M1411.6 Insulation of refrigerant piping.

Piping and fittings for refrigerant vapor (suction) lines shall be insulated with insulation having a thermal resistivity of not less than R-3 and having external surface permeance not exceeding 0.05 perm [2.87 ng/(s · m2 · Pa)] when tested in accordance with ASTM E96.

M1411.7 Location and protection of refrigerant piping.

Refrigerant piping installed within 11/2 inches (38 mm) of the underside of roof decks shall be protected from damage caused by nails and other fasteners.

M1411.8 Locking access port caps.

Refrigerant circuit access ports located outdoors shall be fitted with locking-type tamper-resistant caps or shall be otherwise secured to prevent unauthorized access.

Exception: No locking-type tamper-resistant caps are required if ports are located inside the condensing unit cabinet.

M1411.9 Support of refrigerant piping.

Refrigerant piping and tubing shall be securely fastened to a permanent support within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the condensing unit.

SECTION M1412
ABSORPTION COOLING EQUIPMENT
M1412.1 Approval of equipment.

Absorption systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorption equipment shall comply with UL 1995 or UL/CSA/ANCE 60335-2-40.

M1412.2 Condensate disposal.

Condensate from the cooling coil shall be disposed of as provided in Section M1411.3.

M1412.3 Insulation of piping.

Refrigerant piping, brine piping and fittings within a building shall be insulated to prevent condensation from forming on piping.

M1412.4 Pressure-relief protection.

Absorption systems shall be protected by a pressure-relief device. Discharge from the pressure-relief device shall be located where it will not create a hazard to persons or property.

SECTION M1413
EVAPORATIVE COOLING EQUIPMENT
M1413.1 General.

Evaporative cooling equipment and appliances shall comply with UL 1995 or UL/CSA/ANCE 60335-2-40 and shall be installed:

1.	In accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	On level platforms in accordance with Section M1305.1.4.1.

3.	So that openings in exterior walls are flashed in accordance with Section R703.4.

4.	So as to protect the potable water supply in accordance with Section P2902.

5.	So that air intake opening locations are in accordance with Section R303.5.1.

SECTION M1414
FIREPLACE STOVES
M1414.1 General.

Fireplace stoves shall be listed, labeled and installed in accordance with the terms of the listing. Fireplace stoves shall be tested in accordance with UL 737.

M1414.2 Hearth extensions.

Hearth extensions for fireplace stoves shall be installed in accordance with the listing of the fireplace stove. The supporting structure for a hearth extension for a fireplace stove shall be at the same level as the supporting structure for the fireplace unit. The hearth extension shall be readily distinguishable from the surrounding floor area.

SECTION M1415
MASONRY HEATERS
M1415.1 General.

Masonry heaters shall be constructed in accordance with Section R1002.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-15]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 15
EXHAUST SYSTEMS
SECTION M1501
GENERAL
M1501.1 Outdoor discharge.

The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged to the outdoors in accordance with Section M1506.3. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, soffit, ridge vent or crawl space.

Exception: Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans that discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics shall be permitted.

SECTION M1502
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
M1502.1 General.

Clothes dryers shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1502.2 Independent exhaust systems.

Dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall convey the moisture to the outdoors.

Exception: This section shall not apply to listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.

M1502.3 Duct termination.

Exhaust ducts shall terminate on the outside of the building. Exhaust duct terminations shall be in accordance with the dryer manufacturer’s installation instructions. If the manufacturer’s instructions do not specify a termination location, the exhaust duct shall terminate not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in any direction from openings into buildings, including openings in ventilated soffits. Exhaust duct terminations shall be equipped with a backdraft damper. Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination.

M1502.3.1 Exhaust termination outlet and passageway size.

The passageway of dryer exhaust duct terminals shall be undiminished in size and shall provide an open area of not less than 12.5 square inches (8065 mm2).

M1502.4 Dryer exhaust ducts.

Dryer exhaust ducts shall conform to the requirements of Sections M1502.4.1 through M1502.4.7.

M1502.4.1 Material and size.

Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth interior finish and be constructed of metal having a minimum thickness of 0.0157 inch (28 gauge). The duct shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in diameter.

Exception: Exhaust ducts may be 4 inches nominal in diameter Schedule 40 PVC when horizontally run beneath the slab.

M1502.4.2 Duct installation.

Exhaust ducts shall be supported at intervals not to exceed 12 feet (3658 mm) and shall be secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Exhaust duct joints shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling cavities, such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without deformation.

M1502.4.3 Transition duct.

Transition ducts used to connect the dryer to the exhaust duct system shall be a single length that is listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2158A. Transition ducts shall be not greater than 8 feet (2438 mm) in length. Transition ducts shall not be concealed within construction.

M1502.4.4 Dryer exhaust duct power ventilators.

Domestic dryer exhaust duct power ventilators shall conform to UL 705 for use in dryer exhaust duct systems. The dryer exhaust duct power ventilator shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1502.4.5 Duct length.

The maximum allowable exhaust duct length shall be determined by one of the methods specified in Sections M1502.4.5.1 through M1502.4.5.3.

M1502.4.5.1 Specified length.

The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be 35 feet (10 668 mm) from the connection to the transition duct from the dryer to the outlet terminal. Where fittings are used, the maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be reduced in accordance with Table M1502.4.5.1. The maximum length of the exhaust duct does not include the transition duct.

TABLE M1502.4.5.1

DRYER EXHAUST DUCT FITTING EQUIVALENT LENGTH

DRYER EXHAUST DUCT FITTING TYPE	EQUIVALENT LENGTH
4 inch radius mitered 45 degree elbow	2 feet 6 inches
4 inch radius mitered 90 degree elbow	5 feet
6 inch radius smooth 45 degree elbow	1 foot
6 inch radius smooth 90 degree elbow	1 foot 9 inches
8 inch radius smooth 45 degree elbow	1 foot
8 inch radius smooth 90 degree elbow	1 foot 7 inches
10 inch radius smooth 45 degree elbow	9 inches
10 inch radius smooth 90 degree elbow	1 foot 6 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

M1502.4.5.2 Manufacturer’s instructions.

The size and maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be determined by the dryer manufacturer’s installation instructions. The code official shall be provided with a copy of the installation instructions for the make and model of the dryer at the concealment inspection. In the absence of fitting equivalent length calculations from the clothes dryer manufacturer, Table M1502.4.5.1 shall be used.

M1502.4.5.3 Dryer exhaust duct power ventilator.

The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be determined in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for the dryer exhaust duct power ventilator.

M1502.4.6 Length identification.

Where the exhaust duct equivalent length exceeds 35 feet (10 668 mm), the equivalent length of the exhaust duct shall be identified on a permanent label or tag. The label or tag shall be located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the exhaust duct connection.

M1502.4.7 Exhaust duct required.

Where space for a clothes dryer is provided, an exhaust duct system shall be installed. Where the clothes dryer is not installed at the time of occupancy the exhaust duct shall be capped or plugged in the space in which it originates and identified and marked “future use.”

Exception: Where a listed condensing clothes dryer is installed prior to occupancy of the structure.

M1502.4.8 Booster fans prohibited.

Domestic booster fans shall not be installed in dryer exhaust systems.

M1502.5 Protection required.

Protective shield plates shall be placed where nails or screws from finish or other work are likely to penetrate the clothes dryer exhaust duct. Shield plates shall be placed on the finished face of framing members where there is less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) between the duct and the finished face of the framing member. Protective shield plates shall be constructed of steel, shall have a minimum thickness of 0.062-inch (1.6 mm) and shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above sole plates and below top plates.

SECTION M1503
RANGE HOODS
M1503.1 General.

Range hoods shall discharge to the outdoors through a duct. The duct serving the hood shall have a smooth interior surface, shall be air tight, shall be equipped with a back-draft damper and shall be independent of all other exhaust systems. Ducts serving range hoods shall not terminate in an attic or crawl space or areas inside the building.

Exception: Where installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and where mechanical or natural ventilation is otherwise provided, listed and labeled ductless range hoods shall not be required to discharge to the outdoors.

M1503.2 Duct material.

Ducts serving range hoods shall be constructed of galvanized steel, stainless steel or copper.

Exception: Ducts for domestic kitchen cooking appliances equipped with down-draft exhaust systems shall be permitted to be constructed of schedule 40 PVC pipe and fittings provided that the installation complies with all of the following:

1.	The duct is installed under a concrete slab poured on grade.

2.	The underfloor trench in which the duct is installed is completely backfilled with sand or gravel.

3.	The PVC duct extends not more than 1 inch (25 mm) above the indoor concrete floor surface.

4.	The PVC duct extends not more than 8 inches above grade outside of the building.

5.	The PVC ducts are solvent cemented.

M1503.3 Kitchen exhaust rates.

Where domestic kitchen cooking appliances are equipped with ducted range hoods or down-draft exhaust systems, the fans shall be sized in accordance with Section M1507.4.

M1503.4 Makeup air required.

Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be mechanically or naturally provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the exhaust air rate. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with not less than one damper. Each damper shall be a gravity damper or an electrically operated damper that automatically opens when the exhaust system operates. Dampers shall be located to allow access for inspection, service, repair and replacement without removing permanent construction or any other ducts not connected to the damper being inspected, serviced, repaired or replaced.

Exception: In a single-family dwelling, make-up air is not required for range hood exhaust systems capable of exhausting:

(a)	Four hundred cubic feet per minute or less; or

(b)	More than 400 cubic feet per minute but no more than 800 cubic feet per minute if there are no gravity vent appliances within the conditioned living space of the structure.

M1503.4.1 Location.

Kitchen exhaust makeup air shall be discharged into the same room in which the exhaust system is located or into rooms or duct systems that communicate through one or more permanent openings with the room in which such exhaust system is located. Such permanent openings shall have a net cross-sectional area not less than the required area of the makeup air supply openings.

SECTION M1504
INSTALLATION OF MICROWAVE OVENS
M1504.1 Installation of a microwave oven over a cooking appliance.

The installation of a listed and labeled cooking appliance or microwave oven over a listed and labeled cooking appliance shall conform to the terms of the upper appliance’s listing and label and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. The microwave oven shall conform to UL 923.

SECTION M1505
OVERHEAD EXHAUST HOODS
M1505.1 General.

Domestic open-top broiler units shall have a metal exhaust hood, having a minimum thickness of 0.0157-inch (0.3950 mm) (No. 28 gage) with 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) clearance between the hood and the underside of combustible material or cabinets. A clearance of not less than 24 inches (610 mm) shall be maintained between the cooking surface and the combustible material or cabinet. The hood shall be not less than the width of the broiler unit, extend over the entire unit, discharge to the outdoors and be equipped with a backdraft damper or other means to control infiltration/exfiltration when not in operation. Broiler units incorporating an integral exhaust system, and listed and labeled for use without an exhaust hood, need not have an exhaust hood.

SECTION M1506
EXHAUST DUCTS AND EXHAUST OPENINGS
M1506.1 Duct construction.

Where exhaust duct construction is not specified in this chapter, construction shall comply with Chapter 16.

M1506.2 Duct length.

The length of exhaust and supply ducts used with ventilating equipment shall not exceed the lengths determined in accordance with Table M1506.2.

Exception: Duct length shall not be limited where the duct system complies with the manufacturer’s design criteria or where the flow rate of the installed ventilating equipment is verified by the installer or approved third party using a flow hood, flow grid or other airflow measuring device.

TABLE M1506.2

DUCT LENGTH

DUCT TYPE	FLEX DUCT	SMOOTH-WALL DUCT
Fan airflow rating
(CFM @ 0.25 inch wca)
	50	80	100	125	150	200	250	300	50	80	100	125	150	200	250	300
Diameterb
(inches)
	Maximum lengthc, d, e
(feet)

3	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	5	X	X	X	X	X	X	X
4	56	4	X	X	X	X	X	X	114	31	10	X	X	X	X	X
5	NL	81	42	16	2	X	X	X	NL	152	91	51	28	4	X	X
6	NL	NL	158	91	55	18	1	X	NL	NL	NL	168	112	53	25	9
7	NL	NL	NL	NL	161	78	40	19	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	148	88	54
8 and above	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	189	111	69	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	NL	198	133

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Fan airflow rating shall be in acordance with ANSI/AMCA 210-ANSI/ASHRAE 51.

b.	For noncircular ducts, calculate the diameter as four times the cross-sectional area divided by the perimeter.

c.	This table assumes that elbows are not used. Fifteen feet of allowable duct length shall be deducted for each elbow installed in the duct run.

d.	NL = no limit on duct length of this size.

e.	X = not allowed. Any length of duct of this size with assumed turns and fittings will exceed the rated pressure drop.

M1506.3 Exhaust openings.

Air exhaust openings shall terminate not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from property lines; 3 feet (914 mm) from operable and nonoperable openings into the building and 10 feet (3048 mm) from mechanical air intakes except where the opening is located 3 feet (914 mm) above the air intake. Openings shall comply with Sections R303.5.2 and R303.6.

SECTION M1507
MECHANICAL VENTILATION
M1507.1 General.

Where local exhaust or whole-house mechanical ventilation is provided, the equipment shall be designed in accordance with this section.

M1507.2 Recirculation of air.

Exhaust air from bathrooms and toilet rooms shall not be recirculated within a residence or to another dwelling unit and shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors. Exhaust air from bathrooms and toilet rooms shall not discharge into an attic, crawl space or other areas inside the building.

M1507.3 Whole-house mechanical ventilation system.

Whole-house mechanical ventilation systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections M1507.3.1 through M1507.3.3.

M1507.3.1 System design.

The whole-house ventilation system shall consist of one or more supply or exhaust fans, or a combination of such, and associated ducts and controls. Local exhaust or supply fans are permitted to serve as such a system. Outdoor air ducts connected to the return side of an air handler shall be considered as providing supply ventilation.

M1507.3.2 System controls.

The whole-house mechanical ventilation system shall be provided with controls that enable manual override. Controls shall include text or a symbol indicating their function.

M1507.3.3 Mechanical ventilation rate.

The wholehouse mechanical ventilation system shall provide outdoor air at a continuous rate not less than that determined in accordance with Table M1507.3.3(1) or Equation 15-1.

(Equation 15-1)

Exceptions:

1.	The whole-house mechanical ventilation system is permitted to operate intermittently where the system has controls that enable operation for not less than 25 percent of each 4-hour segment and the ventilation rate prescribed in Table M1507.3.3(1) is multiplied by the factor determined in accordance with Table M1507.3.3(2).

2.	The minimum mechanical ventilation rate determined in accordance with Table M1507.3.3(1) or Equation 15-1 shall be reduced by 30%, provided that both of the following conditions apply:

2.1.	A ducted system supplies ventilation air directly to each bedroom and to one or more of the following rooms:

2.1.1.	Living room.

2.1.2.	Dining room.

2.1.3.	Kitchen.

2.2.	The whole-house ventilation system is a balanced ventilation system.

TABLE M1507.3.3(1)

CONTINUOUS WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM AIRFLOW RATE REQUIREMENTS

DWELLING UNIT
FLOOR AREA
(square feet)	NUMBER OF BEDROOMS
0 – 1	2 – 3	4 – 5	6 – 7	> 7
Airflow in CFM
< 1,500	30	45	60	75	90
1,501 – 3,000	45	60	75	90	105
3,001 – 4,500	60	75	90	105	120
4,501 – 6,000	75	90	105	120	135
6,001 – 7,500	90	105	120	135	150
> 7,500	105	120	135	150	165

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.0004719 m3/s.

TABLE M1507.3.3(2)

INTERMITTENT WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION RATE FACTORSa, b

RUN-TIME PERCENTAGE IN EACH 4-HOUR
SEGMENT
	25%	33%	50%	66%	75%	100%
Factora	4	3	2	1.5	1.3	1.0

a.	For ventilation system run time values between those given, the factors are permitted to be determined by interpolation.

b.	Extrapolation beyond the table is prohibited.

M1507.4 Local exhaust rates.

Local exhaust systems shall be designed to have the capacity to exhaust the minimum air flow rate determined in accordance with Table M1507.4.

TABLE M1507.4

MINIMUM REQUIRED LOCAL EXHAUST RATES FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS

AREA TO BE
EXHAUSTED
	EXHAUST RATES
Kitchens	100 cfm intermittent or 25 cfm continuous
Bathrooms-Toilet
Rooms
	Mechanical exhaust capacity of 50 cfm
intermittent or 20 cfm continuous

For SI: 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.0004719 m3/s.

a.	The listed exhaust rate for bathrooms-toilet rooms shall equal or exceedthe exhaust rate at a minimum static pressure of 0.25 inch wc.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-16]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 16
DUCT SYSTEMS
SECTION M1601
DUCT CONSTRUCTION
M1601.1 Duct design.

Duct systems serving heating, cooling and ventilation equipment shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section and ACCA Manual D, the appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions or other approved methods.

M1601.1.1 Above-ground duct systems.

Above-ground duct systems shall conform to the following:

1.	Equipment connected to duct systems shall be designed to limit discharge air temperature to not greater than 250°F (121°C).

2.	Factory-made ducts shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	Fibrous glass duct construction shall conform to the SMACNA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards or NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards.

4.	Field-fabricated and shop-fabricated metal and flexible duct constructions shall conform to the SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and Flexible except as allowed by Table M1601.1.1. Galvanized steel shall conform to ASTM A653.

5.	The use of gypsum products to construct return air ducts or plenums is permitted, provided that the air temperature does not exceed 125°F (52°C) and exposed surfaces are not subject to condensation.

6.	Duct systems shall be constructed of materials having a flame spread index of not greater than 200.

7.	Stud wall cavities and the spaces between solid floor joists to be used as air plenums shall comply with the following conditions:

7.1.	These cavities or spaces shall not be used as a plenum for supply air.

7.2.	These cavities or spaces shall not be part of a required fire-resistance-rated assembly.

7.3.	Stud wall cavities shall not convey air from more than one floor level.

7.4.	Stud wall cavities and joist-space plenums shall be isolated from adjacent concealed spaces by tight-fitting fireblocking in accordance with Section R302.11. Fireblocking materials used for isolation shall comply with Section R302.11.1.

7.5.	Stud wall cavities in the outside walls of building envelope assemblies shall not be utilized as air plenums.

TABLE M1601.1.1

DUCT CONSTRUCTION MINIMUM SHEET METAL THICKNESS FOR SINGLE DWELLING UNITSa

ROUND DUCT DIAMETER
(inches)
	STATIC PRESSURE
1/2 inch water gage	1 inch water gage
Thickness (inches)	Thickness (inches)
Galvanized	Aluminum	Galvanized	Aluminum
< 12	0.013	0.018	0.013	0.018
12 to 14	0.013	0.018	0.016	0.023
15 to 17	0.016	0.023	0.019	0.027
18	0.016	0.023	0.024	0.034
19 to 20	0.019	0.027	0.024	0.034

RECTANGULAR DUCT DIMENSION
(inches)
	STATIC PRESSURE
1/2 inch water gage	1 inch water gage
Thickness (inches)	Thickness (inches)
Galvanized	Aluminum	Galvanized	Aluminum
≤ 8	0.013	0.018	0.013	0.018
9 to 10	0.013	0.018	0.016	0.023
11 to 12	0.016	0.023	0.019	0.027
13 to 16	0.019	0.027	0.019	0.027
17 to 18	0.019	0.027	0.024	0.034
19 to 20	0.024	0.034	0.024	0.034

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 inch water gage = 249 Pa.

a.	Ductwork that exceeds 20 inches by dimension or exceeds a pressure of 1 inch water gage (250 Pa) shall be constructed in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and Flexible.

M1601.1.2 Underground duct systems.

Underground duct systems shall be constructed of approved concrete, clay, metal or plastic. The maximum duct temperature for plastic ducts shall not be greater than 150°F (66°C). Metal ducts shall be protected from corrosion in an approved manner or shall be completely encased in concrete not less than 2 inches (51 mm) thick. Nonmetallic ducts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Plastic pipe and fitting materials shall conform to cell classification 12454-B of ASTM D1248 or ASTM D1784 and external loading properties of ASTM D2412. Ducts shall slope to a point for drainage that has access. Where encased in concrete, ducts shall be sealed and secured prior to any concrete being poured. Metallic ducts having an approved protective coating and nonmetallic ducts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1601.2 Vibration isolators.

Vibration isolators installed between mechanical equipment and metal ducts shall be fabricated from approved materials and shall not exceed 10 inches (254 mm) in length.

M1601.3 Duct insulation materials.

Duct insulation materials shall conform to the following requirements:

1.	Duct coverings and linings, including adhesives where used, shall have a flame spread index not higher than 25, and a smoke-developed index not over 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, using the specimen preparation and mounting procedures of ASTM E2231.

Exception: Spray application of polyurethane foam to the exterior of ducts in attics and crawl spaces shall be permitted subject to all of the following:

1.	The flame spread index is not greater than 25 and the smoke-developed index is not greater than 450 at the specified installed thickness.

2.	The foam plastic is protected in accordance with the ignition barrier requirements of Sections R316.5.3 and R316.5.4.

3.	The foam plastic complies with the requirements of Section R316.

2.	Duct coverings and linings shall not flame, glow, smolder or smoke when tested in accordance with ASTM C411 at the temperature to which they are exposed in service. The test temperature shall not fall below 250°F (121°C). Coverings and linings shall be listed and labeled.

3.	External reflective duct insulation shall be legibly printed or identified at intervals not greater than 36 inches (914 mm) with the name of the manufacturer, the product R-value at the specified installed thickness and the flame spread and smoke-developed indices. The installed thickness of the external duct insulation shall include the enclosed air space(s). The product R-value for external reflective duct insulation shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C1668.

4.	External duct insulation and factory-insulated flexible ducts shall be legibly printed or identified at intervals not longer than 36 inches (914 mm) with the name of the manufacturer, the thermal resistance R-value at the specified installed thickness and the flame spread and smoke-developed indexes of the composite materials. Spray polyurethane foam manufacturers shall provide the same product information and properties, at the nominal installed thickness, to the customer in writing at the time of foam application. Nonreflective duct insulation product R-values shall be based on insulation only, excluding air films, vapor retarders or other duct components, and shall be based on tested C-values at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature at the installed thickness, in accordance with recognized industry procedures. The installed thickness of duct insulation used to determine its R-value shall be determined as follows:

4.1.	For duct board, duct liner and factory-made rigid ducts not normally subjected to compression, the nominal insulation thickness shall be used.

4.2.	For ductwrap, the installed thickness shall be assumed to be 75 percent (25-percent compression) of nominal thickness.

4.3.	For factory-made flexible air ducts, The installed thickness shall be determined by dividing the difference between the actual outside diameter and nominal inside diameter by two.

4.4.	For spray polyurethane foam, the aged R-value per inch measured in accordance with recognized industry standards shall be provided to the customer in writing at the time of foam application. In addition, the total R-value for the nominal application thickness shall be provided.

M1601.4 Installation.

Duct installation shall comply with Sections M1601.4.1 through M1601.4.10.

M1601.4.1 Joints, seams and connections.

Longitudinal and transverse joints, seams and connections in metallic and nonmetallic ducts shall be constructed as specified in SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards—Metal and Flexible and NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards. Joints, longitudinal and transverse seams, and connections in ductwork shall be securely fastened and sealed with welds, gaskets, mastics (adhesives), mastic-plus-embedded-fabric systems, liquid sealants or tapes. Tapes and mastics used to seal fibrous glass ductwork shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181A and shall be marked “181A-P” for pressure-sensitive tape, “181 A-M” for mastic or “181 A-H” for heat-sensitive tape.

Tapes and mastics used to seal metallic and flexible air ducts and flexible air connectors shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked “181 B-FX” for pressure-sensitive tape or “181 BM” for mastic. Duct connections to flanges of air distribution system equipment shall be sealed and mechanically fastened. Mechanical fasteners for use with flexible nonmetallic air ducts shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked 181B-C. Crimp joints for round metallic ducts shall have a contact lap of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) and shall be mechanically fastened by means of not less than three sheet-metal screws or rivets equally spaced around the joint.

Closure systems used to seal all ductwork shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions.

Exceptions:

1.	Spray polyurethane foam shall be permitted to be applied without additional joint seals.

2.	Where a duct connection is made that is partially without access, three screws or rivets shall be equally spaced on the exposed portion of the joint so as to prevent a hinge effect.

3.	For ducts having a static pressure classification of less than 2 inches of water column (500 Pa), additional closure systems shall not be required for continuously welded joints and seams and locking-type joints and seams of other than the snap-lock and button-lock types.

M1601.4.2 Duct lap.

Crimp joints for round and oval metal ducts shall be lapped not less than 1 inch (25 mm) and the male end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct in the direction of airflow.

M1601.4.3 Plastic duct joints.

Joints between plastic ducts and plastic fittings shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

M1601.4.4 Support.

Factory-made ducts listed in accordance with UL 181 shall be supported in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Field- and shop-fabricated fibrous glass ducts shall be supported in accordance with the SMACNA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards or the NAIMA Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards. Field- and shop-fabricated metal and flexible ducts shall be supported in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards— Metal and Flexible.

M1601.4.5 Fireblocking.

Duct installations shall be fire-blocked in accordance with Section R302.11.

M1601.4.6 Duct insulation.

Duct insulation shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	A vapor retarder having a maximum permeance of 0.05 perm [2.87 ng/(s · m2 · Pa)] in accordance with ASTM E96, or aluminum foil with a minimum thickness of 2 mils (0.05 mm), shall be installed on the exterior of insulation on cooling supply ducts that pass through unconditioned spaces conducive to condensation except where the insulation is spray polyurethane foam with a maximum water vapor permeance of 3 perm per inch [1722 ng/(s · m2 · Pa)] at the installed thickness.

2.	Exterior duct systems shall be protected against the elements.

3.	Duct coverings shall not penetrate a fireblocked wall or floor.

M1601.4.7 Factory-made air ducts.

Factory-made air ducts shall not be installed in or on the ground, in tile or metal pipe, or within masonry or concrete.

M1601.4.8 Duct separation.

Ducts shall be installed with not less than 4 inches (102 mm) separation from earth except where they meet the requirements of Section M1601.1.2.

M1601.4.9 Ducts located in garages.

Ducts in garages shall comply with the requirements of Section R302.5.2.

M1601.4.10 Flood hazard areas.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), duct systems shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

M1601.5 Under-floor plenums.

Under-floor plenums shall be prohibited in new structures. Modification or repairs to under-floor plenums in existing structures shall conform to the requirements of this section.

M1601.5.1 General.

The space shall be cleaned of loose combustible materials and scrap, and shall be tightly enclosed. The ground surface of the space shall be covered with a moisture barrier having a minimum thickness of 4 mils (0.1 mm). Plumbing waste cleanouts shall not be located within the space.

Exception: Plumbing waste cleanouts shall be permitted to be located in unvented crawl spaces that receive conditioned air in accordance with Section R408.3.

M1601.5.2 Materials.

The under-floor space, including the sidewall insulation, shall be formed by materials having flame spread index values not greater than 200 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

M1601.5.3 Furnace connections.

A duct shall extend from the furnace supply outlet to not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the combustible framing. This duct shall comply with the provisions of Section M1601.1. A noncombustible receptacle shall be installed below any floor opening into the plenum in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	The receptacle shall be securely suspended from the floor members and shall be not more than 18 inches (457 mm) below the floor opening.

2.	The area of the receptacle shall extend 3 inches (76 mm) beyond the opening on all sides.

3.	The perimeter of the receptacle shall have a vertical lip not less than 1 inch (25 mm) in height at the open sides.

M1601.5.4 Access.

Access to an under-floor plenum shall be provided through an opening in the floor with minimum dimensions of 18 inches by 24 inches (457 mm by 610 mm).

M1601.5.5 Furnace controls.

The furnace shall be equipped with an automatic control that will start the air-circulating fan when the air in the furnace bonnet reaches a temperature not higher than 150°F (66°C). The furnace shall additionally be equipped with an approved automatic control that limits the outlet air temperature to 200°F (93°C).

M1601.6 Independent garage HVAC systems.

Furnaces and air-handling systems that supply air to living spaces shall not supply air to or return air from a garage.

SECTION M1602
RETURN AIR
M1602.1 Outdoor air openings.

Outdoor intake openings shall be located in accordance with Section R303.5.1. Opening protection shall be in accordance with Section R303.6.

M1602.2 Return air openings.

Return air openings for heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems shall comply with all of the following:

1.	Openings shall not be located less than 10 feet (3048 mm) measured in any direction from an open combustion chamber or draft hood of another appliance located in the same room or space.

2.	The amount of return air taken from any room or space shall be not greater than the flow rate of supply air delivered to such room or space.

3.	Return and transfer openings shall be sized in accordance with the appliance or equipment manufacturers’ installation instructions, Manual D or the design of the registered design professional.

4.	Return air shall not be taken from a closet, bathroom, toilet room, kitchen, garage, mechanical room, boiler room, furnace room or unconditioned attic.

Exceptions:

1.	Taking return air from a kitchen is not prohibited where such return air openings serve the kitchen only, and are located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from the cooking appliances.

2.	Dedicated forced-air systems serving only the garage shall not be prohibited from obtaining return air from the garage.

3.	Dedicated independent dehumidification systems shall be allowed to take return air from spaces such as closets and bathrooms and discharge the air back into the spaces, provided that the air is filtered and dehumidified prior to the air being reintroduced back into the spaces.

4.	Taking return air from a closet is not prohibited where such return air taken from closets shall serve only the closet and may be taken from closets that have no dedicated supply duct. Where return air is taken from a closet smaller than 30 square feet (2.8 m2), the return air shall be no more than 30 cfm (15 l/s), shall serve only the closet and shall not require a dedicated supply duct. Where return air is taken from a closet smaller than 30 square feet (2.8 m2), the closet door shall be undercut a minimum of 1.5 inches (38 mm) or the closet shall include a louvered door or transfer grille with a minimum net free area of 30 square inches (194 cm2).

5.	Taking return air from an unconditioned crawl space shall not be accomplished through a direct connection to the return side of a forced-air furnace. Transfer openings in the crawl space enclosure shall not be prohibited.

6.	Return air from one dwelling unit shall not be discharged into another dwelling unit.

M1602.3 Balanced return air.

Restricted return air occurs in buildings when returns are located in central zones and closed interior doors impede air flow to the return grill or when ceiling spaces are used as return plenums and fire walls restrict air movement from one portion of the return plenum to another. Provisions shall be made in both residential and commercial buildings to avoid unbalanced air flows and pressure differentials caused by restricted return air. Pressure differentials across closed doors where returns are centrally located shall be limited to 0.01 inch w.c. (2.5 Pa) or less. Pressure differentials across fire walls in ceiling space plenums shall be limited to 0.01 inch w.c. (2.5 Pa) by providing air duct pathways or air transfer pathways from the high pressure zone to the low zone.

Exceptions:

1.	Transfer ducts may achieve this by increasing the return transfer 11/2 times the cross sectional area (square inches) of the supply duct entering the room or space it is serving and the door having at least an unrestricted 1-inch undercut to achieve proper return air balance.

2.	Transfer grilles shall use 50 square inches (of grille area) to 100 cfm (of supply air) for sizing throughthe-wall transfer grilles and using an unrestricted 1-inch undercutting of doors to achieve proper return air balance.

3.	Habitable rooms only shall be required to meet these requirements for proper balanced return air excluding bathrooms, closets, storage rooms and laundry rooms, except that all supply air into the master suite shall be included.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-17]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 17
COMBUSTION AIR
SECTION M1701
GENERAL
M1701.1 Scope.

Solid fuel-burning appliances shall be provided with combustion air in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions. Oil-fired appliances shall be provided with combustion air in accordance with NFPA 31. The methods of providing combustion air in this chapter do not apply to fireplaces, fireplace stoves and direct-vent appliances. The requirements for combustion and dilution air for gas-fired appliances shall be in accordance with Chapter 24.

M1701.2 Opening location.

In flood hazard areas as established in Table R301.2(1), combustion air openings shall be located at or above the elevation required in Section R322.2.1 or R322.3.2.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-18]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 18
CHIMNEYS AND VENTS
SECTION M1801
GENERAL
M1801.1 Venting required.

Fuel-burning appliances shall be vented to the outdoors in accordance with their listing and label and manufacturer’s installation instructions except appliances listed and labeled for unvented use. Venting systems shall consist of approved chimneys or vents, or venting assemblies that are integral parts of labeled appliances. Gas-fired appliances shall be vented in accordance with Chapter 24.

M1801.2 Draft requirements.

A venting system shall satisfy the draft requirements of the appliance in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions, and shall be constructed and installed to develop a positive flow to convey combustion products to the outside atmosphere.

M1801.3 Existing chimneys and vents.

Where an appliance is permanently disconnected from an existing chimney or vent, or where an appliance is connected to an existing chimney or vent during the process of a new installation, the chimney or vent shall comply with Sections M1801.3.1 through M1801.3.4.

M1801.3.1 Size.

The chimney or vent shall be resized as necessary to control flue gas condensation in the interior of the chimney or vent and to provide the appliance, or appliances served, with the required draft. For the venting of oil-fired appliances to masonry chimneys, the resizing shall be done in accordance with NFPA 31.

M1801.3.2 Flue passageways.

The flue gas passageway shall be free of obstructions and combustible deposits and shall be cleaned if previously used for venting a solid or liquid fuel-burning appliance or fireplace. The flue liner, chimney inner wall or vent inner wall shall be continuous and free of cracks, gaps, perforations, or other damage or deterioration that would allow the escape of combustion products, including gases, moisture and creosote.

M1801.3.3 Cleanout.

Masonry chimneys shall be provided with a cleanout opening complying with Section R1003.17.

M1801.3.4 Clearances.

Chimneys and vents shall have airspace clearance to combustibles in accordance with this code and the chimney or vent manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Exception: Masonry chimneys equipped with a chimney lining system tested and listed for installation in chimneys in contact with combustibles in accordance with UL 1777, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, shall not be required to have a clearance between combustible materials and exterior surfaces of the masonry chimney. Noncombustible firestopping shall be provided in accordance with this code.

M1801.4 Space around lining.

The space surrounding a flue lining system or other vent installed within a masonry chimney shall not be used to vent any other appliance. This shall not prevent the installation of a separate flue lining in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and this code.

M1801.5 Mechanical draft systems.

A mechanical draft system shall be used only with appliances listed and labeled for such use. Provisions shall be made to prevent the flow of fuel to the equipment when the draft system is not operating. Forced draft systems and portions of induced draft systems under positive pressure during operation shall be designed and installed to prevent leakage of flue gases into a building.

M1801.6 Direct-vent appliances.

Direct-vent appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1801.7 Support.

Venting systems shall be adequately supported for the weight of the material used.

M1801.8 Duct penetrations.

Chimneys, vents and vent connectors shall not extend into or through supply and return air ducts or plenums.

M1801.9 Fireblocking.

Vent and chimney installations shall be fireblocked in accordance with Section R302.11.

M1801.10 Unused openings.

Unused openings in any venting system shall be closed or capped.

M1801.11 Multiple-appliance venting systems.

Two or more listed and labeled appliances connected to a common natural draft venting system shall comply with the following requirements:

1.	Appliances that are connected to common venting systems shall be located on the same floor of the dwelling.

Exception: Engineered systems as provided for in Section G2427.

2.	Inlets to common venting systems shall be offset such that no portion of an inlet is opposite another inlet.

3.	Connectors serving appliances operating under a natural draft shall not be connected to any portion of a mechanical draft system operating under positive pressure.

M1801.12 Multiple solid fuel prohibited.

A solid fuel-burning appliance or fireplace shall not connect to a chimney passageway venting another appliance.

SECTION M1802
VENT COMPONENTS
M1802.1 Draft hoods.

Draft hoods shall be located in the same room or space as the combustion air openings for the appliances.

M1802.2 Vent dampers.

Vent dampers shall comply with Sections M1802.2.1 and M1802.2.2.

M1802.2.1 Manually operated.

Manually operated dampers shall not be installed except in connectors or chimneys serving solid fuel-burning appliances.

M1802.2.2 Automatically operated.

Automatically operated dampers shall conform to UL 17 and be installed in accordance with the terms of their listing and label. The installation shall prevent firing of the burner when the damper is not opened to a safe position.

M1802.3 Draft regulators.

Draft regulators shall be provided for oil-fired appliances that must be connected to a chimney. Draft regulators provided for solid fuel-burning appliances to reduce draft intensity shall be installed and set in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

M1802.3.1 Location.

Where required, draft regulators shall be installed in the same room or enclosure as the appliance so that a difference in pressure will not exist between the air at the regulator and the combustion air supply.

M1802.4 Blocked vent switch.

Oil-fired appliances shall be equipped with a device that will stop burner operation in the event that the venting system is obstructed. Such device shall have a manual reset and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION M1803
CHIMNEY AND VENT CONNECTORS
M1803.1 General.

Connectors shall be used to connect fuel-burning appliances to a vertical chimney or vent except where the chimney or vent is attached directly to the appliance.

M1803.2 Connectors for oil and solid fuel appliances.

Connectors for oil and solid fuel-burning appliances shall be constructed of factory-built chimney material, Type L vent material or single-wall metal pipe having resistance to corrosion and heat and thickness not less than that of galvanized steel as specified in Table M1803.2.

TABLE M1803.2

THICKNESS FOR SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE CONNECTORS

DIAMETER OF
CONNECTOR (inches)
	GALVANIZED SHEET
METAL GAGE
NUMBER	MINIMUM THICKNESS
(inch)

Less than 6	26	0.019
6 to 10	24	0.024
Over 10 through 16	22	0.029

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

M1803.3 Installation.

Vent and chimney connectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and within the space where the appliance is located. Appliances shall be located as close as practical to the vent or chimney. Connectors shall be as short and straight as possible and installed with a slope of not less than 1/4 inch (6 mm) rise per foot of run. Connectors shall be securely supported and joints shall be fastened with sheet metal screws or rivets. Devices that obstruct the flow of flue gases shall not be installed in a connector unless listed and labeled or approved for such installations.

M1803.3.1 Floor, ceiling and wall penetrations.

A chimney connector or vent connector shall not pass through any floor or ceiling. A chimney connector or vent connector shall not pass through a wall or partition unless the connector is listed and labeled for wall pass-through, or is routed through a device listed and labeled for wall pass-through and is installed in accordance with the conditions of its listing and label. Connectors for oil-fired appliances listed and labeled for Type L vents, passing through walls or partitions shall be in accordance with the following:

1.	Type L vent material for oil appliances shall be installed with not less than listed and labeled clearances to combustible material.

2.	Single-wall metal pipe shall be guarded by a ventilated metal thimble not less than 4 inches (102 mm) larger in diameter than the vent connector. A minimum 6 inches (152 mm) of clearance shall be maintained between the thimble and combustibles.

M1803.3.2 Length.

The horizontal run of an uninsulated connector to a natural draft chimney shall not exceed 75 percent of the height of the vertical portion of the chimney above the connector. The horizontal run of a listed connector to a natural draft chimney shall not exceed 100 percent of the height of the vertical portion of the chimney above the connector.

M1803.3.3 Size.

A connector shall not be smaller than the flue collar of the appliance.

Exception: Where installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

M1803.3.4 Clearance.

Connectors shall be installed with clearance to combustibles as set forth in Table M1803.3.4. Reduced clearances to combustible materials shall be in accordance with Table M1306.2 and Figure M1306.1.

TABLE M1803.3.4

CHIMNEY AND VENT CONNECTOR CLEARANCES TO COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALSa

TYPE OF CONNECTOR	MINIMUM
CLEARANCE
(inches)
Single-wall metal pipe connectors:	
 Oil and solid-fuel appliances	18
 Oil appliances listed for use with Type L vents	9
Type L vent piping connectors:	
 Oil and solid-fuel appliances	9
 Oil appliances listed for use with Type L vents	3b

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	These minimum clearances apply to unlisted single-wall chimney and vent connectors. Reduction of required clearances is permitted as in Table M1306.2.

b.	Where listed Type L vent piping is used, the clearance shall be in accordance with the vent listing.

M1803.3.5 Access.

The entire length of a connector shall allow access for inspection, cleaning and replacement.

M1803.4 Connection to fireplace flue.

Connection of appliances to chimney flues serving fireplaces shall comply with Sections M1803.4.1 through M1803.4.4.

M1803.4.1 Closure and accessibility.

A noncombustible seal shall be provided below the point of connection to prevent entry of room air into the flue. Means shall be provided for access to the flue for inspection and cleaning.

M1803.4.2 Connection to factory-built fireplace flue.

A different appliance shall not be connected to a flue serving a factory-built fireplace unless the appliance is specifically listed for such an installation. The connection shall be made in conformance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

M1803.4.3 Connection to masonry fireplace flue.

A connector shall extend from the appliance to the flue serving a masonry fireplace to convey the flue gases directly into the flue. The connector shall allow access or removal for inspection and cleaning of both the connector and the flue. Listed direct-connection devices shall be installed in accordance with their listing.

M1803.4.4 Size of flue.

The size of the fireplace flue shall be in accordance with Section M1805.3.1.

SECTION M1804
VENTS
M1804.1 Type of vent required.

Appliances shall be provided with a listed and labeled venting system as set forth in Table M1804.1.

TABLE M1804.1

VENT SELECTION CHART

VENT TYPES	APPLIANCE TYPES
Type L oil vents	Oil-burning appliances listed and labeled for
venting with Type L vents

Pellet vents	Pellet fuel-burning appliances listed and
labeled for use with pellet vents
M1804.2 Termination.

Vent termination shall comply with Sections M1804.2.1 through M1804.2.6.

M1804.2.1 Through the roof.

Vents passing through a roof shall extend through flashing and terminate in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation requirements.

M1804.2.2 Decorative shrouds.

Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of vents except where the shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific venting system and are installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1804.2.3 Natural draft appliances.

Vents for natural draft appliances shall terminate not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the highest connected appliance outlet, and natural draft gas vents serving wall furnaces shall terminate at an elevation not less than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the bottom of the furnace.

M1804.2.4 Type L vent.

Type L venting systems shall conform to UL 641 and shall terminate with a listed and labeled cap in accordance with the vent manufacturer’s installation instructions not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above the roof and not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above any portion of the building within 10 feet (3048 mm).

M1804.2.5 Direct vent terminations.

Vent terminals for direct-vent appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1804.2.6 Mechanical draft systems.

Mechanical draft systems shall comply with UL 378 and shall be installed in accordance with their listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and, except for direct-vent appliances, the following requirements:

1.	The vent terminal shall be located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above a forced air inlet located within 10 feet (3048 mm).

2.	The vent terminal shall be located not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) below, 4 feet (1219 mm) horizontally from, or 1 foot (305 mm) above any door, window or gravity air inlet into a dwelling.

3.	The vent termination point shall be located not closer than 3 feet (914 mm) to an interior corner formed by two walls perpendicular to each other.

4.	The bottom of the vent terminal shall be located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above finished ground level.

5.	The vent termination shall not be mounted directly above or within 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally of an oil tank vent or gas meter.

6.	Power exhauster terminations shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from lot lines and adjacent buildings.

7.	The discharge shall be directed away from the building.

M1804.3 Installation.

Type L and pellet vents shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listing and label and the manufacturer’s instructions.

M1804.3.1 Size of single-appliance venting systems.

An individual vent for a single appliance shall have a cross-sectional area equal to or greater than the area of the connector to the appliance, but not less than 7 square inches (4515 mm2) except where the vent is an integral part of a listed and labeled appliance.

M1804.4 Door swing.

Appliance and equipment vent terminals shall be located such that doors cannot swing within 12 inches (305 mm) horizontally of the vent terminals. Door stops or closers shall not be installed to obtain this clearance.

SECTION M1805
MASONRY AND FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEYS
M1805.1 General.

Masonry and factory-built chimneys shall be built and installed in accordance with Sections R1003 and R1005, respectively. Flue lining for masonry chimneys shall comply with Section R1003.11.

M1805.2 Masonry chimney connection.

A chimney connector shall enter a masonry chimney not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the bottom of the chimney. Where it is not possible to locate the connector entry at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the bottom of the chimney flue, a cleanout shall be provided by installing a capped tee in the connector next to the chimney. A connector entering a masonry chimney shall extend through, but not beyond, the wall and shall be flush with the inner face of the liner. Connectors, or thimbles where used, shall be firmly cemented into the masonry.

M1805.3 Size of chimney flues.

The effective area of a natural draft chimney flue for one appliance shall be not less than the area of the connector to the appliance. The area of chimney flues connected to more than one appliance shall be not less than the area of the largest connector plus 50 percent of the areas of additional chimney connectors.

Exception: Chimney flues serving oil-fired appliances sized in accordance with NFPA 31.

M1805.3.1 Size of chimney flue for solid-fuel appliance.

Except where otherwise specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the cross-sectional area of a flue connected to a solid-fuel-burning appliance shall be not less than the area of the flue collar or connector, and not larger than three times the area of the flue collar.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-19]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 19
SPECIAL APPLIANCES, EQUIPMENT AND SYSTEMS
SECTION M1901
RANGES AND OVENS
M1901.1 Clearances.

Freestanding or built-in ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) to unprotected combustible material. Reduced clearances are permitted in accordance with the listing and labeling of the range hoods or appliances. The installation of a listed and labeled cooking appliance or microwave oven over a listed and labeled cooking appliance shall be in accordance with Section M1504.1. The clearances for a domestic open-top broiler unit shall be in accordance with Section M1505.1.

M1901.2 Cooking appliances.

Cooking appliances shall be listed and labeled for household use and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The installation shall not interfere with combustion air or access for operation and servicing. Electric cooking appliances shall comply with UL 1026 or UL 858. Solid-fuel-fired fireplace stoves shall comply with UL 737.

SECTION M1902
SAUNA HEATERS
M1902.1 Locations and protection.

Sauna heaters shall be protected from accidental contact by persons with a guard of material having a low thermal conductivity, such as wood. The guard shall not have a substantial effect on the transfer of heat from the heater to the room.

M1902.2 Installation.

Sauna heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Sauna heaters shall comply with UL 875.

M1902.3 Combustion air.

Combustion air and venting for a nondirect vent-type heater shall be provided in accordance with Chapters 17 and 18, respectively.

M1902.4 Controls.

Sauna heaters shall be equipped with a thermostat that will limit room temperature to not greater than 194°F (90°C). Where the thermostat is not an integral part of the heater, the heat-sensing element shall be located within 6 inches (152 mm) of the ceiling.

SECTION M1903

RESERVED

SECTION M1904
GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEMS
M1904.1 Installation.

Gaseous hydrogen systems shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section M1307.4 and the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas, the Florida Fire Prevention Code and the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION M1905
RESIDENTIAL PERMANENTLY INSTALLED
STAND-BY GENERATORS
M1905.1 Listed and labeled.

Permanently installed stand-by generators regulated by this code shall be listed and labeled for the application in which they are installed and used.

M1905.2 Installation.

Installation of permanently installed stand-by generators shall comply with manufacturer’s installation instructions and listing conditions.

M1905.2.1 Electrical installation.

Electrical installation of permanently installed stand-by generators shall comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, manufacturer’s installation instructions, and conditions of the listing.

M1905.2.2 Flood hazard.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), permanently installed stand-by generators shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

M1905.2.3 Fuel installation.
M1905.2.3.1 Fuel gas.

Fuel gas installation for permanently installed stand-by generators shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 24 of this code.

M1905.2.3.2 Liquid fuel.

Liquid fuel installation for permanently installed stand-by generators shall comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA-30.

M1905.2.4 Wind resistance.

Permanently installed standby generators that are exposed to wind shall be designed and installed to resist the wind pressures determined in accordance with this code.

M1905.2.5 Exhaust location.

Permanently installed residential standby generator’s exhaust shall be located to not create a nuisance. Exhaust termination shall be a minimum of 10 feet (3048 mm) from any openings that could allow fumes into the building (doors, operable windows, eave vents, etc.) or air intakes.

Exception:The generator exhaust can be located a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) from any such openings (doors, operable windows, eave vents, etc.) or in compliance with generator manufacturer installation requirements and listing, whichever is more restrictive, if all of the following are complied with:

1.	A carbon monoxide (CO) alarm(s) is installed in the residency within 10 feet (3048 mm) of each room used for sleeping purposes, or in accordance with the alarm’s manufacturer installation requirements and listing, whichever is more restrictive.

2.	An additional carbon monoxide (CO) alarm is installed in the residency as close as possible to the building’s exterior opening nearest to the generator exhaust.

3.	The carbon monoxide (CO) alarms mentioned above shall be of the types required by Sections R315.1.1 or R315.1.2 of this code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-2]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION R201
GENERAL
R201.1 Scope.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings indicated in this chapter.

R201.2 Interchangeability.

Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

R201.3 Terms defined in other codes.

Where terms are not defined in this code such terms shall have the meanings ascribed in other code publications of the Florida Building Commission.

R201.4 Terms not defined.

Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

SECTION R202
DEFINITIONS

ACCESS (TO). That which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be reached by ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or movement of a panel, door or similar obstruction.

[RB] ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling(s) and that is located on the same lot.

[RB] ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or height of a building or structure.

[RB] ADHERED STONE OR MASONRY VENEER. Stone or masonry veneer secured and supported through the adhesion of an approved bonding material applied to an approved backing.

AIR ADMITTANCE VALVE. A one-way valve designed to allow air into the plumbing drainage system where a negative pressure develops in the piping. This device shall close by gravity and seal the terminal under conditions of zero differential pressure (no flow conditions) and under positive internal pressure.

AIR BARRIER. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

AIR BREAK (DRAINAGE SYSTEM). An arrangement where a discharge pipe from a fixture, appliance or device drains indirectly into a receptor below the flood-level rim of the receptor and above the trap seal.

AIR CIRCULATION, FORCED. A means of providing space conditioning utilizing movement of air through ducts or plenums by mechanical means.

AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEM. A system that consists of heat exchangers, blowers, filters, supply, exhaust and return-air systems, and shall include any apparatus installed in connection therewith.

AIR GAP, DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The unobstructed vertical distance through free atmosphere between the outlet of a waste pipe and the flood-level rim of the fixture or receptor into which it is discharging.

AIR GAP, WATER-DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The unobstructed vertical distance through free atmosphere between the lowest opening from a water supply discharge to the flood-level rim of a plumbing fixture.

[RB] AIR-IMPERMEABLE INSULATION. An insulation having an air permanence equal to or less than 0.02 L/s-m2 at 75 Pa pressure differential as tested in accordance with ASTM E2178 or E283.

[RB] ALTERATION. Any construction, retrofit or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition that requires a permit. Also, a change in a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that involves an extension, addition or change to the arrangement, type or purpose of the original installation that requires a permit.

[RB] ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. A device that has a series of steps between 50 and 70 degrees (0.87 and 1.22 rad) from horizontal, usually attached to a center support rail in an alternating manner so that the user does not have both feet on the same level at the same time.

[RB] ANCHORED STONE OR MASONRY VENEER. Stone or masonry veneer secured with approved mechanical fasteners to an approved backing.

ANCHORS. See “Supports.”

ANTISIPHON. A term applied to valves or mechanical devices that eliminate siphonage.

APPLIANCE. A device or apparatus that is manufactured and designed to utilize energy and for which this code provides specific requirements.

APPLICABLE GOVERNING BODY. A city, county, state, state agency or other political government subdivision or entity authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this code, as adopted or amended. Also applies to administrative authority.

[RB] APPROVED. Acceptable to the building official.

[RB] APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized agency that is regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, where such agency has been approved by the building official.

ARCHITECT. A Florida-registered architect.

[RB] ASPECT RATIO. The ratio of longest to shortest perpendicular dimensions, or for wall sections, the ratio of height to length.

[RB] ATTIC. The unfinished space between the ceiling assembly and the roof assembly.

[RB] ATTIC, HABITABLE. A finished or unfinished area, not considered a story, complying with all of the following requirements:

1.	The occupiable floor area is not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2), in accordance with Section R304.

2.	The occupiable floor area has a ceiling height in accordance with Section R305.

3.	The occupiable space is enclosed by the roof assembly above, knee walls (if applicable) on the sides and the floor-ceiling assembly below.

BACKFLOW, DRAINAGE. A reversal of flow in the drainage system.

BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A backflow prevention assembly, a backflow prevention device or other means or method to prevent backflow into the potable water supply.

BACKFLOW PREVENTER, REDUCED-PRESSURE-ZONE TYPE. A backflow-prevention device consisting of two independently acting check valves, internally force loaded to a normally closed position and separated by an intermediate chamber (or zone) in which there is an automatic relief means of venting to atmosphere internally loaded to a normally open position between two tightly closing shutoff valves and with means for testing for tightness of the checks and opening of relief means.

BACKFLOW, WATER DISTRIBUTION. The flow of water or other liquids into the potable water-supply piping from any sources other than its intended source. Backsiphonage is one type of backflow.

BACKPRESSURE. Pressure created by any means in the water distribution system that by being in excess of the pressure in the water supply mains causes a potential backflow condition.

BACKPRESSURE, LOW HEAD. A pressure less than or equal to 4.33 psi (29.88 kPa) or the pressure exerted by a 10-foot (3048 mm) column of water.

BACKSIPHONAGE. The flowing back of used or contaminated water from piping into a potable water-supply pipe due to a negative pressure in such pipe.

BACKWATER VALVE. A device installed in a drain or pipe to prevent backflow of sewage.

BALANCED VENTILATION. Any combination of concurrently operating mechanical exhaust and mechanical supply whereby the total mechanical exhaust airflow rate is within 10% of the total mechanical supply airflow rate.

[RB] BASEMENT. A story that is not a story above grade plane (see “Story above grade plane”).

[RB] BASEMENT WALL. The opaque portion of a wall that encloses one side of a basement and has an average below grade wall area that is 50 percent or more of the total opaque and nonopaque area of that enclosing side.

[RB] BASIC WIND SPEED. Three-second gust speed at 33 feet (10 058 mm) above the ground in Exposure C (see Section R301.2.1) as given in Figure R301.2(4).

BATHROOM GROUP. A group of fixtures, including or excluding a bidet, consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. Such fixtures are located together on the same floor level.

BEND. A drainage fitting, designed to provide a change in direction of a drain pipe of less than the angle specified by the amount necessary to establish the desired slope of the line (see “Elbow” and “Sweep”).

BOILER. A self-contained appliance from which hot water is circulated for heating purposes and then returned to the boiler, and that operates at water pressures not exceeding 160 pounds per square inch gage (psig) (1102 kPa gauge) and at water temperatures not exceeding 250°F (121°C).

[RB] BOND BEAM. A horizontal grouted element within masonry in which reinforcement is embedded.

[RB] BRACED WALL LINE. A straight line through the building plan that represents the location of the lateral resistance provided by the wall bracing.

[RB] BRACED WALL LINE, CONTINUOUSLY SHEATHED. A braced wall line with structural sheathing applied to all sheathable surfaces including the areas above and below openings.

[RB] BRACED WALL PANEL. A full-height section of wall constructed to resist in-plane shear loads through interaction of framing members, sheathing material and anchors. The panel’s length meets the requirements of its particular bracing method, and contributes toward the total amount of bracing required along its braced wall line in accordance with Section R602.3.

BRANCH. Any part of the piping system other than a riser, main or stack.

BRANCH, FIXTURE. See “Fixture branch, drainage.”

BRANCH, HORIZONTAL. See “Horizontal branch, drainage.”

BRANCH INTERVAL. A vertical measurement of distance, 8 feet (2438 mm) or more in developed length, between the connections of horizontal branches to a drainage stack. Measurements are taken down the stack from the highest horizontal branch connection.

BRANCH, MAIN. A water-distribution pipe that extends horizontally off a main or riser to convey water to branches or fixture groups.

BRANCH, VENT. A vent connecting two or more individual vents with a vent stack or stack vent.

BTU/H. The listed maximum capacity of an appliance, absorption unit or burner expressed in British thermal units input per hour.

[RB] BUILDING. Building shall mean any one- and two-family dwelling or portion thereof, including townhouses, that is used, or designed or intended to be used for human habitation, for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, or any combination thereof, and shall include accessory structures thereto.

BUILDING DRAIN. The lowest piping that collects the discharge from all other drainage piping inside the house and extends 30 inches (762 mm) in developed length of pipe, beyond the exterior walls and conveys the drainage to the building sewer.

[RB] BUILDING, EXISTING. Existing building is a building erected prior to the adoption of this code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

[RB] BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC PRODUCT. A building product that incorporates photovoltaic modules and functions as a component of the building envelope.

BUILDING-INTEGRATED PHOTOVOLTAIC ROOF PANEL. A photovoltaic panel that functions as a component of the building envelope.

[RB] BUILDING LINE. The line established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.

[RB] BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code.

BUILDING SEWER. That part of the drainage system that extends from the end of the building drain and conveys its discharge to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage-disposal system or other point of disposal.

[RE] BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE. The basement walls, exterior walls, floor, roof and any other building element that enclose conditioned spaces. (Also see Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.)

[RB] BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.

[RB] CAP PLATE. The top plate of the double top plates used in structural insulated panel (SIP) construction. The cap plate is cut to match the panel thickness such that it overlaps the wood structural panel facing on both sides.

CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM. A device for the purpose of detecting carbon monoxide, that produces a distinct audible alarm, and is listed or labeled with the appropriate standard, either ANSI/UL 2034 Standard for Single and Multiple Station CO Alarms, or UL 2075, Gas and Vapor Detector Sensor, in accordance with its application.

[RB] CEILING HEIGHT. The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling.

[RB] CEMENT PLASTER. A mixture of portland or blended cement, portland cement or blended cement and hydrated lime, masonry cement or plastic cement and aggregate and other approved materials as specified in this code.

[RB] CHIMNEY. A primary vertical structure containing one or more flues, for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from a fuel-burning appliance to the outside atmosphere.

CHIMNEY CONNECTOR. A pipe that connects a fuel-burning appliance to a chimney.

CHIMNEY TYPES.

Residential-type appliance. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, residential-type appliances producing combustion gases not in excess of 1,000°F (538°C) under normal operating conditions, and capable of producing combustion gases of 1,400°F (760°C) during intermittent forces firing for periods up to 1 hour. All temperatures shall be measured at the appliance flue outlet. Residential-type appliance chimneys include masonry and factory-built types.

CIRCUIT VENT. A vent that connects to a horizontal drainage branch and vents two traps to not more than eight traps or trapped fixtures connected into a battery.

CIRCULATING HOT WATER SYSTEM. A specifically designed water distribution system where one or more pumps are operated in the service hot water piping to circulate heated water from the water-heating equipment to fixtures and back to the water-heating equipment.

[RB] CLADDING. The exterior materials that cover the surface of the building envelope that is directly loaded by the wind.

[MP]CLEANOUT. An access opening in the drainage system utilized for the removal of obstructions. Types of cleanouts include a removable plug or cap, and a removable fixture or fixture trap.

[RE] CLIMATE ZONE. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] CLOSET. A small room or chamber used for storage.

COLLECTION PIPE. Unpressurized pipe used within the collection system that drains on-site nonpotable water or rainwater to a storage tank by gravity.

COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEM. A specially designed system of waste piping embodying the horizontal wet venting of one or more sinks, lavatories or floor drains by means of a common waste and vent pipe adequately sized to provide free movement of air above the flow line of the drain.

[RB] COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material not defined as noncombustible.

COMBUSTION AIR. The air provided to fuel-burning equipment including air for fuel combustion, draft hood dilution and ventilation of the equipment enclosure.

[CE] COMMERCIAL BUILDING. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

COMMISSION. Means the Florida Building Commission created as per Section 553.74, Florida Statutes.

COMMON VENT. A single pipe venting two trap arms within the same branch interval, either back-to-back or one above the other.

CONDENSATE. The liquid that separates from a gas due to a reduction in temperature; for example, water that condenses from flue gases and water that condenses from air circulating through the cooling coil in air conditioning equipment.

CONDENSING APPLIANCE. An appliance that condenses water generated by the burning of fuels.

[RB] CONDITIONED AIR. Air treated to control its temperature, relative humidity or quality.

[RE] CONDITIONED AREA. That area within a building provided with heating or cooling systems or appliances capable of maintaining, through design or heat loss or gain, 68°F (20°C) during the heating season or 80°F (27°C) during the cooling season, or has a fixed opening directly adjacent to a conditioned area.

[RE] CONDITIONED FLOOR AREA. The horizontal projection of the floors associated with the conditioned space.

[RE] CONDITIONED SPACE. An area, room or space that is enclosed within the building thermal envelope and that is directly heated or cooled or that is indirectly heated or cooled. Spaces are indirectly heated or cooled where they communicate thru openings with conditioned spaces, where they are separated from conditioned spaces by uninsulated walls, floors or ceilings or where they contain uninsulated ducts, piping or other sources of heating or cooling.

[RB] CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. Written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of a project necessary for obtaining a building permit. Construction drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale.

CONTAMINATION. A high hazard or health hazard impairment of the quality of the potable water that creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste.

[RE] CONTINUOUS INSULATION (ci). Insulating material that is continuous across all structural members without thermal bridges other than fasteners and service openings. It is installed on the interior or exterior or is integral to any opaque surface of the building envelope.

CONTINUOUS WASTE. A drain from two or more similar adjacent fixtures connected to a single trap.

CONTROL, LIMIT. An automatic control responsive to changes in liquid flow or level, pressure, or temperature for limiting the operation of an appliance.

CONTROL, PRIMARY SAFETY. A safety control responsive directly to flame properties that senses the presence or absence of flame and, in event of ignition failure or unintentional flame extinguishment, automatically causes shutdown of mechanical equipment.

CONVECTOR. A system-incorporating heating element in an enclosure in which air enters an opening below the heating element, is heated and leaves the enclosure through an opening located above the heating element.

COPPER ALLOY. A homogeneous mixture of not less than two metals where not less than 50 percent of the finished metal is copper.

CORE. The lightweight middle section of a structural insulated panel, composed of foam plastic insulation that provides the link between the two facing shells.

[RB] CORROSION RESISTANCE. The ability of a material to withstand deterioration of its surface or its properties where exposed to its environment.

[RB] COURT. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls or a building.

[RB] CRIPPLE WALL. A framed wall extending from the top of the foundation to the underside of the floor framing of the first story above grade plane.

CROSS CONNECTION. Any connection between two otherwise separate piping systems that allows a flow from one system to the other.

[RB] CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER. A prefabricated engineered wood product consisting of not less than three layers of solid-sawn lumber or structural composite lumber where the adjacent layers are cross-oriented and bonded with structural adhesive to form a solid wood element.

[RE] CURTAIN WALL. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] DALLE GLASS. A decorative composite glazing material made of individual pieces of glass that are embedded in a cast matrix of concrete or epoxy.

DAMPER, VOLUME. A device that will restrict, retard or direct the flow of air in any duct, or the products of combustion of heat-producing equipment, vent connector, vent or chimney.

[RB] DEAD LOADS. The weight of the materials of construction incorporated into the building, including but not limited to walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, finishes, cladding, and other similarly incorporated architectural and structural items, and fixed service equipment.

DECORATIVE CEMENTITIOUS FINISH. A skim coat, as defined in ASTM C926, of Portland cement-based plaster applied to concrete or masonry surfaces intended for cosmetic purposes.

[RB] DECORATIVE GLASS. A carved, leaded or Dalle glass or glazing material with a purpose that is decorative or artistic, not functional; with coloring, texture or other design qualities or components that cannot be removed without destroying the glazing material; and with a surface, or assembly into which it is incorporated, that is divided into segments.

[RE] DEMAND RECIRCULATION WATER SYSTEM. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. See “Registered design professional.”

DEVELOPED LENGTH. The length of a pipeline measured along the center line of the pipe and fittings.

DIAMETER. Unless specifically stated, the term “diameter” is the nominal diameter as designated by the approved material standard.

[RB] DIAPHRAGM. A horizontal or nearly horizontal system acting to transmit lateral forces to the vertical resisting elements. Where the term “diaphragm” is used, it includes horizontal bracing systems.

DILUTION AIR. Air that enters a draft hood or draft regulator and mixes with flue gases.

DIRECT SYSTEM. A solar thermal system in which the gas or liquid in the solar collector loop is not separated from the load.

DIRECT-VENT APPLIANCE. A fuel-burning appliance with a sealed combustion system that draws all air for combustion from the outside atmosphere and discharges all flue gases to the outside atmosphere.

DRAFT. The pressure difference existing between the appliance or any component part and the atmosphere, that causes a continuous flow of air and products of combustion through the gas passages of the appliance to the atmosphere.

Induced draft. The pressure difference created by the action of a fan, blower or ejector, that is located between the appliance and the chimney or vent termination.

Natural draft. The pressure difference created by a vent or chimney because of its height, and the temperature difference between the flue gases and the atmosphere.

DRAFT HOOD. A device built into an appliance, or a part of the vent connector from an appliance, that is designed to provide for the ready escape of the flue gases from the appliance in the event of no draft, backdraft or stoppage beyond the draft hood; prevent a backdraft from entering the appliance; and neutralize the effect of stack action of the chimney or gas vent on the operation of the appliance.

DRAFT REGULATOR. A device that functions to maintain a desired draft in the appliance by automatically reducing the draft to the desired value.

[RB] DRAFT STOP. A material, device or construction installed to restrict the movement of air within open spaces of concealed areas of building components such as crawl spaces, floor-ceiling assemblies, roof-ceiling assemblies and attics.

DRAIN. Any pipe that carries soil and water-borne wastes in a building drainage system.

DRAINAGE FITTING. A pipe fitting designed to provide connections in the drainage system that have provisions for establishing the desired slope in the system. These fittings are made from a variety of both metals and plastics. The methods of coupling provide for required slope in the system.

DRAIN-BACK SYSTEM. A solar thermal system in which the fluid in the solar collector loop is drained from the collector into a holding tank under prescribed circumstances.

[BS] DRILLED SHAFT. A cast-in-place deep foundation element, also referred to as caisson, drilled pier and bored pile, constructed by drilling a hole (with or without permanent casing or drilling fluid) into soil or rock and filling it with fluid concrete after the drilling equipment is removed.

DRILLED SHAFT, SOCKETED. A drilled shaft with a permanent pipe or tube casing that extends down to bedrock and an uncased socket drilled into the bedrock.

DUCT SYSTEM. A continuous passageway for the transmission of air that, in addition to ducts, includes duct fittings, dampers, plenums, fans and accessory air-handling equipment and appliances.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] DWELLING. Any building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or that are occupied for living purposes.

[RB] DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

DWV. Abbreviated term for drain, waste and vent piping as used in common plumbing practice.

EFFECTIVE OPENING. The minimum cross-sectional area at the point of water-supply discharge, measured or expressed in terms of diameter of a circle and if the opening is not circular, the diameter of a circle of equivalent cross-sectional area. (This is applicable to air gap.)

ELBOW. A pressure pipe fitting designed to provide an exact change in direction of a pipe run. An elbow provides a sharp turn in the flow path (see “Bend” and “Sweep”).

[RB] EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An operable exterior window, door or other similar device that provides for a means of escape and access for rescue in the event of an emergency. (See also “Grade floor emergency escape and rescue opening.”)

[RB]ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS (ESS). One or more devices, assembled together, capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical energy at a future time.

ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

Local enforcement agency. An agency of local government, a local school board, a community college board of trustees, or a university board of trustees in the State University System with jurisdiction to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the codes which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification, or demolition of public or private buildings, structures, or facilities.

State Enforcement Agency. The agency of state government with authority to make inspections of buildings and to enforce the codes, as required by Chapter 553, Florida Statutes which establish standards for design, construction, erection, alteration, repair, modification or demolition of public or private buildings, structures or facilities.

ENGINEER. A Florida-registered engineer.

[RB] ENGINEERED WOOD RIM BOARD. A full-depth structural composite lumber, wood structural panel, structural glued laminated timber or prefabricated wood I-joist member designed to transfer horizontal (shear) and vertical (compression) loads, provide attachment for diaphragm sheathing, siding and exterior deck ledgers and provide lateral support at the ends of floor or roof joists or rafters.

EQUIPMENT. Piping, ducts, vents, control devices and other components of systems other than appliances that are permanently installed and integrated to provide control of environmental conditions for buildings. This definition shall also include other systems specifically regulated in this code.

EQUIVALENT LENGTH. For determining friction losses in a piping system, the effect of a particular fitting equal to the friction loss through a straight piping length of the same nominal diameter.

[RE] ERI REFERENCE DESIGN. A version of the rated design that meets the minimum requirements of the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code.

[RB] ESCARPMENT. With respect to topographic wind effects, a cliff or steep slope generally separating two levels or gently sloping areas.

ESSENTIALLY NONTOXIC TRANSFER FLUIDS. Fluids having a Gosselin rating of 1, including propylene glycol; mineral oil; polydimethy oil oxane; hydrochlorofluorocarbon, chlorofluorocarbon and hydrofluorocarbon refrigerants; and FDA-approved boiler water additives for steam boilers.

ESSENTIALLY TOXIC TRANSFER FLUIDS. Soil, water or graywater and fluids having a Gosselin rating of 2 or more including ethylene glycol, hydrocarbon oils, ammonia refrigerants and hydrazine.

EVAPORATIVE COOLER. A device used for reducing air temperature by the process of evaporating water into an airstream.

EXCESS AIR. Air that passes through the combustion chamber and the appliance flue in excess of what is theoretically required for complete combustion.

EXHAUST HOOD, FULL OPENING. An exhaust hood with an opening not less than the diameter of the connecting vent.

EXISTING INSTALLATIONS. Any plumbing system regulated by this code that was legally installed prior to the effective date of this code, or for which a permit to install has been issued.

[RB] EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS). EIFS are nonstructural, nonload-bearing exterior wall cladding systems that consist of an insulation board attached either adhesively or mechanically, or both, to the substrate; an integrally reinforced base coat; and a textured protective finish coat.

[RB] EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS) WITH DRAINAGE. An EIFS that incorporates a means of drainage applied over a water-resistive barrier.

[RB] EXTERIOR WALL. An above-grade wall that defines the exterior boundaries of a building. Includes between-floor spandrels, peripheral edges of floors, roof and basement knee walls, dormer walls, gable end walls, walls enclosing a mansard roof and basement walls with an average below-grade wall area that is less than 50 percent of the total opaque and nonopaque area of that enclosing side.

[RB] EXTERIOR WALL COVERING. A material or assembly of materials applied on the exterior side of exterior walls for the purpose of providing a weather-resistive barrier, insulation or for aesthetics, including but not limited to, veneers, siding, exterior insulation and finish systems, architectural trim and embellishments such as cornices, soffits, and fascias.

[RB] FACING. The wood structural panel facings that form the two outmost rigid layers of the structural insulated panel.

FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEY. A listed and labeled chimney composed of factory-made components assembled in the field in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the conditions of the listing.

FACTORY-MADE AIR DUCT. A listed and labeled duct manufactured in a factory and assembled in the field in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and conditions of the listing.

[RE] FENESTRATION. Products classified as either vertical fenestration or skylights and sloped glazing, installed in such a manner as to preserve the weather-resistant barrier of the wall or roof in which they are installed. Fenestration includes products with glass or other transparent or translucent materials.

FENESTRATION, VERTICAL. Windows that are fixed or movable, opaque doors, glazed doors, glazed block and combination opaque and glazed doors installed in a wall at less than 15 degrees from vertical.

FIBER-CEMENT (BACKERBOARD, SIDING, SOFFIT, TRIM AND UNDERLAYMENT) PRODUCTS. Manufactured thin section composites of hydraulic cementitious matrices and discrete nonasbestos fibers.

FIREBLOCKING. Building materials or materials approved for use as fireblocking, installed to resist the free passage of flame to other areas of the building through concealed spaces.

[RB] FIREPLACE. An assembly consisting of a hearth and fire chamber of noncombustible material and provided with a chimney, for use with solid fuels.

Factory-built fireplace. A listed and labeled fireplace and chimney system composed of factory-made components, and assembled in the field in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions and the conditions of the listing.

Masonry fireplace. A field-constructed fireplace composed of solid masonry units, bricks, stones or concrete.

FIREPLACE STOVE. A free-standing, chimney-connected solid-fuel-burning heater designed to be operated with the fire chamber doors in either the open or closed position.

[RB] FIREPLACE THROAT. The opening between the top of the firebox and the smoke chamber.

[RB]FIRE-RETARDANT-TREATED WOOD. Wood products that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, exhibit reduced surface burning characteristics and resist propagation of fire.

Other means during manufacture. A process where the wood raw material is treated with a fire-retardant formulation while undergoing creation as a finished product.

Pressure process. A process for treating wood using an initial vacuum followed by the introduction of pressure above atmospheric.

[RB] FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from the building face to one of the following:

1.	To the closest interior lot line.

2.	To the centerline of a street, an alley or public way.

3.	To an imaginary line between two buildings on the lot; or

4.	For zero lot line developments to an imaginary line between two buildings on adjacent lots when the exterior wall of one building is located on a zero lot line where zero lot line developments are permitted by local regulations.

The distance shall be measured at a right angle from the face of the wall.

FIXTURE. See “Plumbing fixture.”

FIXTURE BRANCH, DRAINAGE. A drain serving two or more fixtures that discharges into another portion of the drainage system.

FIXTURE BRANCH, WATER-SUPPLY. A water-supply pipe between the fixture supply and a main water-distribution pipe or fixture group main.

FIXTURE DRAIN. The drain from the trap of a fixture to the junction of that drain with any other drain pipe.

FIXTURE FITTING.

Supply fitting. A fitting that controls the volume or directional flow or both of water and that is either attached to or is accessed from a fixture or is used with an open or atmospheric discharge.

Waste fitting. A combination of components that conveys the sanitary waste from the outlet of a fixture to the connection of the sanitary drainage system.

FIXTURE GROUP, MAIN. The main water-distribution pipe (or secondary branch) serving a plumbing fixture grouping such as a bath, kitchen or laundry area to which two or more individual fixture branch pipes are connected.

FIXTURE SUPPLY. The water-supply pipe connecting a fixture or fixture fitting to a fixture branch.

FIXTURE UNIT, DRAINAGE (d.f.u.). A measure of probable discharge into the drainage system by various types of plumbing fixtures, used to size DWV piping systems. The drainage fixture-unit value for a particular fixture depends on its volume rate of drainage discharge, on the time duration of a single drainage operation and on the average time between successive operations.

FIXTURE UNIT, WATER-SUPPLY (w.s.f.u.). A measure of the probable hydraulic demand on the water supply by various types of plumbing fixtures used to size water-piping systems. The water-supply fixture-unit value for a particular fixture depends on its volume rate of supply, on the time duration of a single supply operation and on the average time between successive operations.

[RB] FLAME SPREAD. The propagation of flame over a surface.

[RB] FLAME SPREAD INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from visual measurements of the spread of flame versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

FLEXIBLE AIR CONNECTOR. A conduit for transferring air between an air duct or plenum and an air terminal unit, an air inlet or an air outlet. Such conduit is limited in its use, length and location.

[RB] FLIGHT. A continuous run of rectangular treads or winders or combination thereof from one landing to another.

FLOOD-LEVEL RIM. The edge of the receptor or fixture from which water overflows.

FLOOR DRAIN. A plumbing fixture for recess in the floor having a floor-level strainer intended for the purpose of the collection and disposal of waste water used in cleaning the floor and for the collection and disposal of accidental spillage to the floor.

FLOOR FURNACE. A self-contained furnace suspended from the floor of the space being heated, taking air for combustion from outside such space, and with means for lighting the appliance from such space.

FLOW PRESSURE. The static pressure reading in the water-supply pipe near the faucet or water outlet while the faucet or water outlet is open and flowing at capacity.

FLUE. See “Vent.”

FLUE, APPLIANCE. The passages within an appliance through which combustion products pass from the combustion chamber to the flue collar.

FLUE COLLAR. The portion of a fuel-burning appliance designed for the attachment of a draft hood, vent connector or venting system.

FLUE GASES. Products of combustion plus excess air in appliance flues or heat exchangers.

FLUSH VALVE. A device located at the bottom of a flush tank that is operated to flush water closets.

FLUSHOMETER TANK. A device integrated within an air accumulator vessel that is designed to discharge a predetermined quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes.

FLUSHOMETER VALVE. A flushometer valve is a device that discharges a predetermined quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes and is actuated by direct water pressure.

[RB] FOAM BACKER BOARD. Foam plastic used in siding applications where the foam plastic is a component of the siding.

[RB] FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. A plastic that is intentionally expanded by the use of a foaming agent to produce a reduced-density plastic containing voids consisting of open or closed cells distributed throughout the plastic for thermal insulating or acoustic purposes and that has a density less than 20 pounds per cubic foot (320 kg/m3) unless it is used as interior trim.

[RB] FOAM PLASTIC INTERIOR TRIM. Exposed foam plastic used as picture molds, chair rails, crown moldings, baseboards, handrails, ceiling beams, door trim and window trim and similar decorative or protective materials used in fixed applications.

FOSSIL FUEL. Coal, kerosene, oil, fuel gases, or other petroleum or hydrocarbon product that emits carbon monoxide as a by-product of combustion.

[RB]FUEL CELL POWER SYSTEM, STATIONARY. A stationary energy generation system that converts the chemical energy of a fuel and oxidant to electric energy (DC or AC electricity) by an electrochemical process.

Field-fabricated fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system that is assembled at the job site and is not a preengineered or prepackaged factory-assembled fuel cell power system.

Preengineered fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system consisting of components and modules that are produced in a factory, and shipped to the job site for assembly.

Prepackaged fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system that is factory assembled as a single, complete unit and shipped as a complete unit for installation at the job site.

FUEL-PIPING SYSTEM. All piping, tubing, valves and fittings used to connect fuel utilization equipment to the point of fuel delivery.

FULL-OPEN VALVE. A water control or shutoff component in the water supply system piping that, where adjusted for maximum flow, the flow path through the component’s closure member is not a restriction in the component’s through-flow area.

FULLWAY VALVE. A valve that in the full open position has an opening cross-sectional area that is not less than 85 percent of the cross-sectional area of the connecting pipe.

FURNACE. A vented heating appliance designed or arranged to discharge heated air into a conditioned space or through a duct or ducts.

GARAGE DOOR MANUFACTURER. The party responsible for the completed assembly of the garage door components.

GLASS MAT GYPSUM PANEL.A gypsum panel consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum, surfaced with glass mat partially or completely embedded in the core.

[RB] GLAZING AREA. The interior surface area of all glazed fenestration, including the area of sash, curbing or other framing elements, that enclose conditioned space. Includes the area of glazed fenestration assemblies in walls bounding conditioned basements.

[RB] GRADE. The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.

[RB] GRADE FLOOR EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An emergency escape and rescue opening located such that the bottom of the clear opening is not more than 44 inches (1118 mm) above or below the finished ground level adjacent to the opening. (See also “Emergency escape and rescue opening.”)

GRADE, PIPING. See “Slope.”

[RB] GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building between the structure and a point 6 feet (1829 mm) from the building.

GRAY WATER. As defined by Sections 381.0065(2)(b) and (d) Florida Statutes, “Graywater” means that part of domestic sewage that is not blackwater, including waste from the bath, lavatory, laundry, and sink, except kitchen sink waste. “Blackwater” means that part of domestic sewage carried off by toilets, urinals, and kitchen drains.

GRIDDED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. A water distribution system where every water distribution pipe is interconnected so as to provide two or more paths to each fixture supply pipe.

[RB] GROSS AREA OF EXTERIOR WALLS. The normal projection of all exterior walls, including the area of all windows and doors installed therein.

GROUND-SOURCE HEAT PUMP LOOP SYSTEM. Piping buried in horizontal or vertical excavations or placed in a body of water for the purpose of transporting heat transfer liquid to and from a heat pump. Included in this definition are closed loop systems in which the liquid is recirculated and open loop systems in which the liquid is drawn from a well or other source.

[RB] GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to the lower level.

[RB] GUESTROOM. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by one or more guests for living or sleeping purposes.

[RB] GYPSUM BOARD. The generic name for a family of sheet products consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum with paper surfacing. Gypsum wallboard, gypsum sheathing, gypsum base for gypsum veneer plaster, exterior gypsum soffit board, predecorated gypsum board and water-resistant gypsum backing board complying with the standards listed in Section R702.3 and Part IX of this code are types of gypsum board.

[RB] GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT. The general name for a family of sheet products consisting essentially of gypsum.

GYPSUM SHEATHING. Gypsum panel products specifically manufactured with enhanced water resistance for use as a substrate for exterior surface materials.

GYPSUM WALLBOARD. A gypsum board used primarily as an interior surfacing for building structures.

[RB] HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, screen enclosures, sunroom categories as defined at Section R301.2.1.1.1, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

[RB] HANDRAIL. A horizontal or sloping rail intended for grasping by the hand for guidance or support.

HANGERS. See “Supports.”

HAZARDOUS LOCATION. Any location considered to be a fire hazard for flammable vapors, dust, combustible fibers or other highly combustible substances.

HEAT PUMP. An appliance having heating or heating and cooling capability and that uses refrigerants to extract heat from air, liquid or other sources.

[RE] HEATING DEGREE DAYS (HDD). The sum, on an annual basis, of the difference between 65°F (18°C) and the mean temperature for each day as determined from “NOAA Annual Degree Days to Selected Bases Derived from the 1960–1990 Normals” or other weather data sources acceptable to the code official.

[RB] HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.

[RB] HEIGHT, STORY. The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.

[RE] HIGH-EFFICACY LAMPS. See Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

HIGH-TEMPERATURE (H.T.) CHIMNEY. A high temperature chimney complying with the requirements of UL 103. A Type H.T. chimney is identifiable by the markings “Type H.T.” on each chimney pipe section.

HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONE (HVHZ). This zone consists of Broward and Miami-Dade counties.

[RB] HILL. With respect to topographic wind effects, a land surface characterized by strong relief in any horizontal direction.

[RB] HISTORIC BUILDING. Buildings that are listed in or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or designated as historic under an appropriate state or local law.

HORIZONTAL BRANCH, DRAINAGE. A drain pipe extending laterally from a soil or waste stack or building drain, that receives the discharge from one or more fixture drains.

HORIZONTAL PIPE. Any pipe or fitting that makes an angle of less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) with the horizontal.

[MP] HOT WATER. Water at a temperature greater than 120°F (49°C).

[RB] HURRICANE-PRONE REGIONS. Areas vulnerable to hurricanes, defined as the U.S. Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico coasts where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is greater than 115 miles per hour (51 m/s), and Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, Virgin Islands and America Samoa.

HYDROGEN-GENERATING APPLIANCE. A self-contained package or factory-matched packages of integrated systems for generating gaseous hydrogen. Hydrogen-generating appliances utilize electrolysis, reformation, chemical or other processes to generate hydrogen.

IGNITION SOURCE. A flame, spark or hot surface capable of igniting flammable vapors or fumes. Such sources include appliance burners, burner ignitions and electrical switching devices.

INDIRECT SYSTEM. A solar thermal system in which the gas or liquid in the solar collector loop circulates between the solar collector and a heat exchanger and such gas or liquid is not drained from the system or supplied to the load during normal operation.

INDIRECT WASTE PIPE. A waste pipe that discharges into the drainage system through an air gap into a trap, fixture or receptor.

INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system for disposal of sewage by means of a septic tank or mechanical treatment, designed for use apart from a public sewer to serve a single establishment or building.

INDIVIDUAL VENT. A pipe installed to vent a single fixture drain that connects with the vent system above or terminates independently outside the building.

INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY. A supply other than an approved public water supply that serves one or more families.

[RB] INSULATED SIDING. A type of continuous insulation, with manufacturer-installed insulating material as an integral part of the cladding product, having a minimum R-value of R-2.

[RB] INSULATED VINYL SIDING. A vinyl cladding product, with manufacturer-installed foam plastic insulating material as an integral part of the cladding product, having a thermal resistance of not less than R-2.

[RB] INSULATING CONCRETE FORM (ICF). A concrete forming system using stay-in-place forms of rigid foam plastic insulation, a hybrid of cement and foam insulation, a hybrid of cement and wood chips, or other insulating material for constructing cast-in-place concrete walls.

[RB]INSULATING SHEATHING. A rigid panel or board insulation material having a thermal resistance of not less than R-2 of the core material with properties suitable for use on walls, floors, roofs, or foundations.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] JURISDICTION. The governmental unit that has adopted this code under due legislative authority.

[RB] KITCHEN. Kitchen shall mean an area used, or designated to be used, for the preparation of food.

[RB] LABEL. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer that contains the name of the manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics of the product or material, and the name and identification of an approved agency and that indicates that the representative sample of the product or material has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency. (See also “Manufacturer’s designation” and “Mark.”)

[RB] LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, approved agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A Florida registered Landscape Architect.

[RB] LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. Construction whose vertical and horizontal structural elements are primarily a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel framing members.

[RB] LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the code official and concerned with evaluation of products or services that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

[RB]LIVE LOADS. Those loads produced by the use and occupancy of the building or other structure and do not include construction or environmental loads such as wind load, rain load, flood load or dead load.

LIVING SPACE. Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing and sanitation purposes.

LOCAL EXHAUST. An exhaust system that uses one or more fans to exhaust air from a specific room or rooms within a dwelling.

LOCAL FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. An ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant to the authority granted to local governments by Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.

[RB] LODGING HOUSE. A one-family dwelling where one or more occupants are primarily permanent in nature, and rent is paid for guestrooms.

[RB]LOT. A measured portion or parcel of land considered as a unit having fixed boundaries.

[RB]LOT LINE. The line that bounds a plot of ground described as a lot in the title to the property.

MACERATING TOILET SYSTEMS. A system comprised of a sump with macerating pump and with connections for a water closet and other plumbing fixtures, that is designed to accept, grind and pump wastes to an approved point of discharge.

MAIN. The principal pipe artery to which branches may be connected.

MAIN SEWER. See “Public sewer.”

MANIFOLD WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS. A fabricated piping arrangement in which a large supply main is fitted with multiple branches in close proximity in which water is distributed separately to fixtures from each branch.

[RB] MANUFACTURED HOME. Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode is 8 body feet (2438 body mm) or more in width or 40 body feet (12 192 body mm) or more in length, or, where erected on site, is 320 square feet (30 m2) or more, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation where connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary (HUD) and complies with the standards established under this title. For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, in effect at the time of manufacture is required. For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home shall be considered to be a manufactured home.

[RB] MANUFACTURER’S DESIGNATION. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating that a product or material complies with a specified standard or set of rules. (See also “Mark” and “Label.”)

[RB] MANUFACTURER’S INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS. Printed instructions included with equipment as part of the conditions of their listing and labeling.

[RB] MARK. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating the name of the manufacturer and the function of a product or material. (See also “Manufacturer’s designation” and “Label.”)

[RB] MASONRY CHIMNEY. A field-constructed chimney composed of solid masonry units, bricks, stones or concrete.

[RB] MASONRY HEATER. A masonry heater is a solid fuel burning heating appliance constructed predominantly of concrete or solid masonry having a mass of not less than 1,100 pounds (500 kg), excluding the chimney and foundation. It is designed to absorb and store a substantial portion of heat from a fire built in the firebox by routing exhaust gases through internal heat exchange channels in which the flow path downstream of the firebox includes not less than one 180-degree (3.14-rad) change in flow direction before entering the chimney and that deliver heat by radiation through the masonry surface of the heater.

[RB] MASONRY, SOLID. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid contiguously with the joints between the units filled with mortar.

[RB] MASONRY UNIT. Brick, tile, stone, architectural cast stone, glass block or concrete block conforming to the requirements specified in Section 2103 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

Clay. A building unit larger in size than a brick, composed of burned clay, shale, fire clay or mixtures thereof.

Concrete. A building unit or block larger in size than 12 inches by 4 inches by 4 inches (305 mm by 102 mm by 102 mm) made of cement and suitable aggregates.

Glass. Nonload-bearing masonry composed of glass units bonded by mortar.

Hollow. A masonry unit with a net cross-sectional area in any plane parallel to the loadbearing surface that is less than 75 percent of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

Solid. A masonry unit with a net cross-sectional area in every plane parallel to the loadbearing surface that is 75 percent or more of its cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

[RE] MASS WALL. Masonry or concrete walls having a mass greater than or equal to 30 pounds per square foot (146 kg/m2), solid wood walls having a mass greater than or equal to 20 pounds per square foot (98 kg/m2), and any other walls having a heat capacity greater than or equal to 6 Btu/ft2 · °F [123 J/(m2 · K)].

MATERIAL CODE VIOLATION. A material code violation is a violation that exists within a completed building, structure or facility which may reasonably result, or has resulted, in physical harm to a person or significant damage to the performance of a building or its systems.

MATERIAL VIOLATION. As defined in Florida Statutes.

[RB] MEAN ROOF HEIGHT. The average of the roof eave height and the height to the highest point on the roof surface, except that eave height shall be used for roof angle of less than or equal to 10 degrees (0.18 rad).

MEANS OF ESCAPE. A way out of a building or structure that does not conform to the strict definition of means of egress but does provide an alternate way out. A means of escape consists of a door, stairway, passage or hall providing a way of unobstructed travel to the outside at street or ground level. It may also consist of a passage through an adjacent nonlockable space, independent of and remotely located from the means of egress, to any approved exit.

MECHANICAL DRAFT SYSTEM. A venting system designed to remove flue or vent gases by mechanical means, that consists of an induced draft portion under nonpositive static pressure or a forced draft portion under positive static pressure.

Forced-draft venting system. A portion of a venting system using a fan or other mechanical means to cause the removal of flue or vent gases under positive static pressure.

Induced draft venting system. A portion of a venting system using a fan or other mechanical means to cause the removal of flue or vent gases under nonpositive static vent pressure.

Power venting system. A portion of a venting system using a fan or other mechanical means to cause the removal of flue or vent gases under positive static vent pressure.

MECHANICAL EXHAUST SYSTEM. A system for removing air from a room or space by mechanical means.

MECHANICAL JOINT.

1.	A connection between pipes, fittings or pipes and fittings that is not welded, brazed, caulked, soldered, solvent cemented or heat-fused.

2.	A general form of gas- or liquid-tight connections obtained by the joining of parts through a positive holding mechanical construction such as, but not limited to, flanged, screwed, clamped or flared connections.

MECHANICAL SYSTEM. A system specifically addressed and regulated in this code and composed of components, devices, appliances and equipment.

[RB] METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having a minimum installed weather exposure of 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

METAL ROOF PANEL, or METAL ROOF SHINGLE, MANUFACTURER. The party responsible for forming sheet metal raw materials into the metal roof panels and/or metal roof shingles used in building construction.

[RB] METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure less than 3 square feet (0.279 m2) per sheet.

[RB] MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story.

[RB] MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more layers of polymer modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate or held in place with an approved ballast layer.

MODULAR HOME. Any residential unit, constructed to standards promulgated by the Florida Building Commission, away from the installation site, and which bears a Department of Business and Professional Regulation Insignia.

[RB] MULTIPLE STATION SMOKE ALARM. Two or more single station alarm devices that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one causes all integral or separate audible alarms to operate.

[RB] NAILABLE SUBSTRATE. A product or material such as framing, sheathing or furring, composed of wood or wood-based materials, or other materials and fasteners providing equivalent fastener withdrawal resistance.

NATURAL DRAFT SYSTEM. A venting system designed to remove flue or vent gases under nonpositive static vent pressure entirely by natural draft.

[RB] NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. The heartwood of the following species with the exception that an occasional piece with corner sapwood is permitted if 90 percent or more of the width of each side on which it occurs is heartwood.

Decay resistant. Redwood, cedar, black locust and black walnut.

Termite resistant. Alaska yellow cedar, redwood, Eastern red cedar and Western red cedar including all sapwood of Western red cedar.

[RB]NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. A material that passes ASTM E136.

[RB] NOSING. The leading edge of treads of stairs and of landings at the top of stairway flights.

[RB] OCCUPIED SPACE. The total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground projected on a horizontal plane, excluding permitted projections as allowed by this code.

OFFSET. A combination of fittings that makes two changes in direction, bringing one section of the pipe out of line and into a line parallel with the other section.

ON-SITE NONPOTABLE WATER REUSE SYSTEMS. Water systems for the collection, treatment, storage, distribution, and reuse of nonpotable water generated on site, including but not limited to graywater systems. This definition does not include rainwater harvesting systems.

[RB] OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property.

[RB] PAN FLASHING. Corrosion-resistant flashing at the base of an opening that is integrated into the building exterior wall to direct water to the exterior and is premanufactured, fabricated, formed or applied at the job site.

[RB] PANEL THICKNESS. Thickness of core plus two layers of structural wood panel facings.

PELLET FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCE. A closed combustion, vented appliance equipped with a fuel feed mechanism for burning processed pellets of solid fuel of a specified size and composition.

PELLET VENT. A vent listed and labeled for use with a listed pellet fuel-burning appliance.

[RB] PERFORMANCE CATEGORY. A designation of wood structural panels as related to the panel performance used in Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 8.

[RB] PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction that authorizes performance of a specified activity.

[RB] PERSON. An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.

[RB] PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE. A complete, environmentally protected unit consisting of solar cells, optics and other components, exclusive of a tracker, designed to generate DC power where exposed to sunlight.

[RB] PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL. A collection of photovoltaic modules mechanically fastened together, wired, and designed to provide a field-installable unit.

[RB] PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL SYSTEM. A system that incorporates discrete photovoltaic panels that convert solar radiation into electricity, including rack support systems.

[RB] PHOTOVOLTAIC SHINGLES. A roof covering that resembles shingles and that incorporates photovoltaic modules.

PITCH. See “Slope.”

[RB] PLASTIC COMPOSITE. A generic designation that refers to wood-plastic composites and plastic lumber.

[RB] PLATFORM CONSTRUCTION. A method of construction by which floor framing bears on load bearing walls that are not continuous through the story levels or floor framing.

PLENUM. A chamber that forms part of an air-circulation system other than the occupied space being conditioned.

PLUMBING. For the purpose of this code, plumbing refers to those installations, repairs, maintenance and alterations regulated by Chapters 25 through 33.

PLUMBING APPLIANCE. An energized household appliance with plumbing connections, such as a dishwasher, food waste disposer, clothes washer or water heater.

PLUMBING APPURTENANCE. A device or assembly that is an adjunct to the basic plumbing system and does not demand additional water supply or add any discharge load to the system. It is presumed that it performs some useful function in the operation, maintenance, servicing, economy or safety of the plumbing system. Examples include filters, relief valves and aerators.

PLUMBING FIXTURE. A receptacle or device that is connected to a water supply system or discharges to a drainage system or both. Such receptacles or devices require a supply of water; or discharge liquid waste or liquid-borne solid waste; or require a supply of water and discharge waste to a drainage system.

PLUMBING SYSTEMS. Includes the water distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps; water-treating or water-using equipment; soil, waste and vent pipes; and building drains; in addition to their respective connections, devices and appurtenances within a structure or premises; and the water service, building sewer and building storm sewer serving such structure or premises.

POLLUTION. A low-hazard or non-health hazard impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree that does not create a hazard to the public health and that does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable water for domestic use.

[RB] POLYPROPYLENE SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from polypropylene homopolymer, or copolymer, that in some cases contains fillers or reinforcements, that is used to clad exterior walls or buildings.

PORTABLE-FUEL-CELL APPLIANCE. A fuel cell generator of electricity that is not fixed in place. A portable-fuel-cell appliance utilizes a cord and plug connection to a grid-isolated load and has an integral fuel supply.

[RB] POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. The drainage condition in which consideration has been made for the loading deflections of the roof deck, and sufficient slope has been provided to ensure drainage of the roof within 48 hours of precipitation.

POTABLE WATER. Water free from impurities present in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects and conforming in bacteriological and chemical quality to the requirements of the public health authority having jurisdiction.

[RB] PRECAST CONCRETE. A structural concrete element cast elsewhere than its final position in the structure.

[RB] PRECAST CONCRETE FOUNDATION WALLS. Pre-engineered, precast concrete wall panels that are designed to withstand specified stresses and used to build below-grade foundations.

PRESS-CONNECT JOINT. A permanent mechanical joint incorporating an elastomeric seal or an elastomeric seal and corrosion-resistant grip or bite ring. The joint is made with a pressing tool and jaw or ring approved by the fitting manufacturer.

PRESSURE-RELIEF VALVE. A pressure-actuated valve held closed by a spring or other means and designed to automatically relieve pressure at the pressure at which it is set.

PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR AND MAPPER. An individual who is licensed or registered to engage in the practice of surveying and mapping under Chapter 472, Florida Statutes.

PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer directly controlled by public authority.

PUBLIC WATER MAIN. A water-supply pipe for public use controlled by public authority.

[RB] PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or other parcel of land open to the outside air leading to a public street, that has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and that has a clear width and height of not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).

PURGE. To clear of air, gas or other foreign substances.

PUSH-FIT FITTING. A mechanical fitting that joins pipes or tubes and achieves a seal by mating the pipe or tube into the fitting.

QUICK-CLOSING VALVE. A valve or faucet that closes automatically where released manually or controlled by mechanical means for fast-action closing.

[RE] R-VALUE, THERMAL RESISTANCE. The inverse of the time rate of heat flow through a building thermal envelope element from one of its bounding surfaces to the other for a unit temperature difference between the two surfaces, under steady state conditions, per unit area (h · ft2 · °F/Btu).

[RB] RAMP. A walking surface that has a running slope steeper than 1 unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope).

[RE] RATED DESIGN. A description of the proposed building, used to determine the energy rating index.

READY ACCESS (TO). That which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be directly reached, without requiring the removal or movement of any panel, door or similar obstruction.

RECEPTOR. A fixture or device that receives the discharge from indirect waste pipes.

RECLAIMED WATER. Nonpotable water that has been derived from the treatment of waste water by a facility or system licensed or permitted to produce water meeting the jurisdiction’s water requirements for its intended uses. Also known as “Recycled Water.”

[RE] REFLECTIVE DUCT INSULATION. A thermal insulation assembly consisting of one or more surfaces that have an emittance of 0.1 or less, and that bound an enclosed air space or spaces.

REFRIGERANT. A substance used to produce refrigeration by its expansion or evaporation.

REFRIGERANT COMPRESSOR. A specific machine, with or without accessories, for compressing a given refrigerant vapor.

REFRIGERATING SYSTEM. A combination of interconnected parts forming a closed circuit in which refrigerant is circulated for the purpose of extracting, then rejecting, heat. A direct refrigerating system is one in which the evaporator or condenser of the refrigerating system is in direct contact with the air or other substances to be cooled or heated. An indirect refrigerating system is one in which a secondary coolant cooled or heated by the refrigerating system is circulated to the air or other substance to be cooled or heated.

[RB] REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is registered or licensed to practice their respective design profession as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws of the state or jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. This includes any registered design professional so long as they are practicing within the scope of their license, which includes those licensed under Chapters 471 and 481, Florida Statutes.

REGISTERED TERMITICIDE. Product listed as registered for use as a preventative treatment for termites for new construction by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services under authority of Chapter 487, Florida Statutes.

RELIEF VALVE, VACUUM. A device to prevent excessive buildup of vacuum in a pressure vessel.

[RB] REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an existing roof covering. See “Roof recover.”

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

RETURN AIR. Air removed from an approved conditioned space or location and recirculated or exhausted.

[RB] RIDGE. With respect to topographic wind effects, an elongated crest of a hill characterized by strong relief in two directions.

[RB] RISER.

1.	The vertical component of a step or stair.

2.	A water pipe that extends vertically one full story or more to convey water to branches or to a group of fixtures.

[RB] ROOF ASSEMBLY. A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly includes the roof covering, roof deck and may include a vapor retarder, thermal barrier, insulation or similar substrate.

[RB] ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.

[RB] ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface not including its supporting members or vertical supports.

[RB] ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without removing the existing roof covering.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and installing a new roof covering.

ROOF SECTION. A separation or division of a roof area by existing expansion joints, parapet walls, flashing (excluding valley), difference of elevation (excluding hips and ridges), roof type or legal description; not including the roof area required for a proper tie-off with an existing system.

ROOF SYSTEM.A roof system consists of a roof covering and other interacting roofing components and may include vapor retarder, a thermal barrier, insulation or other similar substrate. The system does not include the roof deck unless it is part of a single component serving as the roof covering and the roof deck.

[RB] ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any part of a building.

ROOM HEATER. A freestanding heating appliance installed in the space being heated and not connected to ducts.

ROUGH-IN. The installation of the parts of the plumbing system that must be completed prior to the installation of fixtures. This includes DWV, water supply and built-in fixture supports.

[RB] RUNNING BOND. The placement of masonry units such that head joints in successive courses are horizontally offset not less than one-quarter the unit length.

SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries sewage and excludes storm, surface and groundwater.

SCREEN ENCLOSURE. A building or part thereof, in whole or in part self-supporting, and having walls of insect screening with or without removable vinyl or acrylic wind break panels and a roof of insect screening, plastic, aluminum or similar lightweight material, or other materials and assemblies such as a patio, a deck, or the roof of a structure.

SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water to drain from a roof.

SEPARATE ATMOSPHERE. The atmosphere that exists between rooms, spaces or areas that are separated by an approved smoke barrier.

SEPTIC TANK. A water-tight receptor that receives the discharge of a building sanitary drainage system and is constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint or perforated piping or a seepage pit.

SEWAGE. Any liquid waste containing animal matter, vegetable matter or other impurity in suspension or solution.

SEWAGE PUMP. A permanently installed mechanical device for removing sewage or liquid waste from a sump.

[RB] SHALL. The term, where used in the code, is construed as mandatory.

[RB] SHEAR WALL. A general term for walls that are designed and constructed to resist racking from lateral loads by use of masonry, concrete, cold-formed steel or wood framing in accordance with Chapter 6 of this code and the associated limitations in Section R301.2 of this code.

[RB] SINGLE PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is field applied using one layer of membrane material (either homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.

[RB] SINGLE STATION SMOKE ALARM. An assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment and alarm sounding device in one unit that is operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation.

SITE-BUILT SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES. This term shall mean site-built single-family detached residential structures.

[RB] SHINGLE FASHION. A method of installing roof or wall coverings, water-resistive barriers, flashing or other building components such that upper layers of material are placed overlapping lower layers of material to provide drainage and protect against water intrusion at unsealed penetrations and joints or in combination with sealed joints.

[RE] SKYLIGHT. See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] SKYLIGHT AND SLOPED GLAZING. Glass or other transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a slope of 15 degrees (0.26 rad) or more from vertical. Glazing materials in skylights, including unit skylights, tubular daylighting devices, solariums, sunrooms, roofs and sloped walls are included in this definition.

[RB] SKYLIGHT, UNIT. A factory assembled, glazed fenestration unit, containing one panel of glazing material, that allows for natural daylighting through an opening in the roof assembly while preserving the weather-resistant barrier of the roof.

SLIP JOINT. A mechanical-type joint used primarily on fixture traps. The joint tightness is obtained by compressing a friction-type washer such as rubber, nylon, neoprene, lead or special packing material against the pipe by the tightening of a (slip) nut.

SLOPE. The fall (pitch) of a line of pipe in reference to a horizontal plane. In drainage, the slope is expressed as the fall in units vertical per units horizontal (percent) for a length of pipe.

[RB] SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from measurements of smoke obscuration versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

SOIL STACK OR PIPE. A pipe that conveys sewage containing fecal material.

[RE] SOLAR HEAT GAIN COEFFICIENT (SHGC). The solar heat gain through a fenestration or glazing assembly relative to the incident solar radiation (Btu/h · ft2 · °F).

[RB] SOLID MASONRY. Load-bearing or nonload-bearing construction using masonry units where the net cross-sectional area of each unit in any plane parallel to the bearing surface is not less than 75 percent of its gross cross-sectional area. Solid masonry units shall conform to ASTM C55, C62, C73, C145 or C216.

[RB] SPLINE. A strip of wood structural panel cut from the same material used for the panel facings, used to connect two structural insulated panels. The strip (spline) fits into a groove cut into the vertical edges of the two structural insulated panels to be joined. Splines are used behind each facing of the structural insulated panels being connected as shown in Figure R610.8.

STACK. Any main vertical DWV line, including offsets, that extends one or more stories as directly as possible to its vent terminal.

[RB] STACK BOND. The placement of masonry units in a bond pattern is such that head joints in successive courses are vertically aligned. For the purpose of this code, requirements for stack bond shall apply to all masonry laid in other than running bond.

STACK VENT. The extension of soil or waste stack above the highest horizontal drain connected.

[RB] STAIR. A change in elevation, consisting of one or more risers.

[RB] STAIRWAY. One or more flights of stairs, either interior or exterior, with the necessary landings and connecting platforms to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one level to another.

[RB] STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. A stairway with a plan view of closed circular form and uniform section-shaped treads radiating from a minimum-diameter circle.

[RB] STANDARD TRUSS. Any construction that does not permit the roof-ceiling insulation to achieve the required R-value over the exterior walls.

STATIONARY FUEL CELL POWER PLANT. A self-contained package or factory-matched packages that constitute an automatically-operated assembly of integrated systems for generating useful electrical energy and recoverable thermal energy that is permanently connected and fixed in place.

STORM SEWER, DRAIN. A pipe used for conveying rainwater, surface water, subsurface water and similar liquid waste.

[RB] STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.

[RB] STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished surface of the floor next above is either of the following:

1.	More than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade plane.

2.	More than 12 feet (3658 mm) above the finished ground level at any point.

[RB] STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER. Structural members manufactured using wood elements bonded together with exterior adhesives.

Examples of structural composite lumber are:

Laminated strand lumber (LSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.10 inch (2.54 mm) or less and their average lengths are not less than 150 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

Laminated veneer lumber (LVL). A composite of wood veneer elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the veneer element thicknesses are 0.25 inches (6.4 mm) or less.

Oriented strand lumber (OSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.10 inch (2.54 mm) or less and their average lengths are not less than 75 times and less than 150 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

Parallel strand lumber (PSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 0.25 inch (6.4 mm) or less and their average lengths are not less than 300 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

[RB] STRUCTURAL INSULATED PANEL (SIP). A structural sandwich panel that consists of a light-weight foam plastic core securely laminated between two thin, rigid wood structural panel facings.

[RB] STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.

[RB] SUBSOIL DRAIN. A drain that collects subsurface water or seepage water and conveys such water to a place of disposal.

SUMP. A tank or pit that receives sewage or waste, located below the normal grade of the gravity system and that must be emptied by mechanical means.

SUMP PUMP. A pump installed to empty a sump. These pumps are used for removing storm water only. The pump is selected for the specific head and volume of the load and is usually operated by level controllers.

SUN CONTROL STRUCTURE. An accessory structure consisting of columns or posts supporting an open roof of girders, beams, or cross rafters with or without fixed or operational louvers serving to direct sunlight.

[RB] SUNROOM.

1.	A one-story structure attached to a dwelling with a glazing area in excess of 40 percent of the gross area of the structure’s exterior walls and roof.

2.	A one-story structure added to a dwelling with solid roof panels without sloped glazing. The sunroom walls may have any configuration, provided the open areas consisting of operable or fixed glass or windows or side hinged or sliding glass doors of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 percent of the area below 6 foot 8 inches (2032 mm) of each wall, measured from the floor. For the purposes of this code the term sunroom as used herein shall include conservatories, sunspaces, solariums, and porch or patio covers or enclosures.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

SUPPLY AIR. Air delivered to a conditioned space through ducts or plenums from the heat exchanger of a heating, cooling or ventilating system.

SUPPORTS. Devices for supporting, hanging and securing pipes, fixtures and equipment.

SWEEP. A drainage fitting designed to provide a change in direction of a drain pipe of less than the angle specified by the amount necessary to establish the desired slope of the line. Sweeps provide a longer turning radius than bends and a less turbulent flow pattern (see “Bend” and “Elbow”).

TEMPERATURE- AND PRESSURE-RELIEF (T AND P) VALVE. A combination relief valve designed to function as both a temperature-relief and pressure-relief valve.

TEMPERATURE-RELIEF VALVE. A temperature-actuated valve designed to discharge automatically at the temperature at which it is set.

[RB] TERMITE-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Pressure-preservative treated wood in accordance with the AWPA standards in Section R317.1, naturally durable termite-resistant wood, steel, concrete, masonry or other approved material.

[RB] THERMAL ISOLATION. Physical and space conditioning separation from conditioned space(s) consisting of existing or new walls, doors or windows. The conditioned space(s) shall be controlled as separate zones for heating and cooling or conditioned by separate equipment.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RE] THERMAL RESISTANCE, R-VALUE. The inverse of the time rate of heat flow through a body from one of its bounding surfaces to the other for a unit temperature difference between the two surfaces, under steady state conditions, per unit area (h · ft2 · °F/Btu) (m2 · K)/W.

[RE] THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE, U-FACTOR. The coefficient of heat transmission (air to air) through a building envelope component or assembly, equal to the time rate of heat flow per unit area and unit temperature difference between the warm side and cold side air films (Btu/h · ft2 · °F) W/(m2 · K).

[RB] THIRD-PARTY CERTIFICATION AGENCY. An approved agency operating a product or material certification system that incorporates initial product testing, assessment and surveillance of a manufacturer’s quality control system.

[RB] THIRD-PARTY CERTIFIED. Certification obtained by the manufacturer indicating that the function and performance characteristics of a product or material have been determined by testing and ongoing surveillance by an approved third-party certification agency. Assertion of certification is in the form of identification in accordance with the requirements of the third-party certification agency.

[RB] THIRD-PARTY TESTED. Procedure by which an approved testing laboratory provides documentation that a product material or system conforms to specified requirements.

[RB] TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit not exceeding three stories in height constructed in a group of two or more attached units with property lines separating such units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on not less than two sides.

TRAP. A fitting, either separate or built into a fixture, that provides a liquid seal to prevent the emission of sewer gases without materially affecting the flow of sewage or waste water through it.

TRAP ARM. That portion of a fixture drain between a trap weir and the vent fitting.

TRAP PRIMER. A device or system of piping to maintain a water seal in a trap, typically installed where infrequent use of the trap would result in evaporation of the trap seal, such as floor drains.

TRAP SEAL. The trap seal is the maximum vertical depth of liquid that a trap will retain, measured between the crown weir and the top of the dip of the trap.

[RB] TRIM. Picture molds, chair rails, baseboards, handrails, door and window frames, and similar decorative or protective materials used in fixed applications.

[RB] TRUSS DESIGN DRAWING. The graphic depiction of an individual truss, that describes the design and physical characteristics of the truss.

[RE] TUBULAR DAYLIGHTING DEVICE (TDD). A nonoperable fenestration unit primarily designed to transmit daylight from a roof surface to an interior ceiling via a tubular conduit. The basic unit consists of an exterior glazed weathering surface, a light-transmitting tube with a reflective interior surface, and an interior-sealing device such as a translucent ceiling panel. The unit may be factory assembled, or field assembled from a manufactured kit.

TYPE L VENT. A listed and labeled vent conforming to UL 641 for venting oil-burning appliances listed for use with Type L vents or with gas appliances listed for use with Type B vents.

[RE] U-FACTOR, THERMAL TRANSMITTANCE. See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of felt, sheathing paper, nonbituminous saturated felt, or other approved material over which a roof covering, with a slope of 2 to 12 (17-percent slope) or greater, is applied.

VACUUM BREAKER. A device that prevents back-siphonage of water by admitting atmospheric pressure through ports to the discharge side of the device.

VAPOR DIFFUSION PORT. An assembly constructed or installed within a roof assembly at an opening in the roof deck to convey water vapor from an unvented attic to the outside atmosphere.

VAPOR PERMEABLE. The property of having a moisture vapor permeance rating of 5 perms (2.9 × 10-10 kg/Pa × s × m2) or greater when tested in accordance with Procedure A or Procedure B of ASTM E96. A vapor permeable material permits the passage of moisture vapor.

[RB] VAPOR RETARDER CLASS. A measure of the ability of a material or assembly to limit the amount of moisture that passes through that material or assembly. Vapor retarder class shall be defined using the desiccant method with Procedure A of ASTM E96 as follows:

Class I: 0.1 perm or less

Class II: 0.1 < perm ≤ 1.0 perm

Class III: 1.0 < perm ≤ 10 perm

VENT. A passageway for conveying flue gases from fuel-fired appliances, or their vent connectors, to the outside atmosphere.

VENT COLLAR. See “Flue collar.”

VENT CONNECTOR. That portion of a venting system that connects the flue collar or draft hood of an appliance to a vent.

VENT DAMPER DEVICE, AUTOMATIC. A device intended for installation in the venting system, in the outlet of an individual, automatically operated fuel burning appliance and that is designed to open the venting system automatically where the appliance is in operation and to close off the venting system automatically where the appliance is in a standby or shutdown condition.

VENT GASES. Products of combustion from fuel-burning appliances, plus excess air and dilution air, in the venting system above the draft hood or draft regulator.

VENT STACK. A vertical vent pipe installed to provide circulation of air to and from the drainage system and that extends through one or more stories.

VENT SYSTEM. Piping installed to equalize pneumatic pressure in a drainage system to prevent trap seal loss or blow-back due to siphonage or back pressure.

VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

VENTING. Removal of combustion products to the outdoors.

VENTING SYSTEM. A continuous open passageway from the flue collar of an appliance to the outside atmosphere for the purpose of removing flue or vent gases. A venting system is usually composed of a vent or a chimney and vent connector, if used, assembled to form the open passageway.

VERTICAL PIPE. Any pipe or fitting that makes an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) or more with the horizontal.

[RB] VINYL SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC), that is used to cover exterior walls of buildings.

[RB] WALL, RETAINING. A wall not laterally supported at the top, that resists lateral soil load and other imposed loads.

[RB] WALLS. Walls shall be defined as follows:

Load-bearing wall. A wall supporting any vertical load in addition to its own weight.

Nonbearing wall. A wall which does not support vertical loads other than its own weight.

WASTE. Liquid-borne waste that is free of fecal matter.

WASTE PIPE OR STACK. Piping that conveys only liquid sewage not containing fecal material.

WASTE RECEPTOR. A floor sink, standpipe, hub drain or a floor drain that receives the discharge of one or more indirect waste pipes.

WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. Piping that conveys water from the service to the plumbing fixtures, appliances, appurtenances, equipment, devices or other systems served, including fittings and control valves.

WATER HEATER. Any heating appliance or equipment that heats potable water and supplies such water to the potable hot water distribution system.

WATER MAIN. A water supply pipe for public use.

WATER OUTLET. A valved discharge opening, including a hose bibb, through which water is removed from the potable water system supplying water to a plumbing fixture or plumbing appliance that requires either an air gap or backflow prevention device for protection of the supply system.

[RB] WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. A material behind an exterior wall covering that is intended to resist liquid water that has penetrated behind the exterior covering from further intruding into the exterior wall assembly.

WATER SERVICE PIPE. The outside pipe from the water main or other source of potable water supply to the water distribution system inside the building, terminating at the service valve.

WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The water service pipe, the water-distributing pipes and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves and appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises.

WET VENT. A vent that receives the discharge of wastes from other fixtures.

WHOLE-HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM. An exhaust system, supply system, or combination thereof that is designed to mechanically exchange indoor air for outdoor air where operating continuously or through a programmed intermittent schedule to satisfy the whole-house ventilation rate.

See also Section R202 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

[RB] WINDBORNE DEBRIS REGION. Areas within hurricane-prone regions located in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Within 1 mile (1.61 km) of the mean high water line where an Exposure D condition exists upwind at the waterline and the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is 130 mph (58 m/s) or greater.

2.	In areas where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is 140 mph (63.6 m/s) or greater; or Hawaii.

[RB] WINDER. A tread with nonparallel edges.

[RB] WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. A panel manufactured from veneers; or wood strands or wafers; bonded together with waterproof synthetic resins or other suitable bonding systems. Examples of wood structural panels are plywood, OSB or composite panels.

[RB] YARD. An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this code, on the lot on which a building is situated.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-20]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 20
BOILERS AND WATER HEATERS
SECTION M2001
BOILERS
M2001.1 Installation.

In addition to the requirements of this code, the installation of boilers shall conform to the manufacturer’s instructions. The manufacturer’s rating data, the nameplate and operating instructions of a permanent type shall be attached to the boiler. Boilers shall have their controls set, adjusted and tested by the installer. A complete control diagram together with complete boiler operating instructions shall be furnished by the installer. Solid and liquid fuel-burning boilers shall be provided with combustion air as required by Chapter 17.

M2001.1.1 Standards.

Packaged oil-fired boilers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 726. Packaged electric boilers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 834. Solid fuel-fired boilers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2523. Boilers shall be designed, constructed and certified in accordance with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section I or IV. Controls and safety devices for boilers with fuel input ratings of 12,500,000 Btu/hr (3 663 388 watts) or less shall meet the requirements of ASME CSD-1. Gas-fired boilers shall conform to the requirements listed in Chapter 24.

M2001.2 Clearance.

Boilers shall be installed in accordance with their listing and label.

M2001.3 Valves.

Every boiler or modular boiler shall have a shutoff valve in the supply and return piping. For multiple boiler or multiple modular boiler installations, each boiler or modular boiler shall have individual shutoff valves in the supply and return piping.

Exception: Shutoff valves are not required in a system having a single low-pressure steam boiler.

M2001.4 Flood-resistant installation.

In flood hazard areas established in Table R301.2(1), boilers, water heaters and their control systems shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

SECTION M2002
OPERATING AND SAFETY CONTROLS
M2002.1 Safety controls.

Electrical and mechanical operating and safety controls for boilers shall be listed and labeled.

M2002.2 Hot water boiler gauges.

Every hot water boiler shall have a pressure gauge and a temperature gauge, or combination pressure and temperature gauge. The gauges shall indicate the temperature and pressure within the normal range of the system’s operation.

M2002.3 Steam boiler gauges.

Every steam boiler shall have a water-gauge glass and a pressure gauge. The pressure gauge shall indicate the pressure within the normal range of the system’s operation. The gauge glass shall be installed so that the midpoint is at the normal water level.

M2002.4 Pressure-relief valve.

Boilers shall be equipped with pressure-relief valves with minimum rated capacities for the equipment served. Pressure-relief valves shall be set at the maximum rating of the boiler. Discharge shall be piped to drains by gravity to within 18 inches (457 mm) of the floor or to an open receptor.

M2002.5 Boiler low-water cutoff.

Steam and hot water boilers shall be protected with a low-water cutoff control.

Exception: A low-water cutoff is not required for coiltype and water-tube type boilers that require forced circulation of water through the boiler and that are protected with a flow sensing control.

M2002.6 Operation.

Low-water cutoff controls and flow sensing controls required by Section M2002.5 shall automatically stop the combustion operation of the appliance when the water level drops below the lowest safe water level as established by the manufacturer or when the water circulation flow is less than that required for safe operation of the appliance, respectively.

SECTION M2003
EXPANSION TANKS
M2003.1 General.

Hot water boilers shall be provided with expansion tanks. Nonpressurized expansion tanks shall be securely fastened to the structure or boiler and supported to carry twice the weight of the tank filled with water. Provisions shall be made for draining nonpressurized tanks without emptying the system.

M2003.1.1 Pressurized expansion tanks.

Pressurized expansion tanks shall be consistent with the volume and capacity of the system. Tanks shall be capable of withstanding a hydrostatic test pressure of two and one-half times the allowable working pressure of the system.

M2003.2 Minimum capacity.

The minimum capacity of expansion tanks shall be determined from Table M2003.2.

TABLE M2003.2

EXPANSION TANK MINIMUM CAPACITYa FOR FORCED HOT-WATER SYSTEMS

SYSTEM VOLUMEb
(gallons)
	PRESSURIZED
DIAPHRAGM TYPE
	NONPRESSURIZED
TYPE

10	1.0	1.5
20	1.5	3.0
30	2.5	4.5
40	3.0	6.0
50	4.0	7.5
60	5.0	9.0
70	6.0	10.5
80	6.5	12.0
90	7.5	13.5
100	8.0	15.0

For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound per square inch gauge = 6.895 kPa, °C = [(°F)-32]/1.8.

a.	Based on average water temperature of 195°F (91°C), fill pressure of 12 psig and a maximum operating pressure of 30 psig.

b.	System volume includes volume of water in boiler, convectors and piping, not including the expansion tank.

SECTION M2004
WATER HEATERS USED FOR SPACE HEATING
M2004.1 General.

Water heaters used to supply both potable hot water and hot water for space heating shall be installed in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 24, Chapter 28 and the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION M2005
WATER HEATERS
M2005.1 General.

Water heaters shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 28, the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements of this code. Water heaters installed in an attic shall comply with the requirements of Section M1305.1.3. Gas-fired water heaters shall comply with the requirements in Chapter 24. Domestic electric water heaters shall comply with UL 174. Oiled-fired water heaters shall comply with UL 732. Thermal solar water heaters shall comply with Chapter 23 and UL 174. Solid fuel-fired water heaters shall comply with UL 2523.

M2005.2 Prohibited locations.

Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required.

M2005.2.1 Water heater access.

Access to water heaters that are located in an attic or underfloor crawl space is permitted to be through a closet located in a sleeping room or bathroom where ventilation of those spaces is in accordance with this code.

M2005.3 Electric water heaters.

Electric water heaters shall also be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 34.

M2005.4 Supplemental water-heating devices.

Potable water heating devices that use refrigerant-to-water heat exchangers shall be approved and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION M2006
POOL HEATERS
M2006.1 General.

Pool and spa heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Oil-fired pool heaters shall comply with UL 726. Electric pool and spa heaters shall comply with UL 1261.

M2006.2 Clearances.

The clearances shall not interfere with combustion air, draft hood or flue terminal relief, or accessibility for servicing.

M2006.3 Temperature-limiting devices.

Pool heaters shall have temperature-relief valves.

M2006.4 Bypass valves.

Where an integral bypass system is not provided as a part of the pool heater, a bypass line and valve shall be installed between the inlet and outlet piping for use in adjusting the flow of water through the heater.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-21]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 21
HYDRONIC PIPING
SECTION M2101
HYDRONIC PIPING SYSTEMS INSTALLATION
M2101.1 General.

Hydronic piping shall conform to Table M2101.1. Approved piping, valves, fittings and connections shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Pipe and fittings shall be rated for use at the operating temperature and pressure of the hydronic system. Used pipe, fittings, valves or other materials shall be free of foreign materials.

TABLE M2101.1

HYDRONIC PIPING MATERIALS

MATERIAL	USE
CODEa
	STANDARDb	JOINTS	NOTES
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene
(ABS) plastic pipe
	1, 5	ASTM D1527;
ASTM F2806;
ASTM F2969	Solvent cement joints	
Brass pipe	1	ASTM B43	Brazed, welded, threaded, mechanical and flanged fittings	
Brass tubing	1	ASTM B135	Brazed, soldered and mechanical fittings	
Chlorinated poly (vinyl chloride)
(CPVC) pipe and tubing
	1, 2, 3	ASTM D2846	Solvent cement joints, compression joints and threaded adapters	
Copper pipe	1	ASTM B42,
B302
	Brazed, soldered and mechanical fittings threaded, welded and flanged	
Copper tubing (type K, L or M)	1, 2	ASTM B75,
B88, B251,
B306	Brazed, soldered and flared mechanical fittings	Joints embedded in concrete
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX)	1, 2, 3	ASTM F876, F877	(See PEX fittings)	Install in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions
Cross-linked polyethylene/
aluminum/cross-linked
polyethylene-(PEX-AL-PEX)
pressure pipe
	1, 2	ASTM F1281 or
CAN/CSA B137.10
	Mechanical, crimp/insert	Install in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions
PEX fittings		ASTM F877
ASTM F1807
ASTM F1960
ASTM F2098
ASTM F2159
ASTM F2735
	Copper-crimp/insert fittings, cold expansion fittings, stainless steel clamp, insert fittings	Install in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions
Polybutylene (PB) pipe and tubing	1, 2, 3	ASTM D3309	Heat-fusion, crimp/insert and compression	Joints in concrete shall be heat-fused
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene
(PE-AL-PE) pressure pipe
	1, 2, 3	ASTM F1282
CSA B 137.9
	Mechanical, crimp/insert	
Polypropylene (PP)	1, 2, 3	ISO 15874
ASTM F2389
	Heat-fusion joints, mechanical fittings, threaded adapters, compression joints	
Raised temperature polyethylene
(PE-RT)
	1, 2, 3	ASTM F2623
ASTM F2769
	Copper crimp/insert fitting stainless steel clamp, insert fittings	
Raised temperature polyethylene
(PE-RT) fittings
	1, 2,3	ASTM F1807
ASTM F2159
ASTM F2735
ASTM F2769
ASTM F2098	Copper crimp/insert fitting stainless steel clamp, insert fittings	
Steel pipe	1, 2	ASTM A53,
A106
	Brazed, welded, threaded, flanged and mechanical fittings	Joints in concrete shall be welded. Galvanized pipe shall not be welded or brazed.
Steel tubing	1	ASTM A254	Mechanical fittings, welded	

For SI: °C = [(°F)-32]/1.8.

a.	Use code:

1.	Above ground.

2.	Embedded in radiant systems.

3.	Temperatures below 180°F only.

4.	Low temperature (below 130°F) applications only.

5.	Temperatures below 160°F only.

b.	Standards as listed in Chapter 46.

M2101.2 System drain down.

Hydronic piping systems shall be installed to permit draining of the system. Where the system drains to the plumbing drainage system, the installation shall conform to the requirements of Chapters 25 through 32 of this code.

Exception: The buried portions of systems embedded underground or under floors.

M2101.3 Protection of potable water.

The potable water system shall be protected from backflow in accordance with the provisions listed in Section P2902.

M2101.4 Pipe penetrations.

Openings through concrete or masonry building elements shall be sleeved.

M2101.5 Contact with building material.

A hydronic piping system shall not be in direct contact with any building material that causes the piping material to degrade or corrode.

M2101.6 Drilling and notching.

Wood-framed structural members shall be drilled, notched or altered in accordance with the provisions of Sections R502.2, R602.3 and R802.7. Holes in load-bearing members of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall be permitted only in accordance with Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1. In accordance with the provisions of Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1, cutting and notching of flanges and lips of load-bearing members of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall not be permitted. Structural insulated panels (SIPs) shall be drilled and notched or altered in accordance with the provisions of Section R610.7.

M2101.7 Prohibited tee applications.

Fluid in the supply side of a hydronic system shall not enter a tee fitting through the branch opening.

M2101.8 Expansion, contraction and settlement.

Piping shall be installed so that piping, connections and equipment shall not be subjected to excessive strains or stresses. Provisions shall be made to compensate for expansion, contraction, shrinkage and structural settlement.

M2101.9 Piping support.

Hangers and supports shall be of material of sufficient strength to support the piping, and shall be fabricated from materials compatible with the piping material. Piping shall be supported at intervals not exceeding the spacing specified in Table M2101.9.

TABLE M2101.9

HANGER SPACING INTERVALS

PIPING MATERIAL	MAXIMUM
HORIZONTAL
SPACING
(feet)
	MAXIMUM
VERTICAL
SPACING
(feet)

ABS	4	10a
CPVC ≤ 1-inch pipe or tubing	3	5a
CPVC ≥ 11/4 inches	4	10a
Copper or copper alloy pipe	12	10
Copper or copper alloy tubing	6	10
PB pipe or tubing	2.67	4
PE pipe or tubing	2.67	4
PE-RT ≤ 1 inch	2.67	10a
PE-RT ≥ 11/4 inches	4	10a
PEX tubing	2.67	4
PP < 1-inch pipe or tubing	2.67	4
PP > 11/4 inches	4	10a
PVC	4	10a
Steel pipe	12	15
Steel tubing	8	10

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	For sizes 2 inches and smaller, a guide shall be installed midway between required vertical supports. Such guides shall prevent pipe movement in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the pipe.

M2101.10 Tests.

Hydronic piping systems shall be tested hydrostatically at a pressure of one and one-half times the maximum system design pressure, but not less than 100 pounds per square inch (689 kPa). The duration of each test shall be not less than 15 minutes and not more than 20 minutes.

M2101.11 Used materials.

Used pipe, fittings, valves, and other materials shall not be reused in hydronic systems.

M2101.12 Material rating.

Pipe and tubing shall be rated for the operating temperature and pressure of the system. Fittings shall be suitable for the pressure applications and recommended by the manufacturer for installation with the pipe and tubing material installed. Where used underground, materials shall be suitable for burial.

M2101.13 Joints and connections.

Joints and connections shall be of an approved type. Joints and connections shall be tight for the pressure of the system. Joints used underground shall be approved for such applications.

M2101.13.1 Joints between different piping materials.

Joints between different piping materials shall be made with approved transition fittings.

M2101.14 Preparation of pipe ends.

Pipe shall be cut square and shall be free of burrs and obstructions. Pipe ends shall have full-bore openings and shall be prepared in accordance with the pipe manufacturer’s instructions.

M2101.15 Joint preparation and installation.

Where required by Sections M2101.16 through M2101.18, the preparation and installation of mechanical and thermoplasticwelded joints shall comply with Sections M2101.15.1 and M2101.15.2.

M2101.15.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2101.15.2 Thermoplastic-welded joints.

Joint surfaces for thermoplastic-welded joints shall be cleaned by an approved procedure. Joints shall be welded in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2101.16 CPVC plastic pipe.

Joints between CPVC plastic pipe or fittings shall be solvent-cemented in accordance with Section P2906.9.1.2. Threaded joints between fittings and CPVC plastic pipe shall be in accordance with Section M2101.16.1.

M2101.16.1 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1 The pipe shall be Schedule 80, 40 or heavier plastic pipe and shall be threaded with dies specifically designed for plastic pipe. Thread lubricant, pipejoint compound or tape shall be applied on the male threads only and shall be approved for application on the piping material.

M2101.17 Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing.

Joints between cross-linked polyethylene plastic tubing and fittings shall comply with Sections M2101.17.1 and M2101.17.2. Mechanical joints shall comply with Section M2101.15.1.

M2101.17.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting the inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2101.17.2 Plastic-to-metal.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to plastic pipe or tubing.

M2101.18 Polyethylene plastic pipe and tubing.

Joints between polyethylene plastic pipe and tubing or fittings for systems shall be heat-fusion joints complying with Section M2101.18.1, electrofusion joints complying with Section M2101.18.2, or stab-type insertion joints complying with Section M2101.18.3.

M2101.18.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Joints shall be of the socket-fusion, saddle-fusion or butt-fusion type, and joined in accordance with ASTM D2657. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures and joined. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2683 or ASTM D3261.

M2101.18.2 Electrofusion joints.

Joints shall be of the electrofusion type. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture, and scoured to expose virgin resin. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures for the period of time specified by the manufacturer. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F1055.

M2101.18.3 Stab-type insert fittings.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Pipe ends shall be chamfered and inserted into the fittings to full depth. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F1924.

M2101.19 Polyproplyene (PP) plastic.

Joints between PP plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with Sections M2101.19.1 and M2101.19.2.

M2101.19.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Heat-fusion joints for polypropylene (PP) pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polypropylene fittings, electrofusion polypropylene fittings or by butt fusion. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM F2389.

M2101.19.2 Mechanical and compression sleeve joints.

Mechanical and compression sleeve joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2101.20 Raised temperature polyethylene (PE-RT) plastic tubing.

Joints between raised temperature polyethylene tubing and fittings shall comply with Sections M2101.20.1 through M2101.20.4. Mechanical joints shall comply with Section M2101.15.1.

M2101.20.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting the inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2101.20.2 PE-RT-to-metal connections.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to PE-RT pipe or tubing.

M2101.20.3 Heat-fusion joints.

Heat-fusion joints shall be of the socket-fusion, saddle-fusion or butt-fusion type, and shall be joined in accordance with ASTM D2657. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures and joined. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2683 orASTM D3261.

M2101.20.4 Electrofusion joints.

Joints shall be of the electrofusion type. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture and scoured to expose virgin resin. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures for the period of time specified by the manufacturer and joined. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F105.

M2101.21 PVC plastic pipe.

Joints between PVC plastic pipe or fittings shall be solvent-cemented in accordance with Section P2906.9.1.4. Threaded joints between fittings and PVC plastic pipe shall be in accordance with Section M2101.16.1.

M2101.22 Shutoff valves.

Shutoff valves shall be installed in ground-source loop piping systems in the locations indicated in Sections M2101.21.1 through M2101.21.6.

M2101.22.1 Heat exchangers.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the supply and return side of a heat exchanger.

Exception:Shutoff valves shall not be required where heat exchangers are integral with a boiler or are a component of a manufacturer’s boiler and heat exchanger packaged unit and are capable of being isolated from the hydronic system by the supply and return valves required by Section M2001.3.

M2101.22.2 Central systems.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the building supply and return of a central utility system.

M2101.22.3 Pressure vessels.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the connection to any pressure vessel.

M2101.22.4 Pressure-reducing valves.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on both sides of a pressure-reducing valve.

M2101.22.5 Equipment and appliances.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on connections to mechanical equipment and appliances. This requirement does not apply to components of ground-source loop systems such as pumps, air separators, metering devices, and similar equipment.

M2101.22.6 Expansion tanks.

Shutoff valves shall be installed at connections to nondiaphragm-type expansion tanks.

M2101.23 Reduced pressure.

A pressure relief valve shall be installed on the low-pressure side of a hydronic piping system that has been reduced in pressure. The relief valve shall be set at the maximum pressure of the system design. The valve shall be installed in accordance with Section M2002.

M2101.24 Installation.

Piping, valves, fittings, and connections shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2101.25 Protection of potable water.

Where hydronic systems have a connection to a potable water supply, the potable water system shall be protected from backflow in accordance with Section P2902.

M2101.26 Pipe penetrations.

Openings for pipe penetrations in walls, floors and ceilings shall be larger than the penetrating pipe. Openings through concrete or masonry building elements shall be sleeved. The annular space surrounding pipe penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section P2606.1.

M2101.27 Clearance from combustibles.

A pipe in a piping system having an exterior surface temperature exceeding 250°F (121°C) shall have a clearance of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) from combustible materials.

M2101.28 Contact with building material.

A piping system shall not be in direct contact with building materials that cause the piping or fitting material to degrade or corrode, or that interfere with the operation of the system.

M2101.29 Strains and stresses.

Piping shall be installed so as to prevent detrimental strains and stresses in the pipe. Provisions shall be made to protect piping from damage resulting from expansion, contraction and structural settlement. Piping shall be installed so as to avoid structural stresses or strains within building components.

M2101.29.1 Flood hazard.

Piping located in a flood hazard area shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.

M2101.30 Chemical compatibility.

Antifreeze and other materials used in the system shall be chemically compatible with the pipe, tubing, fittings and mechanical systems.

M2101.31 Makeup water.

The transfer fluid shall be compatible with the makeup water supplied to the system.

SECTION M2102
BASEBOARD CONVECTORS
M2102.1 General.

Baseboard convectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Convectors shall be supported independently of the hydronic piping.

SECTION M2103
FLOOR HEATING SYSTEMS
M2103.1 Piping materials.

Piping for embedment in concrete or gypsum materials shall be standard-weight steel pipe, copper and copper alloy pipe and tubing, cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pressure pipe, chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC), cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) tubing, polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) or polypropylene (PP) with a minimum rating of 80 psi at 180°F (552 kPa at 82°C).

M2103.2 Thermal barrier required.

Radiant floor heating systems shall have a thermal barrier in accordance with Sections M2103.2.1 through M2103.2.4.

Exception: Insulation shall not be required in engineered systems where it can be demonstrated that the insulation will decrease the efficiency or have a negative effect on the installation.

M2103.2.1 Slab-on-grade installation.

Radiant piping used in slab-on-grade applications shall have insulating materials having a minimum R-value of 5 installed beneath the piping.

M2103.2.2 Suspended floor installation.

In suspended floor applications, insulation shall be installed in the joist bay cavity serving the heating space above and shall consist of materials having a minimum R-value of 11.

M2103.2.3 Thermal break required.

A thermal break consisting of asphalt expansion joint materials or similar insulating materials shall be provided at a point where a heated slab meets a foundation wall or other conductive slab.

M2103.2.4 Thermal barrier material marking.

Insulating materials used in thermal barriers shall be installed so that the manufacturer’s R-value mark is readily observable upon inspection.

M2103.3 Piping joints.

Copper and copper alloy systems shall be soldered in accordance with ASTM B828. Fluxes for soldering shall be in accordance with ASTM B813. Brazing fluxes shall be in accordance with AWS A5.31. Piping joints that are embedded shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	Steel pipe joints shall be welded.

2.	Copper tubing shall be joined by brazing complying with Section P3003.6.1.

3.	Polybutylene pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polybutylene fittings.

4.	CPVC tubing shall be joined using solvent cement joints.

5.	Polypropylene pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polypropylene fittings.

6.	Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) tubing shall be joined using cold expansion, insert or compression fittings.

7.	Raised temperature polyethylene (PE-RT) tubing shall be joined using insert or compression fittings.

M2103.4 Testing.

Piping or tubing to be embedded shall be tested by applying a hydrostatic pressure of not less than 100 psi (690 kPa). The pressure shall be maintained for 30 minutes, during which, the joints shall be visually inspected for leaks.

SECTION M2104
LOW TEMPERATURE PIPING
M2104.1 Piping materials.

Low temperature piping for embedment in concrete or gypsum materials shall be as indicated in Table M2101.1.

M2104.2 Piping joints.

Piping joints, other than those in Section M2103.3, that are embedded shall comply with the following requirements:

1.	Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) tubing shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Polyethylene tubing shall be installed with heat fusion joints.

3.	Polypropylene (PP) tubing shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

4.	Raised temperature polyethylene (PE-RT) shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2104.3 Raised temperature polyethylene (PE-RT) plastic tubing.

Joints between raised temperature polyethylene tubing and fittings shall conform to Sections M2104.3.1, M2104.3.2 and M2104.3.3. Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2104.3.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting such inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2104.3.2 PE-RT-to-metal connections.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to PE-RT pipe.

M2104.3.3 PE-RT insert fittings.

PE-RT insert fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2104.4 Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) pressure pipe.

Joints between polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene pressure pipe and fittings shall conform to Sections M2104.4.1 and M2104.4.2. Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2104.4.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting such inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2104.4.2 PE-AL-PE to metal connections.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to PE-AL-PE pipe.

SECTION M2105
GROUND-SOURCE HEAT-PUMP
SYSTEM LOOP PIPING
M2105.1 Plastic ground-source heat-pump loop piping.

Plastic piping and tubing material used in water-based ground-source heat-pump ground-loop systems shall conform to the standards specified in this section.

M2105.2 Used materials.

Reused pipe, fittings, valves, and other materials shall not be used in ground-source heat-pump loop systems.

M2105.3 Material rating.

Pipe and tubing shall be rated for the operating temperature and pressure of the ground-source heat-pump loop system. Fittings shall be suitable for the pressure applications and recommended by the manufacturer for installation with the pipe and tubing material installed. Where used underground, materials shall be suitable for burial.

M2105.4 Piping and tubing materials standards.

Ground-source heat-pump ground-loop pipe and tubing shall conform to the standards listed in Table M2105.4.

TABLE M2105.4

GROUND-SOURCE LOOP PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride
(CPVC)
	ASTM D2846; ASTM F437; ASTM F438; ASTM F439;
ASTM F441; ASTM F442; CSA B137.6

Cross-linked polyethylene
(PEX)
	ASTM F876; ASTM F877, CSA B137.5; CSA C448, NSF 358-3
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene
(PE-AL-PE) pressure pipe
	ASTM F1282; CSA B137.9; AWWA C 903
High-density polyethylene (HDPE)	ASTM D2737; ASTM D3035; ASTM F714;
AWWA C901; CSA B137.1; CSA C448; NSF 358-1

Polypropylene (PP-R)	ASTM F2389; CSA B137.11
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)	ASTM D1785; ASTM D2241; CSA 137.3
Raised temperature polyethylene
(PE-RT)
	ASTM F2623; ASTM F2769, CSA C448, NSF 358-4
M2105.5 Fittings.

Ground-source heat-pump pipe fittings shall be approved for installation with the piping materials to be installed, shall conform to the standards listed in Table M2105.5 and, where installed underground, shall be suitable for burial.

TABLE M2105.5

GROUND-SOURCE LOOP PIPE FITTINGS

PIPE MATERIAL	STANDARD
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride
(CPVC)
	ASTM D2846; ASTM F437; ASTM F438; ASTM F439;
ASTM F1970; CSA B137.6

Cross-linked polyethylene
(PEX)
	ASTM F877; ASTM F1807; ASTM F1960; ASTM F2080;
ASTM F2159; ASTM F2434; CSA B137.5, CSA C448, NSF 358-3

Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene
(PE-AL-PE)
	ASTM F2434; ASTM F1282; CSA B137.9
High-density polyethylene (HDPE)	ASTM D2683; ASTM D3261;
ASTM F1055; CSA B137.1; CSA C448; NSF 358-1

Polypropylene (PP-R)	ASTM F2389; CSA B137.11; NSF 358-2
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)	ASTM D2464; ASTM D2466; ASTM D2467; ASTM F1970,
CSA B137.2; CSA B137.3

Raised temperature polyethylene
(PE-RT)
	ASTM D3261; ASTM F1807; ASTM F2159; F2769; B137.1; CSA C448, NSF 358-4
M2105.6 Joints and connections.

Joints and connections shall be of an approved type. Joints and connections shall be tight for the pressure of the ground-source loop system. Joints used underground shall be approved for such applications.

M2105.6.1 Joints between different piping materials.

Joints between different piping materials shall be made with approved transition fittings.

M2105.7 Preparation of pipe ends.

Pipe shall be cut square, and shall be free of burrs and obstructions. Pipe ends shall have full-bore openings and shall be prepared in accordance with the pipe manufacturer’s instructions.

M2105.8 Joint preparation and installation.

Where required by Sections M2105.9 through M2105.11, the preparation and installation of mechanical and thermoplastic-welded joints shall comply with Sections M2105.8.1 and M2015.8.2.

M2105.8.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2105.8.2 Thermoplastic-welded joints.

Joint surfaces for thermoplastic-welded joints shall be cleaned by an approved procedure. Joints shall be welded in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2105.9 CPVC plastic pipe.

Joints between CPVC plastic pipe or fittings shall be solvent-cemented in accordance with Section P2906.9.1.2. Threaded joints between fittings and CPVC plastic pipe shall be in accordance with Section M2105.9.1.

M2105.9.1 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1. The pipe shall be Schedule 80 or heavier plastic pipe and shall be threaded with dies specifically designed for plastic pipe. Thread lubricant, pipe-joint compound or tape shall be applied on the male threads only and shall be approved for application on the piping material.

M2105.10 Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing.

Joints between cross-linked polyethylene plastic tubing and fittings shall comply with Sections M2105.10.1 and M2105.10.2. Mechanical joints shall comply with Section M2105.8.1.

M2105.10.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting the inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2105.10.2 Plastic-to-metal connections.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to plastic pipe or tubing.

M2105.11 Polyethylene plastic pipe and tubing.

Joints between polyethylene plastic pipe and tubing or fittings for ground-source heat-pump loop systems shall be heat-fusion joints complying with Section M2105.11.1, electrofusion joints complying with Section M2105.11.2, or stab-type insertion joints complying with Section M2105.11.3.

M2105.11.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Joints shall be of the socket-fusion, saddle-fusion or butt-fusion type, and joined in accordance with ASTM D2657. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures and joined. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2683 or ASTM D3261.

M2105.11.2 Electrofusion joints.

Joints shall be of the electrofusion type. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture, and scoured to expose virgin resin. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures for the period of time specified by the manufacturer. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F1055.

M2105.11.3 Stab-type insert fittings.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture. Pipe ends shall be chamfered and inserted into the fittings to full depth. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F1924.

M2105.12 Polypropylene (PP) plastic.

Joints between PP plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with Sections M2105.12.1 and M2105.12.2.

M2105.12.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Heat-fusion joints for polypropylene (PP) pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polypropylene fittings, electrofusion polypropylene fittings or by butt fusion. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM F2389.

M2105.12.2 Mechanical and compression sleeve joints.

Mechanical and compression sleeve joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2105.13 Raised temperature polyethylene (PE-RT) plastic tubing.

Joints between raised temperature polyethylene tubing and fittings shall comply with Sections M2105.13.1 and M2105.13.2. Mechanical joints shall comply with Section M2105.8.1.

M2105.13.1 Compression-type fittings.

Where compression-type fittings include inserts and ferrules or O-rings, the fittings shall be installed without omitting the inserts and ferrules or O-rings.

M2105.13.2 PE-RT-to-metal connections.

Solder joints in a metal pipe shall not occur within 18 inches (457 mm) of a transition from such metal pipe to PE-RT pipe or tubing.

M2105.14 PVC plastic pipe.

Joints between PVC plastic pipe or fittings shall be solvent-cemented in accordance with Section P2906.9.1.4. Threaded joints between fittings and PVC plastic pipe shall be in accordance with Section M2105.9.1.

M2105.15 Shutoff valves.

Shutoff valves shall be installed in ground-source loop piping systems in the locations indicated in Sections M2105.15.1 through M2105.15.6.

M2105.15.1 Heat exchangers.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the supply and return side of a heat exchanger.

Exception: Shutoff valves shall not be required where heat exchangers are integral with a boiler or are a component of a manufacturer’s boiler and heat exchanger packaged unit and are capable of being isolated from the hydronic system by the supply and return valves required by Section M2001.3.

M2105.15.2 Central systems.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the building supply and return of a central utility system.

M2105.15.3 Pressure vessels.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on the connection to any pressure vessel.

M2105.15.4 Pressure-reducing valves.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on both sides of a pressure-reducing valve.

M2105.15.5 Equipment and appliances.

Shutoff valves shall be installed on connections to mechanical equipment and appliances. This requirement does not apply to components of ground-source loop systems such as pumps, air separators, metering devices, and similar equipment.

M2105.15.6 Expansion tanks.

Shutoff valves shall be installed at connections to nondiaphragm-type expansion tanks.

M2105.16 Reduced pressure.

A pressure relief valve shall be installed on the low-pressure side of a hydronic piping system that has been reduced in pressure. The relief valve shall be set at the maximum pressure of the system design. The valve shall be installed in accordance with Section M2002.

M2105.17 Installation.

Piping, valves, fittings, and connections shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

M2105.18 Protection of potable water.

Where ground-source heat-pump ground-loop systems have a connection to a potable water supply, the potable water system shall be protected from backflow in accordance with Section P2902.

M2105.19 Pipe penetrations.

Openings for pipe penetrations in walls, floors and ceilings shall be larger than the penetrating pipe. Openings through concrete or masonry building elements shall be sleeved. The annular space surrounding pipe penetrations shall be protected in accordance with Section P2606.1.

M2105.20 Clearance from combustibles.

A pipe in a ground-source heat pump piping system having an exterior surface temperature exceeding 250°F (121°C) shall have a clearance of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) from combustible materials.

M2105.21 Contact with building material.

A ground-source heat-pump ground-loop piping system shall not be in direct contact with building materials that cause the piping or fitting material to degrade or corrode, or that interfere with the operation of the system.

M2105.22 Strains and stresses.

Piping shall be installed so as to prevent detrimental strains and stresses in the pipe. Provisions shall be made to protect piping from damage resulting from expansion, contraction and structural settlement. Piping shall be installed so as to avoid structural stresses or strains within building components.

M2105.22.1 Flood hazard.

Piping located in a flood hazard area shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.

M2105.23 Pipe support.

Pipe shall be supported in accordance with Section M2101.9.

M2105.24 Velocities.

Ground-source heat-pump ground-loop systems shall be designed so that the flow velocities do not exceed the maximum flow velocity recommended by the pipe and fittings manufacturer. Flow velocities shall be controlled to reduce the possibility of water hammer.

M2105.25 Labeling and marking.

Ground-source heatpump ground-loop system piping shall be marked with tape, metal tags or other methods where it enters a building. The marking shall state the following words: “GROUND-SOURCE HEAT-PUMP LOOP SYSTEM.” The marking shall indicate if antifreeze is used in the system and shall indicate the chemicals by name and concentration.

M2105.26 Chemical compatibility.

Antifreeze and other materials used in the system shall be chemically compatible with the pipe, tubing, fittings and mechanical systems.

M2105.27 Makeup water.

The transfer fluid shall be compatible with the makeup water supplied to the system.

M2105.28 Testing.

Before connection header trenches are backfilled, the assembled loop system shall be pressure tested with water at 100 psi (689 kPa) for 15 minutes without observed leaks. Flow and pressure loss testing shall be performed and the actual flow rates and pressure drops shall be compared to the calculated design values. If actual flow rate or pressure drop values differ from calculated design values by more than 10 percent, the cause shall be identified and corrective action taken.

M2105.29 Embedded piping.

Ground-source heat-pump ground-loop piping to be embedded in concrete shall be pressure tested prior to pouring concrete. During pouring, the pipe shall be maintained at the proposed operating pressure.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-22]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 22
SPECIAL PIPING AND STORAGE SYSTEMS
SECTION M2201
OIL TANKS
M2201.1 Materials.

Supply tanks shall be listed and labeled and shall conform to UL 58 for underground tanks and UL 80 for indoor tanks.

M2201.2 Above-ground tanks.

The maximum amount of fuel oil stored above ground or inside of a building shall be 660 gallons (2498 L). The supply tank shall be supported on rigid noncombustible supports to prevent settling or shifting.

Exception: The storage of fuel oil, used for space or water heating, above ground or inside buildings in quantities exceeding 660 gallons (2498 L) shall comply with NFPA 31.

M2201.2.1 Tanks within buildings.

Supply tanks for use inside of buildings shall be of such size and shape to permit installation and removal from dwellings as whole units. Supply tanks larger than 10 gallons (38 L) shall be placed not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from any fire or flame either within or external to any fuel-burning appliance.

M2201.2.2 Outside above-ground tanks.

Tanks installed outside above ground shall be a minimum of 5 feet (1524 mm) from an adjoining property line. Such tanks shall be suitably protected from the weather and from physical damage.

M2201.3 Underground tanks.

Excavations for underground tanks shall not undermine the foundations of existing structures. The clearance from the tank to the nearest wall of a basement, pit or property line shall be not less than 1 foot (305 mm). Tanks shall be set on and surrounded with noncorrosive inert materials such as clean earth, sand or gravel well tamped in place. Tanks shall be covered with not less than 1 foot (305 mm) of earth. Corrosion protection shall be provided in accordance with Section M2203.7.

M2201.4 Multiple tanks.

Cross connection of two supply tanks shall be permitted in accordance with Section M2203.6.

M2201.5 Oil gauges.

Inside tanks shall be provided with a device to indicate when the oil in the tank has reached a predetermined safe level. Glass gauges or a gauge subject to breakage that could result in the escape of oil from the tank shall not be used. Liquid-level indicating gauges shall comply with UL 180.

M2201.6 Flood-resistant installation.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), tanks shall be installed in accordance with Section R322.2.4 or R322.3.10.

M2201.7 Tanks abandoned or removed.

Exterior abovegrade fill piping shall be removed when tanks are abandoned or removed. Tank abandonment and removal shall be in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION M2202
OIL PIPING, FITTING AND CONNECTIONS
M2202.1 Materials.

Piping shall consist of steel pipe, copper and copper alloy pipe and tubing, steel tubing conforming to ASTM A539 or stainless steel tubing conforming to ASTM A254 or ASTM A269. Aluminum tubing shall not be used between the fuel-oil tank and the burner units.

M2202.2 Joints and fittings.

Piping shall be connected with fittings compatible with the piping material. Cast iron fittings shall not be used for oil piping. Unions requiring gaskets or packings, right or left couplings, and sweat fittings employing solder having a melting point less than 1,000°F (538°C) shall not be used for oil piping. Threaded joints and connections shall be made tight with a lubricant or pipe thread compound.

M2202.3 Flexible connectors.

Flexible metallic hoses shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 536 and shall be installed in accordance with their listing and labeling and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Connectors made from combustible materials shall not be used inside of buildings or above ground outside of buildings.

SECTION M2203
INSTALLATION
M2203.1 General.

Piping shall be installed in a manner to avoid placing stresses on the piping, and to accommodate expansion and contraction of the piping system.

M2203.2 Supply piping.

Supply piping used in the installation of oil burners and appliances shall be not smaller than 3/8-inch (9 mm) pipe or 3/8-inch (9 mm) outside diameter tubing. Copper tubing and fittings shall be a minimum of Type L.

M2203.3 Fill piping.

Fill piping shall terminate outside of buildings at a point not less than 2 feet (610 mm) from any building opening at the same or lower level. Fill openings shall be equipped with a tight metal cover.

M2203.4 Vent piping.

Vent piping shall be not smaller than 11/4-inch (32 mm) pipe. Vent piping shall be laid to drain toward the tank without sags or traps in which the liquid can collect. Vent pipes shall not be cross connected with fill pipes, lines from burners or overflow lines from auxiliary tanks. The lower end of a vent pipe shall enter the tank through the top and shall extend into the tank not more than 1 inch (25 mm).

M2203.5 Vent termination.

Vent piping shall terminate outside of buildings at a point not less than 2 feet (610 mm), measured vertically or horizontally, from any building opening. Outer ends of vent piping shall terminate in a weather-proof cap or fitting having an unobstructed area at least equal to the cross-sectional area of the vent pipe, and shall be located sufficiently above the ground to avoid being obstructed.

M2203.6 Cross connection of tanks.

Cross connection of two supply tanks, not exceeding 660 gallons (2498 L) aggregate capacity, with gravity flow from one tank to another, shall be acceptable providing that the two tanks are on the same horizontal plane.

M2203.7 Corrosion protection.

Underground tanks and buried piping shall be protected by corrosion-resistant coatings or special alloys or fiberglass-reinforced plastic.

SECTION M2204
OIL PUMPS AND VALVES
M2204.1 Pumps.

Oil pumps shall be positive displacement types that automatically shut off the oil supply when stopped. Automatic pumps shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 343 and shall be installed in accordance with their listing.

M2204.2 Shutoff valves.

A manual shutoff valve shall be installed to allow for ready access and be located between the oil supply tank and the burner. Where the shutoff valve is installed in the discharge line of an oil pump, a pressure-relief valve shall be incorporated to bypass or return surplus oil. Valves shall comply with UL 842.

M2204.3 Maximum pressure.

Pressure at the oil supply inlet to an appliance shall be not greater than 3 pounds per square inch (20.7 kPa).

M2204.4 Relief valves.

Fuel-oil lines incorporating heaters shall be provided with relief valves that will discharge to a return line when excess pressure exists.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-23]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 23
SOLAR THERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION M2301
THERMAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
M2301.1 General.

This section provides for the design, construction, installation, alteration and repair of equipment and systems using thermal solar energy to provide space heating or cooling, hot water heating and swimming pool heating.

M2301.2 Design and installation.

The design and installation of thermal solar energy systems shall comply with Sections M2301.2.1 through M2301.2.13.

M2301.2.1 Access.

Solar energy collectors, controls, dampers, fans, blowers and pumps shall be located to allow access for inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement.

M2301.2.2 Collectors and panels.

Solar collectors and panels shall comply with Sections M2301.2.2.1 and M2301.2.2.2.

M2301.2.2.1 Roof-mounted collectors.

The roof shall be constructed to support the loads imposed by roof-mounted solar collectors. Roof-mounted solar collectors that serve as a roof covering shall conform to the requirements for roof coverings in Chapter 9 [the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone (HVHZ) shall comply with Chapter 44] of this code. Where mounted on or above the roof coverings, the collectors and supporting structure shall be constructed of noncombustible materials or fire-retardant-treated wood equivalent to that required for the roof construction.

M2301.2.2.2 Collector sensors.

Collector sensor installation, sensor location and the protection of exposed sensor wires from ultraviolet light shall be in accordance with SRCC 300.

M2301.2.3 Pressure and temperature relief valves and system components.

System components containing fluids shall be protected with temperature and pressure relief valves or pressure relief valves. Relief devices shall be installed in sections of the system so that a section cannot be valved off or isolated from a relief device. Direct systems and the potable water portion of indirect systems shall be equipped with a relief valve in accordance with Section P2804. For indirect systems, pressure relief valves in solar loops shall comply with SRCC 300. System components shall have a working pressure rating of not less than the setting of the pressure relief device.

M2301.2.4 Vacuum relief.

System components that might be subjected to pressure drops below atmospheric pressure during operation or shutdown shall be protected by a vacuum-relief valve.

M2301.2.5 Piping insulation.

Piping shall be insulated in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 11. Exterior insulation shall be protected from ultraviolet degradation. The entire solar loop shall be insulated. Where split-style insulation is used, the seam shall be sealed. Fittings shall be fully insulated.

Exceptions:

1.	Those portions of the piping that are used to help prevent the system from overheating shall not be required to be insulated.

2.	Those portions of piping that are exposed to solar radiation, made of the same material as the solar collector absorber plate and are covered in the same manner as the solar collector absorber, or that are used to collect additional solar energy, shall not be required to be insulated.

3.	Piping in thermal solar systems using unglazed solar collectors to heat a swimming pool shall not be required to be insulated.

M2301.2.6 Protection from freezing.

System components shall be protected from damage resulting from freezing of heat-transfer liquids at the winter design temperature provided in Table R301.2(1). Freeze protection shall be provided by heating, insulation, thermal mass and heat transfer fluids with freeze points lower than the winter design temperature, heat tape or other approved methods, or combinations thereof.

Exception: Where the winter design temperature is greater than 32°F (0°C).

M2301.2.7 Storage tank sensors.

Storage tank sensors shall comply with SRCC 300.

M2301.2.8 Expansion tanks.

Expansion tanks in solar energy systems shall be installed in accordance with Section M2003 in solar collector loops that contain pressurized heat transfer fluid. Where expansion tanks are used, the system shall be designed in accordance with SRCC 300 to provide an expansion tank that is sized to withstand the maximum operating pressure of the system.

Exception: Expansion tanks shall not be required in drain-back systems.

M2301.2.9 Roof and wall penetrations.

Roof and wall penetrations shall be flashed and sealed in accordance with Chapter 9 [the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone (HVHZ) shall comply with Chapter 44] of this code to prevent entry of water, rodents and insects.

M2301.2.10 Description and warning labels.

Solar thermal systems shall comply with description label and warning label requirements of Section M2301.2.11.2 and SRCC 300.

M2301.2.11 Solar loop.

Solar loops shall be in accordance with Sections M2301.2.11.1 and M2301.2.11.2.

M2301.2.11.1 Solar loop isolation.

Valves shall be installed to allow the solar collectors to be isolated from the remainder of the system.

M2301.2.11.2 Drain and fill valve labels and caps.

Drain and fill valves shall be labeled with a description and warning that identifies the fluid in the solar loop and a warning that the fluid might be discharged at high temperature and pressure. Drain caps shall be installed at drain and fill valves.

M2301.2.12 Maximum temperature limitation.

Systems shall be equipped with means to limit the maximum water temperature of the system fluid entering or exchanging heat with any pressurized vessel inside the dwelling to 180°F (82°C). This protection is in addition to the required temperature- and pressure-relief valves required by Section M2301.2.3.

M2301.2.13.

Reserved.

M2301.3 Labeling.

Labeling shall comply with Sections M2301.3.1 and M2301.3.2.

M2301.3.1 Collectors and panels.

Solar thermal collectors and panels shall be listed and labeled in accordance with SRCC 100 or SRCC 600. Collectors and panels shall be listed and labeled to show the manufacturer’s name, model number, serial number, collector weight, collector maximum allowable temperatures and pressures, and the type of heat transfer fluids that are compatible with the collector or panel. The label shall clarify that these specifications apply only to the collector or panel.

M2301.3.2 Thermal storage units.

Pressurized thermal storage units shall be listed and labeled to show the manufacturer’s name, model number, serial number, storage unit maximum and minimum allowable operating temperatures and pressures, and the type of heat transfer fluids that are compatible with the storage unit. The label shall clarify that these specifications apply only to the thermal storage unit.

M2301.4 Heat transfer gasses or liquids and heat exchangers.

Essentially toxic transfer fluids, ethylene glycol, flammable gases and flammable liquids shall not be used as heat transfer fluids. Heat transfer gasses and liquids shall be rated to withstand the system’s maximum design temperature under operating conditions without degradation. Heat exchangers used in solar thermal systems shall comply with Section P2902.5.2 and SRCC 300.

Heat transfer fluids shall be in accordance with SRCC 300. The flash point of the heat transfer fluids utilized in solar thermal systems shall be not less than 50°F (28°C) above the design maximum nonoperating or no-flow temperature attained by the fluid in the collector.

M2301.5 Backflow protection.

Connections from the potable water supply to solar systems shall comply with Section P2902.5.5.

M2301.6 Filtering.

Air provided to occupied spaces that passes through thermal mass storage systems by mechanical means shall be filtered for particulates at the outlet of the thermal mass storage system.

M2301.7 Solar thermal systems for heating potable water.

Where a solar thermal system heats potable water to supply a potable hot water distribution system, the solar thermal system shall be in accordance with Sections M2301.7.1, M2301.7.2 and P2902.5.5.

M2301.7.1 Indirect systems.

Heat exchangers that are components of indirect solar thermal heating systems shall comply with Section P2902.5.2.

M2301.7.2 Direct systems.

Where potable water is directly heated by a solar thermal system, the pipe, fittings, valves and other components that are in contact with the potable water in the solar heating system shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 29.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-24]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 24
FUEL GAS

The text of this chapter is extracted from the 2023 edition of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas and has been modified where necessary to conform to the scope of application of the Florida Building Code, Residential. The section numbers appearing in parentheses after each section number are the section numbers of the corresponding text in the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

SECTION G2401 (101)
GENERAL
G2401.1 (101.2) Application.

This chapter covers those fuel gas piping systems, fuel-gas appliances and related accessories, venting systems and combustion air configurations most commonly encountered in the construction of one- and two-family dwellings and structures regulated by this code.

Coverage of piping systems shall extend from the point of delivery to the outlet of the appliance shutoff valves (see definition of “Point of delivery”). Piping systems requirements shall include design, materials, components, fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation and maintenance. Requirements for gas appliances and related accessories shall include installation, combustion and ventilation air and venting and connections to piping systems.

The omission from this chapter of any material or method of installation provided for in the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas shall not be construed as prohibiting the use of such material or method of installation. Fuel-gas piping systems, fuel-gas appliances and related accessories, venting systems and combustion air configurations not specifically covered in these chapters shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

Gaseous hydrogen systems shall be regulated by Chapter 7 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

This chapter shall not apply to the following:

1.	Liquefied natural gas (LNG) installations.

2.	Temporary LP-gas piping for buildings under construction or renovation that is not to become part of the permanent piping system.

3.	Except as provided in Section G2412.1.1, gas piping, meters, gas pressure regulators, and other appurtenances used by the serving gas supplier in the distribution of gas, other than undiluted LP-gas.

4.	Portable LP-gas appliances and equipment of all types that is not connected to a fixed fuel piping system.

5.	Portable fuel cell appliances that are neither connected to a fixed piping system nor interconnected to a power grid.

6.	Installation of hydrogen gas, LP-gas and compressed natural gas (CNG) systems on vehicles.

SECTION G2402 (201)
GENERAL
G2402.1 (201.1) Scope.

Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this chapter.

G2402.2 (201.2) Interchangeability.

Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

G2402.3 (201.3) Terms defined in other codes.

Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Fire Prevention Code; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; or Florida Building Code, Plumbing such terms shall have meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.

SECTION G2403 (202)
GENERAL DEFINITIONS

ACCESS (TO). That which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be reached by ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or movement of a panel, door or similar obstruction (see also “Ready access”).

AIR, EXHAUST. Air being removed from any space or piece of equipment or appliance and conveyed directly to the atmosphere by means of openings or ducts.

AIR, MAKEUP. Any combination of outdoor and transfer air intended to replace exhaust air and exfiltration.

AIR CONDITIONER, GAS-FIRED. A gas-burning, automatically operated appliance for supplying cooled air, dehumidified air, or both, or chilled liquid.

AIR CONDITIONING. The treatment of air so as to control simultaneously the temperature, humidity, cleanness and distribution of the air to meet the requirements of a conditioned space.

AIR-HANDLING UNIT. A blower or fan used for the purpose of distributing supply air to a room, space or area.

ALTERATION. A change in a system that involves an extension, addition or change to the arrangement, type or purpose of the original installation.

ANODELESS RISER. A transition assembly in which plastic piping is installed and terminated above ground outside of a building.

APPLIANCE. Any apparatus or device that utilizes a fuel or a raw material as a fuel to produce light, heat, power, refrigeration or air conditioning. Also, an apparatus that compresses fuel gases.

APPLIANCE, AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLED. Appliances equipped with an automatic burner ignition and safety shut-off device and other automatic devices, that accomplish complete turn-on and shut-off of the gas to the main burner or burners, and graduate the gas supply to the burner or burners, but do not affect complete shut-off of the gas.

APPLIANCE, FAN-ASSISTED COMBUSTION. An appliance equipped with an integral mechanical means to either draw or force products of combustion through the combustion chamber or heat exchanger.

APPLIANCE, UNVENTED. An appliance designed or installed in such a manner that the products of combustion are not conveyed by a vent or chimney directly to the outside atmosphere.

APPLIANCE, VENTED. An appliance designed and installed in such a manner that all of the products of combustion are conveyed directly from the appliance to the outside atmosphere through an approved chimney or vent system.

APPROVED. Acceptable to the code official.

APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized agency that is regularly engaged in conducting tests, furnishing inspection services or furnishing certification, where such agency has been approved by the code official.

ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE. The pressure of the weight of air and water vapor on the surface of the earth, approximately 14.7 pounds per square inch (psia) (101 kPa absolute) at sea level.

AUTOMATIC IGNITION. Ignition of gas at the burner(s) when the gas controlling device is turned on, including reignition if the flames on the burner(s) have been extinguished by means other than by the closing of the gas controlling device.

BAROMETRIC DRAFT REGULATOR. A balanced damper device attached to a chimney, vent connector, breeching or flue gas manifold to protect combustion appliances by controlling chimney draft. A double-acting barometric draft regulator is one whose balancing damper is free to move in either direction to protect combustion appliances from both excessive draft and backdraft.

BOILER, LOW-PRESSURE. A self-contained appliance for supplying steam or hot water.

Hot water heating boiler. A boiler in which no steam is generated, from which hot water is circulated for heating purposes and then returned to the boiler, and that operates at water pressures not exceeding 160 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (1100 kPa gauge) and at water temperatures not exceeding 250°F (121°C) at or near the boiler outlet.

Hot water supply boiler. A boiler, completely filled with water, which furnishes hot water to be used externally to itself, and that operates at water pressures not exceeding 160 psig (1100 kPa gauge) and at water temperatures not exceeding 250°F (121°C) at or near the boiler outlet.

Steam heating boiler. A boiler in which steam is generated and that operates at a steam pressure not exceeding 15 psig (100 kPa gauge).

BONDING JUMPER. A conductor installed to electrically connect metallic gas piping to the grounding electrode system.

BRAZING. A metal-joining process wherein coalescence is produced by the use of a nonferrous filler metal having a melting point above 1,000°F (538°C), but lower than that of the base metal being joined. The filler material is distributed between the closely fitted surfaces of the joint by capillary action.

BTU. Abbreviation for British thermal unit, which is the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 pound (454 g) of water 1°F (0.56°C) (1 Btu = 1055 J).

BURNER. A device for the final conveyance of the gas, or a mixture of gas and air, to the combustion zone.

Induced-draft. A burner that depends on draft induced by a fan that is an integral part of the appliance and is located downstream from the burner.

Power. A burner in which gas, air or both are supplied at pressures exceeding, for gas, the line pressure, and for air, atmospheric pressure, with this added pressure being applied at the burner.

CHIMNEY. A primarily vertical structure containing one or more flues, for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from an appliance to the outside atmosphere.

Factory-built chimney. A listed and labeled chimney composed of factory-made components, assembled in the field in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions and the conditions of the listing.

Masonry chimney. A field-constructed chimney composed of solid masonry units, bricks, stones or concrete.

CLEARANCE. The minimum distance through air measured between the heat-producing surface of the mechanical appliance, device or equipment and the surface of the combustible material or assembly.

CLOTHES DRYER. An appliance used to dry wet laundry by means of heated air.

Type 1. Factory-built package, multiple production. Primarily used in the family living environment. Usually the smallest unit physically and in function output.

CODE. These regulations, subsequent amendments thereto, or any emergency rule or regulation that the administrative authority having jurisdiction has lawfully adopted.

CODE OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative.

COMBUSTIBLE ASSEMBLY. Wall, floor, ceiling or other assembly constructed of one or more component materials that are not defined as noncombustible.

COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material not defined as noncombustible.

COMBUSTION. In the context of this code, refers to the rapid oxidation of fuel accompanied by the production of heat or heat and light.

COMBUSTION AIR. Air necessary for complete combustion of a fuel, including theoretical air and excess air.

COMBUSTION CHAMBER. The portion of an appliance within which combustion occurs.

COMBUSTION PRODUCTS. Constituents resulting from the combustion of a fuel with the oxygen of the air, including the inert gases, but excluding excess air.

CONCEALED LOCATION. A location that cannot be accessed without damaging permanent parts of the building structure or finish surface. Spaces above, below or behind readily removable panels or doors shall not be considered as concealed.

CONCEALED PIPING. Piping that is located in a concealed location (see “Concealed location”).

CONDENSATE. The liquid that condenses from a gas (including flue gas) caused by a reduction in temperature or increase in pressure.

CONNECTOR, APPLIANCE (Fuel). Rigid metallic pipe and fittings, semirigid metallic tubing and fittings or a listed and labeled device that connects an appliance to the gas piping system.

CONNECTOR, CHIMNEY OR VENT. The pipe that connects an appliance to a chimney or vent.

CONTROL. A manual or automatic device designed to regulate the gas, air, water or electrical supply to, or operation of, a mechanical system.

CONVERSION BURNER. A unit consisting of a burner and its controls for installation in an appliance originally utilizing another fuel.

COPPER ALLOY. A homogeneous mixture of not less than two metals where not less than 50 percent of the finished metal is copper.

CUBIC FOOT. The amount of gas that occupies 1 cubic foot (0.02832 m3) when at a temperature of 60°F (16°C), saturated with water vapor and under a pressure equivalent to that of 30 inches of mercury (101 kPa).

DAMPER. A manually or automatically controlled device to regulate draft or the rate of flow of air or combustion gases.

DECORATIVE APPLIANCE, VENTED. A vented appliance wherein the primary function lies in the aesthetic effect of the flames.

DECORATIVE APPLIANCES FOR INSTALLATION IN VENTED FIREPLACES. A vented appliance designed for installation within the fire chamber of a vented fireplace, wherein the primary function lies in the aesthetic effect of the flames.

DEMAND. The maximum amount of gas input required per unit of time, usually expressed in cubic feet per hour, or Btu/h (1 Btu/h = 0.2931 W).

DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where a depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet (610 mm).

DILUTION AIR. Air that is introduced into a draft hood and is mixed with the flue gases.

DIRECT-VENT APPLIANCES. Appliances that are constructed and installed so that all air for combustion is derived directly from the outside atmosphere and all flue gases are discharged directly to the outside atmosphere.

DRAFT. The pressure difference existing between the appliance or any component part and the atmosphere, that causes a continuous flow of air and products of combustion through the gas passages of the appliance to the atmosphere.

Mechanical or induced draft. The pressure difference created by the action of a fan, blower or ejector that is located between the appliance and the chimney or vent termination.

Natural draft. The pressure difference created by a vent or chimney because of its height, and the temperature difference between the flue gases and the atmosphere.

DRAFT HOOD. A nonadjustable device built into an appliance, or made as part of the vent connector from an appliance, that is designed to: provide for ready escape of the flue gases from the appliance in the event of no draft, backdraft, or stoppage beyond the draft hood; prevent a backdraft from entering the appliance; and neutralize the effect of stack action of the chimney or gas vent upon operation of the appliance.

DRAFT REGULATOR. A device that functions to maintain a desired draft in the appliance by automatically reducing the draft to the desired value.

DRIP. The container placed at a low point in a system of piping to collect condensate and from which the condensate is removable.

DUCT FURNACE. A warm-air furnace normally installed in an air distribution duct to supply warm air for heating. This definition shall apply only to a warm-air heating appliance that depends for air circulation on a blower not furnished as part of the furnace.

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

EQUIPMENT. Apparatus and devices other than appliances.

EXCESS FLOW VALVE (EFV). A valve designed to activate when the fuel gas passing through it exceeds a prescribed flow rate.

EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS. Masonry chimneys exposed to the outdoors on one or more sides below the roof line.

FIREPLACE. A fire chamber and hearth constructed of noncombustible material for use with solid fuels and provided with a chimney.

Factory-built fireplace. A fireplace composed of listed factory-built components assembled in accordance with the terms of listing to form the completed fireplace.

Masonry fireplace. A hearth and fire chamber of solid masonry units such as bricks, stones, listed masonry units or reinforced concrete, provided with a suitable chimney.

FLAME SAFEGUARD. A device that will automatically shut off the fuel supply to a main burner or group of burners when the means of ignition of such burners becomes inoperative, and when flame failure occurs on the burner or group of burners.

FLASHBACK ARRESTOR CHECK VALVE. A device that will prevent the backflow of one gas into the supply system of another gas and prevent the passage of flame into the gas supply system.

FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas:

1.	The area within a floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

2.	This area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

FLOOR FURNACE. A completely self-contained furnace suspended from the floor of the space being heated, taking air for combustion from outside such space and with means for observing flames and lighting the appliance from such space.

FLUE, APPLIANCE. The passage(s) within an appliance through which combustion products pass from the combustion chamber of the appliance to the draft hood inlet opening on an appliance equipped with a draft hood or to the outlet of the appliance on an appliance not equipped with a draft hood.

FLUE COLLAR. That portion of an appliance designed for the attachment of a draft hood, vent connector or venting system.

FLUE GASES. Products of combustion plus excess air in appliance flues or heat exchangers.

FLUE LINER (LINING). A system or material used to form the inside surface of a flue in a chimney or vent, for the purpose of protecting the surrounding structure from the effects of combustion products and for conveying combustion products without leakage to the atmosphere.

FUEL GAS. A natural gas, manufactured gas, liquefied petroleum gas or mixtures of these gases.

FURNACE. A completely self-contained heating unit that is designed to supply heated air to spaces remote from or adjacent to the appliance location.

FURNACE, CENTRAL. A self-contained appliance for heating air by transfer of heat of combustion through metal to the air, and designed to supply heated air through ducts to spaces remote from or adjacent to the appliance location.

FURNACE PLENUM. An air compartment or chamber to which one or more ducts are connected and that forms part of an air distribution system.

GAS CONVENIENCE OUTLET. A permanently mounted, manually operated device that provides the means for connecting an appliance to, and disconnecting an appliance from, the supply piping. The device includes an integral, manually operated valve with a nondisplaceable valve member and is designed so that disconnection of an appliance only occurs when the manually operated valve is in the closed position.

GAS PIPING. An installation of pipe, valves or fittings installed on a premises or in a building and utilized to convey fuel gas.

HAZARDOUS LOCATION. Any location considered to be a fire hazard for flammable vapors, dust, combustible fibers or other highly combustible substances. The location is not necessarily categorized in the Florida Building Code, Building. as a high-hazard use group classification.

HOUSE PIPING. See “Piping system.”

IGNITION PILOT. A pilot that operates during the lighting cycle and discontinues during main burner operation.

IGNITION SOURCE. A flame spark or hot surface capable of igniting flammable vapors or fumes. Such sources include appliance burners, burner ignitors and electrical switching devices.

INFRARED RADIANT HEATER. A heater that directs a substantial amount of its energy output in the form of infrared radiant energy into the area to be heated. Such heaters are of either the vented or unvented type.

JOINT, FLARED. A metal-to-metal compression joint in which a conical spread is made on the end of a tube that is compressed by a flare nut against a mating flare.

JOINT, MECHANICAL. A general form of gas-tight joints obtained by the joining of metal parts through a positive-holding mechanical construction, such as a press-connect joint, flanged joint, threaded joint, flared joint or compression joint.

JOINT, PLASTIC ADHESIVE. A joint made in thermoset plastic piping by the use of an adhesive substance that forms a continuous bond between the mating surfaces without dissolving either one of them.

LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LEAK CHECK. An operation performed on a gas piping system to verify that the system does not leak.

LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS or LPG (LP-GAS). Liquefied petroleum gas composed predominately of propane, propylene, butanes or butylenes, or mixtures thereof that is gaseous under normal atmospheric conditions, but is capable of being liquefied under moderate pressure at normal temperatures.

LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the code official and concerned with evaluation of products or services that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

LIVING SPACE. Space within a dwelling unit utilized for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, washing and sanitation purposes.

LOG LIGHTER. A manually operated solid-fuel ignition appliance for installation in a vented solid fuel-burning fireplace.

MAIN BURNER. A device or group of devices essentially forming an integral unit for the final conveyance of gas or a mixture of gas and air to the combustion zone, and on which combustion takes place to accomplish the function for which the appliance is designed.

METER. The instrument installed to measure the volume of gas delivered through it.

MODULATING. Modulating or throttling is the action of a control from its maximum to minimum position in either predetermined steps or increments of movement as caused by its actuating medium.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS. Materials that, where tested in accordance with ASTM E136, have not fewer than three of four specimens tested meeting all of the following criteria:

1.	The recorded temperature of the surface and interior thermocouples shall not at any time during the test rise more than 54°F (30°C) above the furnace temperature at the beginning of the test.

2.	There shall not be flaming from the specimen after the first 30 seconds.

3.	If the weight loss of the specimen during testing exceeds 50 percent, the recorded temperature of the surface and interior thermocouples shall not at any time during the test rise above the furnace air temperature at the beginning of the test, and there shall not be flaming of the specimen.

OFFSET (VENT). A combination of approved bends that make two changes in direction bringing one section of the vent out of line, but into a line parallel with the other section.

OUTLET. The point at which a gas-fired appliance connects to the gas piping system.

OXYGEN DEPLETION SAFETY SHUTOFF SYSTEM (ODS). A system designed to act to shut off the gas supply to the main and pilot burners if the oxygen in the surrounding atmosphere is reduced below a predetermined level.

PILOT. A small flame that is utilized to ignite the gas at the main burner or burners.

PIPING. Where used in this code, “piping” refers to either pipe or tubing, or both.

Pipe. A rigid conduit of iron, steel, copper, copper-alloy or plastic.

Tubing. Semirigid conduit of copper, copper-alloy, aluminum, plastic or steel.

PIPING SYSTEM. The fuel piping, valves and fittings from the outlet of the point of delivery to the outlets of the appliance shutoff valves.

PLASTIC, THERMOPLASTIC. A plastic that is capable of being repeatedly softened by increase of temperature and hardened by decrease of temperature.

POINT OF DELIVERY. For natural gas systems, the point of delivery is the outlet of the service meter assembly or the outlet of the service regulator or service shutoff valve where a meter is not provided. Where a system shutoff valve is provided after the outlet of the service meter assembly, such valve shall be considered to be downstream of the point of delivery. For undiluted liquefied petroleum gas systems, the point of delivery shall be considered to be the outlet of the service pressure regulator, exclusive of line gas regulators, in the system.

PRESS-CONNECT JOINT. A permanent mechanical joint incorporating an elastomeric seal or an elastomeric seal and corrosion-resistant grip or bite ring. The joint is made with a pressing tool and jaw or ring approved by the fitting manufacturer.

PRESSURE DROP. The loss in pressure due to friction or obstruction in pipes, valves, fittings, regulators and burners.

PRESSURE TEST. An operation performed to verify the gas tight integrity of gas piping following its installation or modification.

PURGE. To free a gas conduit of air or gas, or a mixture of gas and air.

READY ACCESS (TO). That which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be directly reached, without requiring the removal or movement of any panel, door or similar obstruction. (See “Access.”)

REGULATOR. A device for controlling and maintaining a uniform gas supply pressure, either pounds-to-inches water column (MP regulator) or inches-to-inches water column (appliance regulator).

REGULATOR, GAS APPLIANCE. A pressure regulator for controlling pressure to the manifold of the gas appliance.

REGULATOR, LINE GAS PRESSURE. A device placed in a gas line between the service pressure regulator and the appliance for controlling, maintaining or reducing the pressure in that portion of the piping system downstream of the device.

REGULATOR, MEDIUM-PRESSURE (MP Regulator). A line pressure regulator that reduces gas pressure from the range of greater than 0.5 psig (3.4 kPa) and less than or equal to 5 psig (34.5 kPa) to a lower pressure.

REGULATOR, MONITORING. A pressure regulator set in series with another pressure regulator for the purpose of preventing an overpressure in the downstream piping system.

REGULATOR, PRESSURE. A device placed in a gas line for reducing, controlling and maintaining the pressure in that portion of the piping system downstream of the device.

REGULATOR, SERVICE PRESSURE. For natural gas systems, a device installed by the serving gas supplier to reduce and limit the service line pressure to delivery pressure. For undiluted liquefied petroleum gas systems, the regulator located upstream from all line gas pressure regulators, where installed, and downstream from any first stage or a high pressure regulator in the system.

RELIEF OPENING. The opening provided in a draft hood to permit the ready escape to the atmosphere of the flue products from the draft hood in the event of no draft, backdraft or stoppage beyond the draft hood, and to permit air into the draft hood in the event of a strong chimney updraft.

RELIEF VALVE (DEVICE). A safety valve designed to forestall the development of a dangerous condition by relieving either pressure, temperature or vacuum in the hot water supply system.

RELIEF VALVE, PRESSURE. An automatic valve that opens and closes a relief vent, depending on whether the pressure is above or below a predetermined value.

RELIEF VALVE, TEMPERATURE.

Manual reset type. A valve that automatically opens a relief vent at a predetermined temperature and that must be manually returned to the closed position.

Reseating or self-closing type. An automatic valve that opens and closes a relief vent, depending on whether the temperature is above or below a predetermined value.

RELIEF VALVE, VACUUM. A valve that automatically opens and closes a vent for relieving a vacuum within the hot water supply system, depending on whether the vacuum is above or below a predetermined value.

RISER, GAS. A vertical pipe supplying fuel gas.

ROOM HEATER, UNVENTED. See “Unvented room heater.”

ROOM HEATER, VENTED. A free-standing heating unit used for direct heating of the space in and adjacent to that in which the unit is located. (See “Vented room heater.”)

SAFETY SHUTOFF DEVICE. See “Flame safeguard.”

SERVICE METER ASSEMBLY. The meter, valve, regulator, piping, fittings and equipment installed by the service gas supplier before the point of delivery.

SHAFT. An enclosed space extending through one or more stories of a building, connecting vertical openings in successive floors, or floors and the roof.

SPECIFIC GRAVITY. As applied to gas, specific gravity is the ratio of the weight of a given volume to that of the same volume of air, both measured under the same condition.

SYSTEM SHUTOFF. A valve installed after the point of delivery to shut off the entire piping system.

THERMOSTAT. (See types that follow.)

Electric switch type. A device that senses changes in temperature and controls electrically, by means of separate components, the flow of gas to the burner(s) to maintain selected temperatures.

Integral gas valve type. An automatic device, actuated by temperature changes, designed to control the gas supply to the burner(s) in order to maintain temperatures between predetermined limits, and in which the thermal actuating element is an integral part of the device.

1.	Graduating thermostat. A thermostat in which the motion of the valve is approximately in direct proportion to the effective motion of the thermal element induced by temperature change.

2.	Snap-acting thermostat. A thermostat in which the thermostatic valve travels instantly from the closed to the open position, and vice versa.

THIRD-PARTY CERTIFICATION AGENCY. An approved agency operating a product or material certification system that incorporates initial product testing, assessment and surveillance of a manufacturer’s quality control system.

THIRD-PARTY CERTIFIED. Certification obtained by the manufacturer indicating that the function and performance characteristics of a product or material have been determined by testing and ongoing surveillance by an approved third-party certification agency. Assertion of certification is in the form of identification in accordance with the requirements of the third-party certification agency.

THIRD-PARTY TESTED. Procedure by which an approved testing laboratory provides documentation that a product, material or system conforms to specified requirements.

TOILET, GAS-FIRED. A packaged and completely assembled appliance containing a toilet that incinerates refuse instead of flushing it away with water.

TRANSITION FITTINGS, PLASTIC TO STEEL. An adapter for joining plastic pipe to steel pipe. The purpose of this fitting is to provide a permanent, pressure-tight connection between two materials that cannot be joined directly one to another.

UNIT HEATER. A self-contained, automatically controlled, vented, fuel-gas-burning, space-heating appliance, intended for installation in the space to be heated without the use of ducts, and having integral means for circulation of air.

UNVENTED ROOM HEATER. An unvented heating appliance designed for stationary installation and utilized to provide comfort heating. Such appliances provide radiant heat or convection heat by gravity or fan circulation directly from the heater and do not utilize ducts.

VALVE. A device used in piping to control the gas supply to any section of a system of piping or to an appliance.

Appliance shutoff. A valve located in the piping system, used to isolate individual appliances for purposes such as service or replacement.

Automatic. An automatic or semiautomatic device consisting essentially of a valve and an operator that control the gas supply to the burner(s) during operation of an appliance. The operator shall be actuated by application of gas pressure on a flexible diaphragm, by electrical means, by mechanical means or by other approved means.

Automatic gas shutoff. A valve used in conjunction with an automatic gas shutoff device to shut off the gas supply to a water-heating system. It shall be constructed integrally with the gas shutoff device or shall be a separate assembly.

Individual main burner. A valve that controls the gas supply to an individual main burner.

Main burner control. A valve that controls the gas supply to the main burner manifold.

Manual main gas-control. A manually operated valve in the gas line for the purpose of completely turning on or shutting off the gas supply to the appliance, except to pilot or pilots that are provided with independent shutoff.

Manual reset. An automatic shutoff valve installed in the gas supply piping and set to shut off when unsafe conditions occur. The device remains closed until manually reopened.

Service shutoff. A valve, installed by the serving gas supplier between the source of supply and the point of delivery, to shut off the entire piping system.

VENT. A pipe or other conduit composed of factory-made components, containing a passageway for conveying combustion products and air to the atmosphere, listed and labeled for use with a specific type or class of appliance.

Special gas vent. A vent listed and labeled for use with listed Category II, III and IV gas appliances.

Type B vent. A vent listed and labeled for use with appliances with draft hoods and other Category I appliances that are listed for use with Type B vents.

Type BW vent. A vent listed and labeled for use with wall furnaces.

Type L vent. A vent listed and labeled for use with appliances that are listed for use with Type L or Type B vents.

VENT CONNECTOR. See “Connector, Chimney or Vent.”

VENT PIPING.

Breather. Piping run from a pressure-regulating device to the outdoors, designed to provide a reference to atmospheric pressure. If the device incorporates an integral pressure relief mechanism, a breather vent can also serve as a relief vent.

Relief. Piping run from a pressure-regulating or pressure-limiting device to the outdoors, designed to provide for the safe venting of gas in the event of excessive pressure in the gas piping system.

VENTED APPLIANCE CATEGORIES. Appliances that are categorized for the purpose of vent selection are classified into the following four categories:

Category I. An appliance that operates with a nonpositive vent static pressure and with a vent gas temperature that avoids excessive condensate production in the vent.

Category II. An appliance that operates with a nonpositive vent static pressure and with a vent gas temperature that is capable of causing excessive condensate production in the vent.

Category III. An appliance that operates with a positive vent static pressure and with a vent gas temperature that avoids excessive condensate production in the vent.

Category IV. An appliance that operates with a positive vent static pressure and with a vent gas temperature that is capable of causing excessive condensate production in the vent.

VENTED ROOM HEATER. A vented self-contained, free-standing, nonrecessed appliance for furnishing warm air to the space in which it is installed, directly from the heater without duct connections.

VENTED WALL FURNACE. A self-contained vented appliance complete with grilles or equivalent, designed for incorporation in or permanent attachment to the structure of a building, mobile home or travel trailer, and furnishing heated air circulated by gravity or by a fan directly into the space to be heated through openings in the casing. This definition shall exclude floor furnaces, unit heaters and central furnaces as herein defined.

VENTING SYSTEM. A continuous open passageway from the flue collar or draft hood of an appliance to the outdoor atmosphere for the purpose of removing flue or vent gases. A venting system is usually composed of a vent or a chimney and vent connector, if used, assembled to form the open passageway.

WALL HEATER, UNVENTED TYPE. A room heater of the type designed for insertion in or attachment to a wall or partition. Such heater does not incorporate concealed venting arrangements in its construction and discharges all products of combustion through the front into the room being heated.

WATER HEATER. Any heating appliance or equipment that heats potable water and supplies such water to the potable hot water distribution system.

SECTION G2404 (301)
GENERAL
G2404.1 (301.1) Scope.

This section shall govern the approval and installation of all equipment and appliances that comprise parts of the installations regulated by this code in accordance with Section G2401.

G2404.2 (301.1.1) Other fuels.

The requirements for combustion and dilution air for gas-fired appliances shall be governed by Section G2407. The requirements for combustion and dilution air for appliances operating with fuels other than fuel gas shall be regulated by Chapter 17.

G2404.3 (301.3) Listed and labeled.

Appliances regulated by this code shall be listed and labeled for the application in which they are used unless otherwise approved in accordance with Section 104.11 of the Florida Building Code, Building. The approval of unlisted appliances in accordance with Section 104.11 of the Florida Building Code, Building shall be based on approved engineering evaluation.

G2404.4 (301.8) Vibration isolation.

Where means for isolation of vibration of an appliance is installed, an approved means for support and restraint of that appliance shall be provided.

G2404.5 (301.9) Repair.

Defective material or parts shall be replaced or repaired in such a manner so as to preserve the original approval or listing.

G2404.6 (301.10) Wind resistance.

Appliances and supports that are exposed to wind shall be designed and installed to resist the wind pressures determined in accordance with this code.

G2404.7 (301.11) Flood hazard.

For structures located in flood hazard areas, the appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by this code shall be located at or above the elevation required by Section R322 for utilities and attendant equipment.

Exception: The appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by this code are permitted to be located below the elevation required by Section R322 for utilities and attendant equipment provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to such elevation.

G2404.8 (301.12) Seismic resistance.

Where earthquake loads are applicable in accordance with this code, the supports shall be designed and installed for the seismic forces in accordance with this code.

G2404.9 (301.14) Rodentproofing.

Buildings or structures and the walls enclosing habitable or occupiable rooms and spaces in which persons live, sleep or work, or in which feed, food or foodstuffs are stored, prepared, processed, served or sold, shall be constructed to protect against the entry of rodents.

G2404.10 (307.5) Auxiliary drain pan.

Category IV condensing appliances shall be provided with an auxiliary drain pan where damage to any building component will occur as a result of stoppage in the condensate drainage system. Such pan shall be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section M1411.

Exception: An auxiliary drain pan shall not be required for appliances that automatically shut down operation in the event of a stoppage in the condensate drainage system.

G2404.11 (307.6) Condensate pumps.

Condensate pumps located in uninhabitable spaces, such as attics and crawl spaces, shall be connected to the appliance or equipment served such that when the pump fails, the appliance or equipment will be prevented from operating. Pumps shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2405 (302)
STRUCTURAL SAFETY
G2405.1 (302.1) Structural safety.

The building shall not be weakened by the installation of any gas piping. In the process of installing or repairing any gas piping, the finished floors, walls, ceilings, tile work or any other part of the building or premises that is required to be changed or replaced shall be left in a safe structural condition in accordance with the requirements of this code.

G2405.2 (302.4) Alterations to trusses.

Truss members and components shall not be cut, drilled, notched, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without the written concurrence and approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of loads to any member, such as HVAC equipment and water heaters, shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting such additional loading.

G2405.3 (302.3.1) Engineered wood products.

Cuts, notches and holes bored in trusses, structural composite lumber, structural glued-laminated members and I-joists are prohibited except where permitted by the manufacturer’s recommendations or where the effects of such alterations are specifically considered in the design of the member by a registered design professional.

SECTION G2406 (303)
APPLIANCE LOCATION
G2406.1 (303.1) General.

Appliances shall be located as required by this section, specific requirements elsewhere in this code and the conditions of the equipment and appliance listing.

G2406.2 (303.3) Prohibited locations.

Appliances shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms, toilet rooms, storage closets or surgical rooms, or in a space that opens only into such rooms or spaces, except where the installation complies with one of the following:

1.	The appliance is a direct-vent appliance installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Vented room heaters, wall furnaces, vented decorative appliances, vented gas fireplaces, vented gas fireplace heaters and decorative appliances for installation in vented solid fuel-burning fireplaces are installed in rooms that meet the required volume criteria of Section G2407.5.

3.	A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bathroom and such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section G2445.6 and has an input rating not greater than 6,000 Btu/h (1.76 kW). The bathroom shall meet the required volume criteria of Section G2407.5.

4.	A single wall-mounted unvented room heater is installed in a bedroom and such unvented room heater is equipped as specified in Section G2445.6 and has an input rating not greater than 10,000 Btu/h (2.93 kW). The bedroom shall meet the required volume criteria of Section G2407.5.

5.	The appliance is installed in a room or space that opens only into a bedroom or bathroom, and such room or space is used for no other purpose and is provided with a solid weather-stripped door equipped with an approved self-closing device. Combustion air shall be taken directly from the outdoors in accordance with Section G2407.6.

6.	A clothes dryer is installed in a residential bathroom or toilet room having a permanent opening with an area of not less than 100 square inches (0.06 m2) that communicates with a space outside of a sleeping room, bathroom, toilet room or storage closet.

G2406.3 (303.6) Outdoor locations.

Appliances installed in outdoor locations shall be either listed for outdoor installation or provided with protection from outdoor environmental factors that influence the operability, durability and safety of the appliance.

SECTION G2407 (304)
COMBUSTION, VENTILATION AND DILUTION AIR
G2407.1 (304.1) General.

Air for combustion, ventilation and dilution of flue gases for appliances installed in buildings shall be provided by application of one of the methods prescribed in Sections G2407.5 through G2407.9. Where the requirements of Section G2407.5 are not met, outdoor air shall be introduced in accordance with one of the methods prescribed in Sections G2407.6 through G2407.9. Direct-vent appliances, gas appliances of other than natural draft design, vented gas appliances not designated as Category I and appliances equipped with power burners, shall be provided with combustion, ventilation and dilution air in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

Exception: Type 1 clothes dryers that are provided with makeup air in accordance with Section G2439.5.

G2407.2 (304.2) Appliance location.

Appliances shall be located so as not to interfere with proper circulation of combustion, ventilation and dilution air.

G2407.3 (304.3) Draft hood/regulator location.

Where used, a draft hood or a barometric draft regulator shall be installed in the same room or enclosure as the appliance served to prevent any difference in pressure between the hood or regulator and the combustion air supply.

G2407.4 (304.4) Makeup air provisions.

Where exhaust fans, clothes dryers and kitchen ventilation systems interfere with the operation of appliances, makeup air shall be provided.

G2407.5 (304.5) Indoor combustion air.

The required volume of indoor air shall be determined in accordance with Section G2407.5.1 or G2407.5.2, except that where the air infiltration rate is known to be less than 0.40 air changes per hour (ACH), Section G2407.5.2 shall be used. The total required volume shall be the sum of the required volume calculated for all appliances located within the space. Rooms communicating directly with the space in which the appliances are installed through openings not furnished with doors, and through combustion air openings sized and located in accordance with Section G2407.5.3, are considered to be part of the required volume.

G2407.5.1 (304.5.1) Standard method.

The minimum required volume shall be 50 cubic feet per 1,000 Btu/h (4.8 m3/kW) of the appliance input rating.

G2407.5.2 (304.5.2) Known air-infiltration-rate method.

Where the air infiltration rate of a structure is known, the minimum required volume shall be determined as follows:

For appliances other than fan-assisted, calculate volume using Equation 24-1.

(Equation 24-1)

For fan-assisted appliances, calculate volume using Equation 24-2.

(Equation 24-2)

where:

Iother = All appliances other than fan assisted (input in Btu/h).

Ifan = Fan-assisted appliance (input in Btu/h).

ACH = Air change per hour (percent of volume of space exchanged per hour, expressed as a decimal).

For purposes of this calculation, an infiltration rate greater than 0.60 ACH shall not be used in Equations 24-1 and 24-2.

G2407.5.3 (304.5.3) Indoor opening size and location.

Openings used to connect indoor spaces shall be sized and located in accordance with Sections G2407.5.3.1 and G2407.5.3.2 (see Figure G2407.5.3).

FIGURE G2407.5.3 (304.5.3)

ALL AIR FROM INSIDE THE BUILDING (see Section G2407.5.3)

G2407.5.3.1 (304.5.3.1) Combining spaces on the same story.

Where combining spaces on the same story, each opening shall have a minimum free area of 1 square inch per 1,000 Btu/h (2200 mm2/kW) of the total input rating of all appliances in the space, but not less than 100 square inches (0.06 m2). One permanent opening shall commence within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top and one permanent opening shall commence within 12 inches (305 mm) of the bottom of the enclosure. The minimum dimension of air openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

G2407.5.3.2 (304.5.3.2) Combining spaces in different stories.

The volumes of spaces in different stories shall be considered to be communicating spaces where such spaces are connected by one or more permanent openings in doors or floors having a total minimum free area of 2 square inches per 1,000 Btu/h (4402 mm2/kW) of total input rating of all appliances.

G2407.6 (304.6) Outdoor combustion air.

Outdoor combustion air shall be provided through opening(s) to the outdoors in accordance with Section G2407.6.1 or G2407.6.2. The minimum dimension of air openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

G2407.6.1 (304.6.1) Two-permanent-openings method.

Two permanent openings, one commencing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top and one commencing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the bottom of the enclosure, shall be provided. The openings shall communicate directly or by ducts with the outdoors or spaces that freely communicate with the outdoors.

Where directly communicating with the outdoors, or where communicating with the outdoors through vertical ducts, each opening shall have a minimum free area of 1 square inch per 4,000 Btu/h (550 mm2/kW) of total input rating of all appliances in the enclosure [see Figures G2407.6.1(1) and G2407.6.1(2)].

Where communicating with the outdoors through horizontal ducts, each opening shall have a minimum free area of not less than 1 square inch per 2,000 Btu/h (1100 mm2/kW) of total input rating of all appliances in the enclosure [see Figure G2407.6.1(3)].

FIGURE G2407.6.1(1) [304.6.1(1)]

ALL AIR FROM OUTDOORS—INLET AIR FROM VENTILATED CRAWL SPACE AND OUTLET AIR TO VENTILATED ATTIC (see Section G2407.6.1)

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE G2407.6.1(2) [304.6.1(2)]

ALL AIR FROM OUTDOORS THROUGH VENTILATED ATTIC (see Section G2407.6.1)

FIGURE G2407.6.1(3) [304.6.1(3)]

ALL AIR FROM OUTDOORS (see Section G2407.6.1)

G2407.6.2 (304.6.2) One-permanent-opening method.

One permanent opening, commencing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the enclosure, shall be provided. The appliance shall have clearances of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) from the sides and back and 6 inches (152 mm) from the front of the appliance. The opening shall directly communicate with the outdoors or through a vertical or horizontal duct to the outdoors, or spaces that freely communicate with the outdoors (see Figure G2407.6.2) and shall have a minimum free area of 1 square inch per 3,000 Btu/h (734 mm2/kW) of the total input rating of all appliances located in the enclosure and not less than the sum of the areas of all vent connectors in the space.

FIGURE G2407.6.2 (304.6.2)

SINGLE COMBUSTION AIR OPENING, ALL AIR FROM OUTDOORS (see Section G2407.6.2)

G2407.7 (304.7) Combination indoor and outdoor combustion air.

The use of a combination of indoor and outdoor combustion air shall be in accordance with Sections G2407.7.1 through G2407.7.3.

G2407.7.1 (304.7.1) Indoor openings.

Where used, openings connecting the interior spaces shall comply with Section G2407.5.3.

G2407.7.2 (304.7.2) Outdoor opening location.

Outdoor opening(s) shall be located in accordance with Section G2407.6.

G2407.7.3 (304.7.3) Outdoor opening(s) size.

The outdoor opening(s) size shall be calculated in accordance with the following:

1.	The ratio of interior spaces shall be the available volume of all communicating spaces divided by the required volume.

2.	The outdoor size reduction factor shall be one minus the ratio of interior spaces.

3.	The minimum size of outdoor opening(s) shall be the full size of outdoor opening(s) calculated in accordance with Section G2407.6, multiplied by the reduction factor. The minimum dimension of air openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

G2407.8 (304.8) Engineered installations.

Engineered combustion air installations shall provide an adequate supply of combustion, ventilation and dilution air determined using approved engineering methods.

G2407.9 (304.9) Mechanical combustion air supply.

Where all combustion air is provided by a mechanical air supply system, the combustion air shall be supplied from the outdoors at a rate not less than 0.35 cubic feet per minute per 1,000 Btu/h (0.034 m3/min per kW) of total input rating of all appliances located within the space.

G2407.9.1 (304.9.1) Makeup air.

Where exhaust fans are installed, makeup air shall be provided to replace the exhausted air.

G2407.9.2 (304.9.2) Appliance interlock.

Each of the appliances served shall be interlocked with the mechanical air supply system to prevent main burner operation when the mechanical air supply system is not in operation.

G2407.9.3 (304.9.3) Combined combustion air and ventilation air system.

Where combustion air is provided by the building’s mechanical ventilation system, the system shall provide the specified combustion air rate in addition to the required ventilation air.

G2407.10 (304.10) Louvers and grilles.

The required size of openings for combustion, ventilation and dilution air shall be based on the net free area of each opening. Where the free area through a design of louver, grille or screen is known, it shall be used in calculating the size opening required to provide the free area specified. Where the design and free area of louvers and grilles are not known, it shall be assumed that wood louvers will have 25-percent free area and metal louvers and grilles will have 75-percent free area. Screens shall have a mesh size not smaller than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Nonmotorized louvers and grilles shall be fixed in the open position. Motorized louvers shall be interlocked with the appliance so that they are proven to be in the full open position prior to main burner ignition and during main burner operation. Means shall be provided to prevent the main burner from igniting if the louvers fail to open during burner start-up and to shut down the main burner if the louvers close during operation.

G2407.11 (304.11) Combustion air ducts.

Combustion air ducts shall comply with all of the following:

1.	Ducts shall be constructed of galvanized steel complying with Chapter 16 or of a material having equivalent corrosion resistance, strength and rigidity.

Exception: Within dwellings units, unobstructed stud and joist spaces shall not be prohibited from conveying combustion air, provided that not more than one required fireblock is removed.

2.	Ducts shall terminate in an unobstructed space allowing free movement of combustion air to the appliances.

3.	Ducts shall serve a single enclosure.

4.	Ducts shall not serve both upper and lower combustion air openings where both such openings are used. The separation between ducts serving upper and lower combustion air openings shall be maintained to the source of combustion air.

5.	Ducts shall not be screened where terminating in an attic space.

6.	Horizontal upper combustion air ducts shall not slope downward toward the source of combustion air.

7.	The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special gas vent or plastic piping installed within a masonry, metal or factory-built chimney shall not be used to supply combustion air.

Exception: Direct-vent gas-fired appliances designed for installation in a solid fuel-burning fireplace where installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

8.	Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of a building shall have the lowest side of such openings located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) vertically from the adjoining finished ground level.

G2407.12 (304.12) Protection from fumes and gases.

Where corrosive or flammable process fumes or gases, other than products of combustion, are present, means for the disposal of such fumes or gases shall be provided. Such fumes or gases include carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, chlorine and halogenated hydrocarbons.

In barbershops, beauty shops and other facilities where chemicals that generate corrosive or flammable products, such as aerosol sprays, are routinely used, nondirect vent-type appliances shall be located in a mechanical room separated or partitioned off from other areas with provisions for combustion air and dilution air from the outdoors. Direct-vent appliances shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2408 (305)
INSTALLATION
G2408.1 (305.1) General.

Equipment and appliances shall be installed as required by the terms of their approval, in accordance with the conditions of listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and this code. Manufacturer’s installation instructions shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. Where a code provision is less restrictive than the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance or the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions shall apply.

Unlisted appliances approved in accordance with Section G2404.3 shall be limited to uses recommended by the manufacturer and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, the provisions of this code and the requirements determined by the code official.

G2408.2 (305.3) Elevation of ignition source.

Equipment and appliances having an ignition source shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in hazardous locations and public garages, private garages, repair garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage.

Exception: Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed as flammable-vapor-ignition resistant.

G2408.2.1 (305.3.1) Installation in residential garages.

In residential garages where appliances are installed in a separate, enclosed space having access only from outside of the garage, such appliances shall be permitted to be installed at floor level, provided that the required combustion air is taken from the exterior of the garage.

G2408.3 (305.5) Private garages.

Appliances located in private garages shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor.

Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply where the appliances are protected from motor vehicle impact and installed in accordance with Section G2408.2.

G2408.4 (305.7) Clearances from grade.

Equipment and appliances installed at grade level shall be supported on a level concrete slab or other approved material extending not less than 3 inches (76 mm) above adjoining grade or shall be suspended not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above adjoining grade. Such supports shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2408.5 (305.8) Clearances to combustible construction.

Heat-producing equipment and appliances shall be installed to maintain the required clearances to combustible construction as specified in the listing and manufacturer’s instructions. Such clearances shall be reduced only in accordance with Section G2409. Clearances to combustibles shall include such considerations as door swing, drawer pull, overhead projections or shelving and window swing. Devices, such as door stops or limits and closers, shall not be used to provide the required clearances.

G2408.6 (305.12) Avoid strain on gas piping.

Appliances shall be supported and connected to the piping so as not to exert undue strain on the connections.

SECTION G2409 (308)
CLEARANCE REDUCTION
G2409.1 (308.1) Scope.

This section shall govern the reduction in required clearances to combustible materials, including gypsum board, and combustible assemblies for chimneys, vents, appliances, devices and equipment. Clearance requirements for air-conditioning equipment and central heating boilers and furnaces shall comply with Sections G2409.3 and G2409.4.

G2409.2 (308.2) Reduction table.

The allowable clearance reduction shall be based on one of the methods specified in Table G2409.2 or shall utilize a reduced clearance protective assembly listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1618. Where required clearances are not listed in Table G2409.2, the reduced clearances shall be determined by linear interpolation between the distances listed in the table. Reduced clearances shall not be derived by extrapolation below the range of the table. The reduction of the required clearances to combustibles for listed and labeled appliances and equipment shall be in accordance with the requirements of this section, except that such clearances shall not be reduced where reduction is specifically prohibited by the terms of the appliance or equipment listing [see Figures G2409.2(1) through 2409.2(3)].

NOTES:

A	=	The clearance without protection.
B	=	The reduced clearance permitted in accordance with Table G2409.2. The protection applied to the construction using combustible material shall extend far enough in each direction to make “C” equal to “A.”

FIGURE G2409.2(1) [308.2(1)]

EXTENT OF PROTECTION NECESSARY TO REDUCE CLEARANCES FROM GAS EQUIPMENT OR VENT CONNECTORS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE G2409.2(2) [308.2(2)]

WALL PROTECTOR CLEARANCE REDUCTION SYSTEM

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE G2409.2(3) [308.2(3)]

MASONRY CLEARANCE REDUCTION SYSTEM

TABLE G2409.2 (308.2)

REDUCTION OF CLEARANCES WITH SPECIFIED FORMS OF PROTECTIONa through k

TYPE OF PROTECTION APPLIED TO AND
COVERING ALL SURFACES OF COMBUSTIBLE
MATERIAL WITHIN THE DISTANCE SPECIFIED AS
THE REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITH NO
PROTECTION
[see Figures G2409.2(1), G2409.2(2), and
G2409.2(3)]
WHERE THE REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITH NO PROTECTION
FROM APPLIANCE, VENT CONNECTOR, OR SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE IS: (inches)

36	18	12	9	6
Allowable clearances with specified protection (inches)
Use Column 1 for clearances above appliance or horizontal connector.
Use Column 2 for clearances from appliance, vertical connector and single-wall metal pipe.

Above
Col. 1
	Sides
and rear
Col. 2	Above
Col. 1
	Sides
and rear
Col. 2	Above
Col. 1
	Sides
and rear
Col. 2	Above
Col. 1
	Sides
and rear
Col. 2	Above
Col. 1
	Sides
and rear
Col. 2
1. 31/2-inch-thick masonry wall without
ventilated airspace
	—	24	—	12	—	9	—	6	—	5
2. 1/2-inch insulation board over 1-inch glass
fiber or mineral wool batts
	24	18	12	9	9	6	6	5	4	3
3. 0.024-inch (nominal 24 gage) sheet metal
over 1-inch glass fiber or mineral wool batts
reinforced with wire on rear face with
ventilated airspace
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
4. 31/2-inch-thick masonry wall with ventilated
airspace
	—	12	—	6	—	6	—	6	—	6
5. 0.024-inch (nominal 24 gage) sheet metal
with ventilated airspace
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	2
6. 1/2-inch-thick insulation board with ventilated
airspace
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
7. 0.024-inch (nominal 24 gage) sheet metal
with ventilated airspace over 0.024-inch
(nominal 24 gage) sheet metal with ventilated
airspace
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3
8. 1-inch glass fiber or mineral wool batts
sandwiched between two sheets 0.024-inch
(nominal 24 gage) sheet metal with ventilated
airspace
	18	12	9	6	6	4	5	3	3	3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, °C = [(°F – 32)/1.8], 1 pound per cubic foot = 16.02 kg/m3, 1 Btu per inch per square foot per hour per °F = 0.144 W/m2 × K.

a.	Reduction of clearances from combustible materials shall not interfere with combustion air, draft hood clearance and relief, and accessibility of servicing.

b.	Clearances shall be measured from the outer surface of the combustible material to the nearest point on the surface of the appliance, disregarding any intervening protection applied to the combustible material.

c.	Spacers and ties shall be of noncombustible material. A spacer or tie shall not be used directly opposite an appliance or connector.

d.	For all clearance reduction systems using a ventilated airspace, adequate provision for air circulation shall be provided as described [see Figures G2409.2(2) and G2409.2(3)].

e.	There shall be not less than 1 inch between clearance reduction systems and combustible walls and ceilings for reduction systems using ventilated airspace.

f.	Where a wall protector is mounted on a single flat wall away from corners, it shall have a minimum 1-inch air gap. To provide air circulation, the bottom and top edges, or only the side and top edges, or all edges shall be left open.

g.	Mineral wool batts (blanket or board) shall have a density of 8 pounds per cubic foot and a minimum melting point of 1500°F.

h.	Insulation material used as part of a clearance reduction system shall have a thermal conductivity of 1.0 Btu per inch per square foot per hour per °F or less.

i.	There shall be not less than 1 inch between the appliance and the protector. In no case shall the clearance between the appliance and the combustible surface be reduced below that allowed in this table.

j.	Clearances and thicknesses are minimum; larger clearances and thicknesses are acceptable.

k.	Listed single-wall connectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2409.3 (308.3) Clearances for indoor air-conditioning appliances.

Clearance requirements for indoor air-conditioning appliances shall comply with Sections G2409.3.1 through G2409.3.4.

G2409.3.1 (308.3.1) Appliances clearances.

Air-conditioning appliances shall be installed with clearances in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2409.3.2 (308.3.2) Clearance reduction.

Air-conditioning appliances shall be permitted to be installed with reduced clearances to combustible material, provided that the combustible material or appliance is protected as described in Table G2409.2 and such reduction is allowed by the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2409.3.3 (308.3.3) Plenum clearances.

Where the furnace plenum is adjacent to plaster on metal lath or noncombustible material attached to combustible material, the clearance shall be measured to the surface of the plaster or other noncombustible finish where the clearance specified is 2 inches (51 mm) or less.

G2409.3.4 (308.3.4) Clearance from supply ducts.

Supply air ducts connecting to listed central heating furnaces shall have the same minimum clearance to combustibles as required for the furnace supply plenum for a distance of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the supply plenum. Clearance is not required beyond the 3-foot (914 mm) distance.

G2409.4 (308.4) Central-heating boilers and furnaces.

Clearance requirements for central-heating boilers and furnaces shall comply with Sections G2409.4.1 through G2409.4.5. The clearance to these appliances shall not interfere with combustion air, draft hood clearance and relief, and accessibility for servicing.

G2409.4.1 (308.4.1) Appliances clearances.

Central-heating furnaces and low-pressure boilers shall be installed with clearances in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2409.4.2 (308.4.2) Clearance reduction.

Central-heating furnaces and low-pressure boilers shall be permitted to be installed with reduced clearances to combustible material provided that the combustible material or appliance is protected as described in Table G2409.2 and such reduction is allowed by the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2409.4.3 (308.4.4) Plenum clearances.

Where the furnace plenum is adjacent to plaster on metal lath or noncombustible material attached to combustible material, the clearance shall be measured to the surface of the plaster or other noncombustible finish where the clearance specified is 2 inches (51 mm) or less.

G2409.4.4 (308.4.5) Clearance from supply ducts.

Supply air ducts connecting to listed central heating furnaces shall have the same minimum clearance to combustibles as required for the furnace supply plenum for a distance of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the supply plenum. Clearance is not required beyond the 3-foot (914 mm) distance.

G2409.4.5 (308.4.3) Clearance for servicing appliances.

Front clearance shall be sufficient for servicing the burner and the furnace or boiler.

SECTION G2410 (309)
ELECTRICAL
G2410.1 (309.1) Grounding.

Gas piping shall not be used as a grounding electrode.

G2410.2 (309.2) Connections.

Electrical connections between appliances and the building wiring, including the grounding of the appliances, shall conform to Chapter 34.

SECTION G2411 (310)
ELECTRICAL BONDING
G2411.1 (310.1) Pipe and tubing other than CSST.

Each above-ground portion of a gas piping system other than corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) that is likely to become energized shall be electrically continuous and bonded to an effective ground-fault current path. Gas piping other than CSST shall be considered to be bonded where it is connected to an appliance that is connected to the equipment grounding conductor of the circuit that supplies that appliance.

G2411.2 (310.2) CSST.

This section applies to corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) that is not listed with an arcresistant jacket or coating system in accordance with ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26. CSST gas piping systems and piping systems containing one or more segments of CSST shall be electrically continuous and bonded to the electrical service grounding electrode system or, where provided, the lightning protection grounding electrode system.

G2411.2.1 (310.2.1) Point of connection.

The bonding jumper shall connect to a metallic pipe, pipe fitting or CSST fitting.

G2411.2.2 (310.2.2) Size and material of jumper.

The bonding jumper shall be not smaller than 6 AWG copper wire or equivalent.

G2411.2.3 (310.2.3) Bonding jumper length.

The length of the bonding jumper between the connection to a gas piping system and the connection to a grounding electrode system shall not exceed 75 feet (22 860 mm). Any additional grounding electrodes installed to meet this requirement shall be bonded to the electrical service grounding electrode system or, where provided, the lightning protection grounding electrode system.

G2411.2.4 (310.2.4) Bonding connections.

Bonding connections shall be in accordance with NFPA 70.

G2411.2.5 (310.2.5) Connection devices.

Devices used for making the bonding connections shall be listed for the application in accordance with UL 467.

G2411.3 (310.3) Arc-resistant CSST.

This section applies to corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) that is listed with an arc-resistant jacket or coating system in accordance with ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26. The CSST shall be electrically continuous and bonded to an effective ground fault current path. Where any CSST component of a piping system does not have an arc-resistant jacket or coating system, the bonding requirements of Section G2411.2 shall apply. Arc-resistant-jacketed CSST shall be considered to be bonded where it is connected to an appliance that is connected to the appliance grounding conductor of the circuit that supplies that appliance.

SECTION G2412 (401)
GENERAL
G2412.1 (401.1) Scope.

This section shall govern the design, installation, modification and maintenance of piping systems. The applicability of this code to piping systems extends from the point of delivery to the connections with the appliances and includes the design, materials, components, fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation and maintenance of such piping systems.

G2412.1.1 (401.1.1) Utility piping systems located within buildings.

Utility service piping located within buildings shall be installed in accordance with the structural safety and fire protection provisions of this code.

G2412.2 (401.2) Liquefied petroleum gas storage.

The storage system for liquefied petroleum gas shall be designed and installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 58.

G2412.3 (401.3) Modifications to existing systems.

In modifying or adding to existing piping systems, sizes shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter.

G2412.4 (401.4) Additional appliances.

Where an additional appliance is to be served, the existing piping shall be checked to determine if it has adequate capacity for all appliances served. If inadequate, the existing system shall be enlarged as required or separate piping of adequate capacity shall be provided.

G2412.5 (401.5) Identification.

For other than steel pipe and CSST, exposed piping shall be identified by a yellow label marked “Gas” in black letters. The marking shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm). The marking shall not be required on piping located in the same room as the appliance served. CSST shall be identified as required by ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26.

G2412.6 (401.6) Interconnections.

Where two or more meters are installed on the same premises but supply separate consumers, the piping systems shall not be interconnected on the outlet side of the meters.

G2412.7 (401.7) Piping meter identification.

Piping from multiple meter installations shall be marked with an approved permanent identification by the installer so that the piping system supplied by each meter is readily identifiable.

G2412.8 (401.8) Minimum sizes.

Pipe utilized for the installation, extension and alteration of any piping system shall be sized to supply the full number of outlets for the intended purpose and shall be sized in accordance with Section G2413.

G2412.9 (401.9) Identification.

Each length of pipe and tubing and each pipe fitting, utilized in a fuel gas system, shall bear the identification of the manufacturer.

Exceptions:

1.	Steel pipe sections that are 2 feet (610 mm) and less in length and are cut from longer sections of pipe.

2.	Steel pipe fittings 2 inches and less in size.

3.	Where identification is provided on the product packaging or crating.

4.	Where other approved documentation is provided.

G2412.10 (401.10) Piping materials standards.

Piping, tubing and fittings shall be manufactured to the applicable referenced standards, specifications and performance criteria listed in Section G2414 and shall be identified in accordance with Section G2412.9.

SECTION G2413 (402)
PIPE SIZING
G2413.1 (402.1) General considerations.

Piping systems shall be of such size and so installed as to provide a supply of gas sufficient to meet the maximum demand and supply gas to each appliance inlet at not less than the minimum supply pressure required by the appliance.

G2413.2 (402.2) Maximum gas demand.

The volumetric flow rate of gas to be provided shall be the sum of the maximum input of the appliances served.

The total connected hourly load shall be used as the basis for pipe sizing, assuming that all appliances could be operating at full capacity simultaneously. Where a diversity of load can be established, pipe sizing shall be permitted to be based on such loads.

The volumetric flow rate of gas to be provided shall be adjusted for altitude where the installation is above 2,000 feet (610 m) in elevation.

G2413.3 (402.3) Sizing.

Gas piping shall be sized in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Pipe sizing tables or sizing equations in accordance with Section G2413.4 or G2413.5, as applicable.

2.	The sizing tables included in a listed piping system’s manufacturer’s installation instructions.

3.	Approved engineering methods.

G2413.4 (402.4) Sizing tables and equations.

This section applies to piping materials other than noncorrugated stainless steel tubing. Where Tables G2413.4(1) through G2413.4(21) are used to size piping or tubing, the pipe length shall be determined in accordance with Section G2413.4.1, G2413.4.2 or G2413.4.3.

Where Equations 24-3 and 24-4 are used to size piping or tubing, the pipe or tubing shall have smooth inside walls and the pipe length shall be determined in accordance with Section G2413.4.1, G2413.4.2 or G2413.4.3.

1.	Low-pressure gas equation [less than 11/2 pounds per square inch (psi) (10.3 kPa)]:

(Equation 24-3)

2.	High-pressure gas equation [11/2 psi (10.3 kPa) and above]:

(Equation 24-4)

where:

Cr = Value determined by Table G2413.4.

D = Inside diameter of pipe, inches (mm).

Q = Input rate appliance(s), cubic feet per hour at 60°F (16°C) and 30-inch mercury column.

P1 = Upstream pressure, psia (P1 + 14.7).

P2 = Downstream pressure, psia (P2 + 14.7).

L = Equivalent length of pipe, feet.

Y = Value determined by Table G2413.4.

ΔH = Pressure drop, inch water column (27.7-inch water column = 1 psi).

TABLE G2413.4 (402.4)

Cr AND Y VALUES FOR NATURAL GAS AND UNDILUTED PROPANE AT STANDARD CONDITIONS

GAS	EQUATION FACTORS
Cr	Y
Natural gas	0.6094	0.9992
Undiluted propane	1.2462	0.9910

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.028 m3, 1 foot = 305 mm, 1-inch water column = 0.249 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.293 W.

TABLE G2413.4(1) [402.4(2)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	Less than 2 psi
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	0.60
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4	5	6	8	10	12
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026	5.047	6.065	7.981	10.020	11.938
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	172	360	678	1,390	2,090	4,020	6,400	11,300	23,100	41,800	67,600	139,000	252,000	399,000
20	118	247	466	957	1,430	2,760	4,400	7,780	15,900	28,700	46,500	95,500	173,000	275,000
30	95	199	374	768	1,150	2,220	3,530	6,250	12,700	23,000	37,300	76,700	139,000	220,000
40	81	170	320	657	985	1,900	3,020	5,350	10,900	19,700	31,900	65,600	119,000	189,000
50	72	151	284	583	873	1,680	2,680	4,740	9,660	17,500	28,300	58,200	106,000	167,000
60	65	137	257	528	791	1,520	2,430	4,290	8,760	15,800	25,600	52,700	95,700	152,000
70	60	126	237	486	728	1,400	2,230	3,950	8,050	14,600	23,600	48,500	88,100	139,000
80	56	117	220	452	677	1,300	2,080	3,670	7,490	13,600	22,000	45,100	81,900	130,000
90	52	110	207	424	635	1,220	1,950	3,450	7,030	12,700	20,600	42,300	76,900	122,000
100	50	104	195	400	600	1,160	1,840	3,260	6,640	12,000	19,500	40,000	72,600	115,000
125	44	92	173	355	532	1,020	1,630	2,890	5,890	10,600	17,200	35,400	64,300	102,000
150	40	83	157	322	482	928	1,480	2,610	5,330	9,650	15,600	32,100	58,300	92,300
175	37	77	144	296	443	854	1,360	2,410	4,910	8,880	14,400	29,500	53,600	84,900
200	34	71	134	275	412	794	1,270	2,240	4,560	8,260	13,400	27,500	49,900	79,000
250	30	63	119	244	366	704	1,120	1,980	4,050	7,320	11,900	24,300	44,200	70,000
300	27	57	108	221	331	638	1,020	1,800	3,670	6,630	10,700	22,100	40,100	63,400
350	25	53	99	203	305	587	935	1,650	3,370	6,100	9,880	20,300	36,900	58,400
400	23	49	92	189	283	546	870	1,540	3,140	5,680	9,190	18,900	34,300	54,300
450	22	46	86	177	266	512	816	1,440	2,940	5,330	8,620	17,700	32,200	50,900
500	21	43	82	168	251	484	771	1,360	2,780	5,030	8,150	16,700	30,400	48,100
550	20	41	78	159	239	459	732	1,290	2,640	4,780	7,740	15,900	28,900	45,700
600	19	39	74	152	228	438	699	1,240	2,520	4,560	7,380	15,200	27,500	43,600
650	18	38	71	145	218	420	669	1,180	2,410	4,360	7,070	14,500	26,400	41,800
700	17	36	68	140	209	403	643	1,140	2,320	4,190	6,790	14,000	25,300	40,100
750	17	35	66	135	202	389	619	1,090	2,230	4,040	6,540	13,400	24,400	38,600
800	16	34	63	130	195	375	598	1,060	2,160	3,900	6,320	13,000	23,600	37,300
850	16	33	61	126	189	363	579	1,020	2,090	3,780	6,110	12,600	22,800	36,100
900	15	32	59	122	183	352	561	992	2,020	3,660	5,930	12,200	22,100	35,000
950	15	31	58	118	178	342	545	963	1,960	3,550	5,760	11,800	21,500	34,000
1,000	14	30	56	115	173	333	530	937	1,910	3,460	5,600	11,500	20,900	33,100
1,100	14	28	53	109	164	316	503	890	1,810	3,280	5,320	10,900	19,800	31,400
1,200	13	27	51	104	156	301	480	849	1,730	3,130	5,070	10,400	18,900	30,000
1,300	12	26	49	100	150	289	460	813	1,660	3,000	4,860	9,980	18,100	28,700
1,400	12	25	47	96	144	277	442	781	1,590	2,880	4,670	9,590	17,400	27,600
1,500	11	24	45	93	139	267	426	752	1,530	2,780	4,500	9,240	16,800	26,600
1,600	11	23	44	89	134	258	411	727	1,480	2,680	4,340	8,920	16,200	25,600
1,700	11	22	42	86	130	250	398	703	1,430	2,590	4,200	8,630	15,700	24,800
1,800	10	22	41	84	126	242	386	682	1,390	2,520	4,070	8,370	15,200	24,100
1,900	10	21	40	81	122	235	375	662	1,350	2,440	3,960	8,130	14,800	23,400
2,000	NA	20	39	79	119	229	364	644	1,310	2,380	3,850	7,910	14,400	22,700

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	NA means a flow of less than 10 cfh.

2.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(2) [402.4(5)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	0.60
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	1,510	3,040	5,560	11,400	17,100	32,900	52,500	92,800	189,000
20	1,070	2,150	3,930	8,070	12,100	23,300	37,100	65,600	134,000
30	869	1,760	3,210	6,590	9,880	19,000	30,300	53,600	109,000
40	753	1,520	2,780	5,710	8,550	16,500	26,300	46,400	94,700
50	673	1,360	2,490	5,110	7,650	14,700	23,500	41,500	84,700
60	615	1,240	2,270	4,660	6,980	13,500	21,400	37,900	77,300
70	569	1,150	2,100	4,320	6,470	12,500	19,900	35,100	71,600
80	532	1,080	1,970	4,040	6,050	11,700	18,600	32,800	67,000
90	502	1,010	1,850	3,810	5,700	11,000	17,500	30,900	63,100
100	462	934	1,710	3,510	5,260	10,100	16,100	28,500	58,200
125	414	836	1,530	3,140	4,700	9,060	14,400	25,500	52,100
150	372	751	1,370	2,820	4,220	8,130	13,000	22,900	46,700
175	344	695	1,270	2,601	3,910	7,530	12,000	21,200	43,300
200	318	642	1,170	2,410	3,610	6,960	11,100	19,600	40,000
250	279	583	1,040	2,140	3,210	6,180	9,850	17,400	35,500
300	253	528	945	1,940	2,910	5,600	8,920	15,800	32,200
350	232	486	869	1,790	2,670	5,150	8,210	14,500	29,600
400	216	452	809	1,660	2,490	4,790	7,640	13,500	27,500
450	203	424	759	1,560	2,330	4,500	7,170	12,700	25,800
500	192	401	717	1,470	2,210	4,250	6,770	12,000	24,400
550	182	381	681	1,400	2,090	4,030	6,430	11,400	23,200
600	174	363	650	1,330	2,000	3,850	6,130	10,800	22,100
650	166	348	622	1,280	1,910	3,680	5,870	10,400	21,200
700	160	334	598	1,230	1,840	3,540	5,640	9,970	20,300
750	154	322	576	1,180	1,770	3,410	5,440	9,610	19,600
800	149	311	556	1,140	1,710	3,290	5,250	9,280	18,900
850	144	301	538	1,100	1,650	3,190	5,080	8,980	18,300
900	139	292	522	1,070	1,600	3,090	4,930	8,710	17,800
950	135	283	507	1,040	1,560	3,000	4,780	8,460	17,200
1,000	132	275	493	1,010	1,520	2,920	4,650	8,220	16,800
1,100	125	262	468	960	1,440	2,770	4,420	7,810	15,900
1,200	119	250	446	917	1,370	2,640	4,220	7,450	15,200
1,300	114	239	427	878	1,320	2,530	4,040	7,140	14,600
1,400	110	230	411	843	1,260	2,430	3,880	6,860	14,000
1,500	106	221	396	812	1,220	2,340	3,740	6,600	13,500
1,600	102	214	382	784	1,180	2,260	3,610	6,380	13,000
1,700	99	207	370	759	1,140	2,190	3,490	6,170	12,600
1,800	96	200	358	736	1,100	2,120	3,390	5,980	12,200
1,900	93	195	348	715	1,070	2,060	3,290	5,810	11,900
2,000	91	189	339	695	1,040	2,010	3,200	5,650	11,500

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(3) [402.4(9)]

SEMIRIGID COPPER TUBING

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	Less than 2 psi
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	0.60
TUBE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	K & L	1/4	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
ACR	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	7/8	11/8	13/8	—	—
Outside	0.375	0.500	0.625	0.750	0.875	1.125	1.375	1.625	2.125
Inside	0.305	0.402	0.527	0.652	0.745	0.995	1.245	1.481	1.959
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	27	55	111	195	276	590	1,060	1,680	3,490
20	18	38	77	134	190	406	730	1,150	2,400
30	15	30	61	107	152	326	586	925	1,930
40	13	26	53	92	131	279	502	791	1,650
50	11	23	47	82	116	247	445	701	1,460
60	10	21	42	74	105	224	403	635	1,320
70	NA	19	39	68	96	206	371	585	1,220
80	NA	18	36	63	90	192	345	544	1,130
90	NA	17	34	59	84	180	324	510	1,060
100	NA	16	32	56	79	170	306	482	1,000
125	NA	14	28	50	70	151	271	427	890
150	NA	13	26	45	64	136	245	387	806
175	NA	12	24	41	59	125	226	356	742
200	NA	11	22	39	55	117	210	331	690
250	NA	NA	20	34	48	103	186	294	612
300	NA	NA	18	31	44	94	169	266	554
350	NA	NA	16	28	40	86	155	245	510
400	NA	NA	15	26	38	80	144	228	474
450	NA	NA	14	25	35	75	135	214	445
500	NA	NA	13	23	33	71	128	202	420
550	NA	NA	13	22	32	68	122	192	399
600	NA	NA	12	21	30	64	116	183	381
650	NA	NA	12	20	29	62	111	175	365
700	NA	NA	11	20	28	59	107	168	350
750	NA	NA	11	19	27	57	103	162	338
800	NA	NA	10	18	26	55	99	156	326
850	NA	NA	10	18	25	53	96	151	315
900	NA	NA	NA	17	24	52	93	147	306
950	NA	NA	NA	17	24	50	90	143	297
1,000	NA	NA	NA	16	23	49	88	139	289
1,100	NA	NA	NA	15	22	46	84	132	274
1,200	NA	NA	NA	15	21	44	80	126	262
1,300	NA	NA	NA	14	20	42	76	120	251
1,400	NA	NA	NA	13	19	41	73	116	241
1,500	NA	NA	NA	13	18	39	71	111	232
1,600	NA	NA	NA	13	18	38	68	108	224
1,700	NA	NA	NA	12	17	37	66	104	217
1,800	NA	NA	NA	12	17	36	64	101	210
1,900	NA	NA	NA	11	16	35	62	98	204
2,000	NA	NA	NA	11	16	34	60	95	199

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products.

2.	NA means a flow of less than 10 cfh.

3.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits

TABLE G2413.4(4) [402.4(12)]

SEMIRIGID COPPER TUBING

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	0.60
TUBE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	K & L	1/4	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
ACR	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	7/8	11/8	13/8	—	—
Outside	0.375	0.500	0.625	0.750	0.875	1.125	1.375	1.625	2.125
Inside	0.305	0.402	0.527	0.652	0.745	0.995	1.245	1.481	1.959
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	245	506	1,030	1,800	2,550	5,450	9,820	15,500	32,200
20	169	348	708	1,240	1,760	3,750	6,750	10,600	22,200
30	135	279	568	993	1,410	3,010	5,420	8,550	17,800
40	116	239	486	850	1,210	2,580	4,640	7,310	15,200
50	103	212	431	754	1,070	2,280	4,110	6,480	13,500
60	93	192	391	683	969	2,070	3,730	5,870	12,200
70	86	177	359	628	891	1,900	3,430	5,400	11,300
80	80	164	334	584	829	1,770	3,190	5,030	10,500
90	75	154	314	548	778	1,660	2,990	4,720	9,820
100	71	146	296	518	735	1,570	2,830	4,450	9,280
125	63	129	263	459	651	1,390	2,500	3,950	8,220
150	57	117	238	416	590	1,260	2,270	3,580	7,450
175	52	108	219	383	543	1,160	2,090	3,290	6,850
200	49	100	204	356	505	1,080	1,940	3,060	6,380
250	43	89	181	315	448	956	1,720	2,710	5,650
300	39	80	164	286	406	866	1,560	2,460	5,120
350	36	74	150	263	373	797	1,430	2,260	4,710
400	33	69	140	245	347	741	1,330	2,100	4,380
450	31	65	131	230	326	696	1,250	1,970	4,110
500	30	61	124	217	308	657	1,180	1,870	3,880
550	28	58	118	206	292	624	1,120	1,770	3,690
600	27	55	112	196	279	595	1,070	1,690	3,520
650	26	53	108	188	267	570	1,030	1,620	3,370
700	25	51	103	181	256	548	986	1,550	3,240
750	24	49	100	174	247	528	950	1,500	3,120
800	23	47	96	168	239	510	917	1,450	3,010
850	22	46	93	163	231	493	888	1,400	2,920
900	22	44	90	158	224	478	861	1,360	2,830
950	21	43	88	153	217	464	836	1,320	2,740
1,000	20	42	85	149	211	452	813	1,280	2,670
1,100	19	40	81	142	201	429	772	1,220	2,540
1,200	18	38	77	135	192	409	737	1,160	2,420
1,300	18	36	74	129	183	392	705	1,110	2,320
1,400	17	35	71	124	176	376	678	1,070	2,230
1,500	16	34	68	120	170	363	653	1,030	2,140
1,600	16	33	66	116	164	350	630	994	2,070
1,700	15	31	64	112	159	339	610	962	2,000
1,800	15	30	62	108	154	329	592	933	1,940
1,900	14	30	60	105	149	319	575	906	1,890
2,000	14	29	59	102	145	310	559	881	1,830

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products.

2.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(5) [402.4(15)]

CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST)

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	Less than 2 psi
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	0.60
TUBE SIZE (EHD)
Flow
Designation
	13	15	18	19	23	25	30	31	37	39	46	48	60	62
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
5	46	63	115	134	225	270	471	546	895	1,037	1,790	2,070	3,660	4,140
10	32	44	82	95	161	192	330	383	639	746	1,260	1,470	2,600	2,930
15	25	35	66	77	132	157	267	310	524	615	1,030	1,200	2,140	2,400
20	22	31	58	67	116	137	231	269	456	536	888	1,050	1,850	2,080
25	19	27	52	60	104	122	206	240	409	482	793	936	1,660	1,860
30	18	25	47	55	96	112	188	218	374	442	723	856	1,520	1,700
40	15	21	41	47	83	97	162	188	325	386	625	742	1,320	1,470
50	13	19	37	42	75	87	144	168	292	347	559	665	1,180	1,320
60	12	17	34	38	68	80	131	153	267	318	509	608	1,080	1,200
70	11	16	31	36	63	74	121	141	248	295	471	563	1,000	1,110
80	10	15	29	33	60	69	113	132	232	277	440	527	940	1,040
90	10	14	28	32	57	65	107	125	219	262	415	498	887	983
100	9	13	26	30	54	62	101	118	208	249	393	472	843	933
150	7	10	20	23	42	48	78	91	171	205	320	387	691	762
200	6	9	18	21	38	44	71	82	148	179	277	336	600	661
250	5	8	16	19	34	39	63	74	133	161	247	301	538	591
300	5	7	15	17	32	36	57	67	95	148	226	275	492	540

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table includes losses for four 90-degree bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends or fittings shall be increased by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3n, where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings or bends.

2.	EHD—Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater the gas capacity of the tubing.

3.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(6) [402.4(18)]

CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST)

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	0.60
TUBE SIZE (EHD)
Flow
Designation
	13	15	18	19	23	25	30	31	37	39	46	48	60	62
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas Per Hour
10	270	353	587	700	1,100	1,370	2,590	2,990	4,510	5,037	9,600	10,700	18,600	21,600
25	166	220	374	444	709	876	1,620	1,870	2,890	3,258	6,040	6,780	11,900	13,700
30	151	200	342	405	650	801	1,480	1,700	2,640	2,987	5,510	6,200	10,900	12,500
40	129	172	297	351	567	696	1,270	1,470	2,300	2,605	4,760	5,380	9,440	10,900
50	115	154	266	314	510	624	1,140	1,310	2,060	2,343	4,260	4,820	8,470	9,720
75	93	124	218	257	420	512	922	1,070	1,690	1,932	3,470	3,950	6,940	7,940
80	89	120	211	249	407	496	892	1,030	1,640	1,874	3,360	3,820	6,730	7,690
100	79	107	189	222	366	445	795	920	1,470	1,685	3,000	3,420	6,030	6,880
150	64	87	155	182	302	364	646	748	1,210	1,389	2,440	2,800	4,940	5,620
200	55	75	135	157	263	317	557	645	1,050	1,212	2,110	2,430	4,290	4,870
250	49	67	121	141	236	284	497	576	941	1,090	1,890	2,180	3,850	4,360
300	44	61	110	129	217	260	453	525	862	999	1,720	1,990	3,520	3,980
400	38	52	96	111	189	225	390	453	749	871	1,490	1,730	3,060	3,450
500	34	46	86	100	170	202	348	404	552	783	1,330	1,550	2,740	3,090

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 3/4 psi, DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with the regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across a regulator can vary with flow rate.

2.	CAUTION: Capacities shown in the table might exceed maximum capacity for a selected regulator. Consult with the regulator or tubing manufacturer for guidance.

3.	Table includes losses for four 90-degree bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends or fittings shall be increased by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3n where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings or bends.

4.	EHD—Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater the gas capacity of the tubing.

5.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(7) [402.4(21)]

POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	Less than 2 psi
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	0.60
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal OD	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
Designation	SDR 9	SDR 11	SDR 11	SDR 10	SDR 11	SDR 11
Actual ID	0.660	0.860	1.077	1.328	1.554	1.943
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	201	403	726	1,260	1,900	3,410
20	138	277	499	865	1,310	2,350
30	111	222	401	695	1,050	1,880
40	95	190	343	594	898	1,610
50	84	169	304	527	796	1,430
60	76	153	276	477	721	1,300
70	70	140	254	439	663	1,190
80	65	131	236	409	617	1,110
90	61	123	221	383	579	1,040
100	58	116	209	362	547	983
125	51	103	185	321	485	871
150	46	93	168	291	439	789
175	43	86	154	268	404	726
200	40	80	144	249	376	675
250	35	71	127	221	333	598
300	32	64	115	200	302	542
350	29	59	106	184	278	499
400	27	55	99	171	258	464
450	26	51	93	160	242	435
500	24	48	88	152	229	411

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(8) [402.4(22)]

POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE

Gas	Natural
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	0.60
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal OD	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
Designation	SDR 9	SDR 11	SDR 11	SDR 10	SDR 11	SDR 11
Actual ID	0.660	0.860	1.077	1.328	1.554	1.943
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	1,860	3,720	6,710	11,600	17,600	31,600
20	1,280	2,560	4,610	7,990	12,100	21,700
30	1,030	2,050	3,710	6,420	9,690	17,400
40	878	1,760	3,170	5,490	8,300	14,900
50	778	1,560	2,810	4,870	7,350	13,200
60	705	1,410	2,550	4,410	6,660	12,000
70	649	1,300	2,340	4,060	6,130	11,000
80	603	1,210	2,180	3,780	5,700	10,200
90	566	1,130	2,050	3,540	5,350	9,610
100	535	1,070	1,930	3,350	5,050	9,080
125	474	949	1,710	2,970	4,480	8,050
150	429	860	1,550	2,690	4,060	7,290
175	395	791	1,430	2,470	3,730	6,710
200	368	736	1,330	2,300	3,470	6,240
250	326	652	1,180	2,040	3,080	5,530
300	295	591	1,070	1,850	2,790	5,010
350	272	544	981	1,700	2,570	4,610
400	253	506	913	1,580	2,390	4,290
450	237	475	856	1,480	2,240	4,020
500	224	448	809	1,400	2,120	3,800
550	213	426	768	1,330	2,010	3,610
600	203	406	733	1,270	1,920	3,440
650	194	389	702	1,220	1,840	3,300
700	187	374	674	1,170	1,760	3,170
750	180	360	649	1,130	1,700	3,050
800	174	348	627	1,090	1,640	2,950
850	168	336	607	1,050	1,590	2,850
900	163	326	588	1,020	1,540	2,770
950	158	317	572	990	1,500	2,690
1,000	154	308	556	963	1,450	2,610
1,100	146	293	528	915	1,380	2,480
1,200	139	279	504	873	1,320	2,370
1,300	134	267	482	836	1,260	2,270
1,400	128	257	463	803	1,210	2,180
1,500	124	247	446	773	1,170	2,100
1,600	119	239	431	747	1,130	2,030
1,700	115	231	417	723	1,090	1,960
1,800	112	224	404	701	1,060	1,900
1,900	109	218	393	680	1,030	1,850
2,000	106	212	382	662	1,000	1,800

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(9) [402.4(25)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	10.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (high-pressure regulator) AND SECOND STAGE (low-pressure regulator)
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	3,320	6,950	13,100	26,900	40,300	77,600	124,000	219,000	446,000
20	2,280	4,780	9,000	18,500	27,700	53,300	85,000	150,000	306,000
30	1,830	3,840	7,220	14,800	22,200	42,800	68,200	121,000	246,000
40	1,570	3,280	6,180	12,700	19,000	36,600	58,400	103,000	211,000
50	1,390	2,910	5,480	11,300	16,900	32,500	51,700	91,500	187,000
60	1,260	2,640	4,970	10,200	15,300	29,400	46,900	82,900	169,000
70	1,160	2,430	4,570	9,380	14,100	27,100	43,100	76,300	156,000
80	1,080	2,260	4,250	8,730	13,100	25,200	40,100	70,900	145,000
90	1,010	2,120	3,990	8,190	12,300	23,600	37,700	66,600	136,000
100	956	2,000	3,770	7,730	11,600	22,300	35,600	62,900	128,000
125	848	1,770	3,340	6,850	10,300	19,800	31,500	55,700	114,000
150	768	1,610	3,020	6,210	9,300	17,900	28,600	50,500	103,000
175	706	1,480	2,780	5,710	8,560	16,500	26,300	46,500	94,700
200	657	1,370	2,590	5,320	7,960	15,300	24,400	43,200	88,100
250	582	1,220	2,290	4,710	7,060	13,600	21,700	38,300	78,100
300	528	1,100	2,080	4,270	6,400	12,300	19,600	34,700	70,800
350	486	1,020	1,910	3,930	5,880	11,300	18,100	31,900	65,100
400	452	945	1,780	3,650	5,470	10,500	16,800	29,700	60,600
450	424	886	1,670	3,430	5,140	9,890	15,800	27,900	56,800
500	400	837	1,580	3,240	4,850	9,340	14,900	26,300	53,700
550	380	795	1,500	3,070	4,610	8,870	14,100	25,000	51,000
600	363	759	1,430	2,930	4,400	8,460	13,500	23,900	48,600
650	347	726	1,370	2,810	4,210	8,110	12,900	22,800	46,600
700	334	698	1,310	2,700	4,040	7,790	12,400	21,900	44,800
750	321	672	1,270	2,600	3,900	7,500	12,000	21,100	43,100
800	310	649	1,220	2,510	3,760	7,240	11,500	20,400	41,600
850	300	628	1,180	2,430	3,640	7,010	11,200	19,800	40,300
900	291	609	1,150	2,360	3,530	6,800	10,800	19,200	39,100
950	283	592	1,110	2,290	3,430	6,600	10,500	18,600	37,900
1,000	275	575	1,080	2,230	3,330	6,420	10,200	18,100	36,900
1,100	261	546	1,030	2,110	3,170	6,100	9,720	17,200	35,000
1,200	249	521	982	2,020	3,020	5,820	9,270	16,400	33,400
1,300	239	499	940	1,930	2,890	5,570	8,880	15,700	32,000
1,400	229	480	903	1,850	2,780	5,350	8,530	15,100	30,800
1,500	221	462	870	1,790	2,680	5,160	8,220	14,500	29,600
1,600	213	446	840	1,730	2,590	4,980	7,940	14,000	28,600
1,700	206	432	813	1,670	2,500	4,820	7,680	13,600	27,700
1,800	200	419	789	1,620	2,430	4,670	7,450	13,200	26,900
1,900	194	407	766	1,570	2,360	4,540	7,230	12,800	26,100
2,000	189	395	745	1,530	2,290	4,410	7,030	12,400	25,400

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(10) [402.4(26)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	10.0 psi
Pressure Drop	3.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (high-pressure regulator) AND SECOND STAGE (low-pressure regulator)
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	5,890	12,300	23,200	47,600	71,300	137,000	219,000	387,000	789,000
20	4,050	8,460	15,900	32,700	49,000	94,400	150,000	266,000	543,000
30	3,250	6,790	12,800	26,300	39,400	75,800	121,000	214,000	436,000
40	2,780	5,810	11,000	22,500	33,700	64,900	103,000	183,000	373,000
50	2,460	5,150	9,710	19,900	29,900	57,500	91,600	162,000	330,000
60	2,230	4,670	8,790	18,100	27,100	52,100	83,000	147,000	299,000
70	2,050	4,300	8,090	16,600	24,900	47,900	76,400	135,000	275,000
80	1,910	4,000	7,530	15,500	23,200	44,600	71,100	126,000	256,000
90	1,790	3,750	7,060	14,500	21,700	41,800	66,700	118,000	240,000
100	1,690	3,540	6,670	13,700	20,500	39,500	63,000	111,000	227,000
125	1,500	3,140	5,910	12,100	18,200	35,000	55,800	98,700	201,000
150	1,360	2,840	5,360	11,000	16,500	31,700	50,600	89,400	182,000
175	1,250	2,620	4,930	10,100	15,200	29,200	46,500	82,300	167,800
200	1,160	2,430	4,580	9,410	14,100	27,200	43,300	76,500	156,100
250	1,030	2,160	4,060	8,340	12,500	24,100	38,400	67,800	138,400
300	935	1,950	3,680	7,560	11,300	21,800	34,800	61,500	125,400
350	860	1,800	3,390	6,950	10,400	20,100	32,000	56,500	115,300
400	800	1,670	3,150	6,470	9,690	18,700	29,800	52,600	107,300
450	751	1,570	2,960	6,070	9,090	17,500	27,900	49,400	100,700
500	709	1,480	2,790	5,730	8,590	16,500	26,400	46,600	95,100
550	673	1,410	2,650	5,450	8,160	15,700	25,000	44,300	90,300
600	642	1,340	2,530	5,200	7,780	15,000	23,900	42,200	86,200
650	615	1,290	2,420	4,980	7,450	14,400	22,900	40,500	82,500
700	591	1,240	2,330	4,780	7,160	13,800	22,000	38,900	79,300
750	569	1,190	2,240	4,600	6,900	13,300	21,200	37,400	76,400
800	550	1,150	2,170	4,450	6,660	12,800	20,500	36,200	73,700
850	532	1,110	2,100	4,300	6,450	12,400	19,800	35,000	71,400
900	516	1,080	2,030	4,170	6,250	12,000	19,200	33,900	69,200
950	501	1,050	1,970	4,050	6,070	11,700	18,600	32,900	67,200
1,000	487	1,020	1,920	3,940	5,900	11,400	18,100	32,000	65,400
1,100	463	968	1,820	3,740	5,610	10,800	17,200	30,400	62,100
1,200	442	923	1,740	3,570	5,350	10,300	16,400	29,000	59,200
1,300	423	884	1,670	3,420	5,120	9,870	15,700	27,800	56,700
1,400	406	849	1,600	3,280	4,920	9,480	15,100	26,700	54,500
1,500	391	818	1,540	3,160	4,740	9,130	14,600	25,700	52,500
1,600	378	790	1,490	3,060	4,580	8,820	14,100	24,800	50,700
1,700	366	765	1,440	2,960	4,430	8,530	13,600	24,000	49,000
1,800	355	741	1,400	2,870	4,300	8,270	13,200	23,300	47,600
1,900	344	720	1,360	2,780	4,170	8,040	12,800	22,600	46,200
2,000	335	700	1,320	2,710	4,060	7,820	12,500	22,000	44,900

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(11) [402.4(27)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	2,680	5,590	10,500	21,600	32,400	62,400	99,500	176,000	359,000
20	1,840	3,850	7,240	14,900	22,300	42,900	68,400	121,000	247,000
30	1,480	3,090	5,820	11,900	17,900	34,500	54,900	97,100	198,000
40	1,260	2,640	4,980	10,200	15,300	29,500	47,000	83,100	170,000
50	1,120	2,340	4,410	9,060	13,600	26,100	41,700	73,700	150,000
60	1,010	2,120	4,000	8,210	12,300	23,700	37,700	66,700	136,000
70	934	1,950	3,680	7,550	11,300	21,800	34,700	61,400	125,000
80	869	1,820	3,420	7,020	10,500	20,300	32,300	57,100	116,000
90	815	1,700	3,210	6,590	9,880	19,000	30,300	53,600	109,000
100	770	1,610	3,030	6,230	9,330	18,000	28,600	50,600	103,000
125	682	1,430	2,690	5,520	8,270	15,900	25,400	44,900	91,500
150	618	1,290	2,440	5,000	7,490	14,400	23,000	40,700	82,900
175	569	1,190	2,240	4,600	6,890	13,300	21,200	37,400	76,300
200	529	1,110	2,080	4,280	6,410	12,300	19,700	34,800	71,000
250	469	981	1,850	3,790	5,680	10,900	17,400	30,800	62,900
300	425	889	1,670	3,440	5,150	9,920	15,800	27,900	57,000
350	391	817	1,540	3,160	4,740	9,120	14,500	25,700	52,400
400	364	760	1,430	2,940	4,410	8,490	13,500	23,900	48,800
450	341	714	1,340	2,760	4,130	7,960	12,700	22,400	45,800
500	322	674	1,270	2,610	3,910	7,520	12,000	21,200	43,200
550	306	640	1,210	2,480	3,710	7,140	11,400	20,100	41,100
600	292	611	1,150	2,360	3,540	6,820	10,900	19,200	39,200
650	280	585	1,100	2,260	3,390	6,530	10,400	18,400	37,500
700	269	562	1,060	2,170	3,260	6,270	9,990	17,700	36,000
750	259	541	1,020	2,090	3,140	6,040	9,630	17,000	34,700
800	250	523	985	2,020	3,030	5,830	9,300	16,400	33,500
850	242	506	953	1,960	2,930	5,640	9,000	15,900	32,400
900	235	490	924	1,900	2,840	5,470	8,720	15,400	31,500
950	228	476	897	1,840	2,760	5,310	8,470	15,000	30,500
1,000	222	463	873	1,790	2,680	5,170	8,240	14,600	29,700
1,100	210	440	829	1,700	2,550	4,910	7,830	13,800	28,200
1,200	201	420	791	1,620	2,430	4,680	7,470	13,200	26,900
1,300	192	402	757	1,550	2,330	4,490	7,150	12,600	25,800
1,400	185	386	727	1,490	2,240	4,310	6,870	12,100	24,800
1,500	178	372	701	1,440	2,160	4,150	6,620	11,700	23,900
1,600	172	359	677	1,390	2,080	4,010	6,390	11,300	23,000
1,700	166	348	655	1,340	2,010	3,880	6,180	10,900	22,300
1,800	161	337	635	1,300	1,950	3,760	6,000	10,600	21,600
1,900	157	327	617	1,270	1,900	3,650	5,820	10,300	21,000
2,000	152	318	600	1,230	1,840	3,550	5,660	10,000	20,400

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(12) [402.4(28)]

SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	11.0 in. w.c.
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE- OR SECOND-STAGE (low pressure) REGULATOR AND APPLIANCE
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3	4
Actual ID	0.622	0.824	1.049	1.380	1.610	2.067	2.469	3.068	4.026
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	291	608	1,150	2,350	3,520	6,790	10,800	19,100	39,000
20	200	418	787	1,620	2,420	4,660	7,430	13,100	26,800
30	160	336	632	1,300	1,940	3,750	5,970	10,600	21,500
40	137	287	541	1,110	1,660	3,210	5,110	9,030	18,400
50	122	255	480	985	1,480	2,840	4,530	8,000	16,300
60	110	231	434	892	1,340	2,570	4,100	7,250	14,800
80	101	212	400	821	1,230	2,370	3,770	6,670	13,600
100	94	197	372	763	1,140	2,200	3,510	6,210	12,700
125	89	185	349	716	1,070	2,070	3,290	5,820	11,900
150	84	175	330	677	1,010	1,950	3,110	5,500	11,200
175	74	155	292	600	899	1,730	2,760	4,880	9,950
200	67	140	265	543	814	1,570	2,500	4,420	9,010
250	62	129	243	500	749	1,440	2,300	4,060	8,290
300	58	120	227	465	697	1,340	2,140	3,780	7,710
350	51	107	201	412	618	1,190	1,900	3,350	6,840
400	46	97	182	373	560	1,080	1,720	3,040	6,190
450	42	89	167	344	515	991	1,580	2,790	5,700
500	40	83	156	320	479	922	1,470	2,600	5,300
550	37	78	146	300	449	865	1,380	2,440	4,970
600	35	73	138	283	424	817	1,300	2,300	4,700
650	33	70	131	269	403	776	1,240	2,190	4,460
700	32	66	125	257	385	741	1,180	2,090	4,260
750	30	64	120	246	368	709	1,130	2,000	4,080
800	29	61	115	236	354	681	1,090	1,920	3,920
850	28	59	111	227	341	656	1,050	1,850	3,770
900	27	57	107	220	329	634	1,010	1,790	3,640
950	26	55	104	213	319	613	978	1,730	3,530
1,000	25	53	100	206	309	595	948	1,680	3,420
1,100	25	52	97	200	300	578	921	1,630	3,320
1,200	24	50	95	195	292	562	895	1,580	3,230
1,300	23	48	90	185	277	534	850	1,500	3,070
1,400	22	46	86	176	264	509	811	1,430	2,930
1,500	21	44	82	169	253	487	777	1,370	2,800
1,200	24	50	95	195	292	562	895	1,580	3,230
1,300	23	48	90	185	277	534	850	1,500	3,070
1,400	22	46	86	176	264	509	811	1,430	2,930
1,500	21	44	82	169	253	487	777	1,370	2,800
1,600	20	42	79	162	243	468	746	1,320	2,690
1,700	19	40	76	156	234	451	719	1,270	2,590
1,800	19	39	74	151	226	436	694	1,230	2,500
1,900	18	38	71	146	219	422	672	1,190	2,420
2,000	18	37	69	142	212	409	652	1,150	2,350

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(13) [402.4(29)]

SEMIRIGID COPPER TUBING

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	10.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (high-pressure regulator) AND SECOND STAGE (low-pressure regulator)
TUBE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	K & L	1/4	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
ACR	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	7/8	11/8	13/8	—	—
Outside	0.375	0.500	0.625	0.750	0.875	1.125	1.375	1.625	2.125
Inside	0.305	0.402	0.527	0.652	0.745	0.995	1.245	1.481	1.959
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	513	1,060	2,150	3,760	5,330	11,400	20,500	32,300	67,400
20	352	727	1,480	2,580	3,670	7,830	14,100	22,200	46,300
30	283	584	1,190	2,080	2,940	6,290	11,300	17,900	37,200
40	242	500	1,020	1,780	2,520	5,380	9,690	15,300	31,800
50	215	443	901	1,570	2,230	4,770	8,590	13,500	28,200
60	194	401	816	1,430	2,020	4,320	7,780	12,300	25,600
70	179	369	751	1,310	1,860	3,980	7,160	11,300	23,500
80	166	343	699	1,220	1,730	3,700	6,660	10,500	21,900
90	156	322	655	1,150	1,630	3,470	6,250	9,850	20,500
100	147	304	619	1,080	1,540	3,280	5,900	9,310	19,400
125	131	270	549	959	1,360	2,910	5,230	8,250	17,200
150	118	244	497	869	1,230	2,630	4,740	7,470	15,600
175	109	225	457	799	1,130	2,420	4,360	6,880	14,300
200	101	209	426	744	1,060	2,250	4,060	6,400	13,300
250	90	185	377	659	935	2,000	3,600	5,670	11,800
300	81	168	342	597	847	1,810	3,260	5,140	10,700
350	75	155	314	549	779	1,660	3,000	4,730	9,840
400	70	144	292	511	725	1,550	2,790	4,400	9,160
450	65	135	274	480	680	1,450	2,620	4,130	8,590
500	62	127	259	453	643	1,370	2,470	3,900	8,120
550	59	121	246	430	610	1,300	2,350	3,700	7,710
600	56	115	235	410	582	1,240	2,240	3,530	7,350
650	54	111	225	393	558	1,190	2,140	3,380	7,040
700	51	106	216	378	536	1,140	2,060	3,250	6,770
750	50	102	208	364	516	1,100	1,980	3,130	6,520
800	48	99	201	351	498	1,060	1,920	3,020	6,290
850	46	96	195	340	482	1,030	1,850	2,920	6,090
900	45	93	189	330	468	1,000	1,800	2,840	5,910
950	44	90	183	320	454	970	1,750	2,750	5,730
1,000	42	88	178	311	442	944	1,700	2,680	5,580
1,100	40	83	169	296	420	896	1,610	2,540	5,300
1,200	38	79	161	282	400	855	1,540	2,430	5,050
1,300	37	76	155	270	383	819	1,470	2,320	4,840
1,400	35	73	148	260	368	787	1,420	2,230	4,650
1,500	34	70	143	250	355	758	1,360	2,150	4,480
1,600	33	68	138	241	343	732	1,320	2,080	4,330
1,700	32	66	134	234	331	708	1,270	2,010	4,190
1,800	31	64	130	227	321	687	1,240	1,950	4,060
1,900	30	62	126	220	312	667	1,200	1,890	3,940
2,000	29	60	122	214	304	648	1,170	1,840	3,830

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products.

2.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(14) [402.4(30)]

SEMIRIGID COPPER TUBING

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	11.0 in. w.c.
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE- OR SECOND-STAGE (low-pressure regulator) AND APPLIANCE
TUBE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	K & L	1/4	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
ACR	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	7/8	11/8	13/8	—	—
Outside	0.375	0.500	0.625	0.750	0.875	1.125	1.375	1.625	2.125
Inside	0.305	0.402	0.527	0.652	0.745	0.995	1.245	1.481	1.959
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	45	93	188	329	467	997	1,800	2,830	5,890
20	31	64	129	226	321	685	1,230	1,950	4,050
30	25	51	104	182	258	550	991	1,560	3,250
40	21	44	89	155	220	471	848	1,340	2,780
50	19	39	79	138	195	417	752	1,180	2,470
60	17	35	71	125	177	378	681	1,070	2,240
70	16	32	66	115	163	348	626	988	2,060
80	15	30	61	107	152	324	583	919	1,910
90	14	28	57	100	142	304	547	862	1,800
100	13	27	54	95	134	287	517	814	1,700
125	11	24	48	84	119	254	458	722	1,500
150	10	21	44	76	108	230	415	654	1,360
175	NA	20	40	70	99	212	382	602	1,250
200	NA	18	37	65	92	197	355	560	1,170
250	NA	16	33	58	82	175	315	496	1,030
300	NA	15	30	52	74	158	285	449	936
350	NA	14	28	48	68	146	262	414	861
400	NA	13	26	45	63	136	244	385	801
450	NA	12	24	42	60	127	229	361	752
500	NA	11	23	40	56	120	216	341	710
550	NA	11	22	38	53	114	205	324	674
600	NA	10	21	36	51	109	196	309	643
650	NA	NA	20	34	49	104	188	296	616
700	NA	NA	19	33	47	100	180	284	592
750	NA	NA	18	32	45	96	174	274	570
800	NA	NA	18	31	44	93	168	264	551
850	NA	NA	17	30	42	90	162	256	533
900	NA	NA	17	29	41	87	157	248	517
950	NA	NA	16	28	40	85	153	241	502
1,000	NA	NA	16	27	39	83	149	234	488
1,100	NA	NA	15	26	37	78	141	223	464
1,200	NA	NA	14	25	35	75	135	212	442
1,300	NA	NA	14	24	34	72	129	203	423
1,400	NA	NA	13	23	32	69	124	195	407
1,500	NA	NA	13	22	31	66	119	188	392
1,600	NA	NA	12	21	30	64	115	182	378
1,700	NA	NA	12	20	29	62	112	176	366
1,800	NA	NA	11	20	28	60	108	170	355
1,900	NA	NA	11	19	27	58	105	166	345
2,000	NA	NA	11	19	27	57	102	161	335

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products.

2.	NA means a flow of less than 10,000 Btu/hr.

3.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(15) [402.4(31)]

SEMIRIGID COPPER TUBING

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: TUBE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR
TUBE SIZE (inches)
Nominal	K & L	1/4	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
ACR	3/8	1/2	5/8	3/4	7/8	11/8	13/8	—	—
Outside	0.375	0.500	0.625	0.750	0.875	1.125	1.375	1.625	2.125
Inside	0.305	0.402	0.527	0.652	0.745	0.995	1.245	1.481	1.959
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	413	852	1,730	3,030	4,300	9,170	16,500	26,000	54,200
20	284	585	1,190	2,080	2,950	6,310	11,400	17,900	37,300
30	228	470	956	1,670	2,370	5,060	9,120	14,400	29,900
40	195	402	818	1,430	2,030	4,330	7,800	12,300	25,600
50	173	356	725	1,270	1,800	3,840	6,920	10,900	22,700
60	157	323	657	1,150	1,630	3,480	6,270	9,880	20,600
70	144	297	605	1,060	1,500	3,200	5,760	9,090	18,900
80	134	276	562	983	1,390	2,980	5,360	8,450	17,600
90	126	259	528	922	1,310	2,790	5,030	7,930	16,500
100	119	245	498	871	1,240	2,640	4,750	7,490	15,600
125	105	217	442	772	1,100	2,340	4,210	6,640	13,800
150	95	197	400	700	992	2,120	3,820	6,020	12,500
175	88	181	368	644	913	1,950	3,510	5,540	11,500
200	82	168	343	599	849	1,810	3,270	5,150	10,700
250	72	149	304	531	753	1,610	2,900	4,560	9,510
300	66	135	275	481	682	1,460	2,620	4,140	8,610
350	60	124	253	442	628	1,340	2,410	3,800	7,920
400	56	116	235	411	584	1,250	2,250	3,540	7,370
450	53	109	221	386	548	1,170	2,110	3,320	6,920
500	50	103	209	365	517	1,110	1,990	3,140	6,530
550	47	97	198	346	491	1,050	1,890	2,980	6,210
600	45	93	189	330	469	1,000	1,800	2,840	5,920
650	43	89	181	316	449	959	1,730	2,720	5,670
700	41	86	174	304	431	921	1,660	2,620	5,450
750	40	82	168	293	415	888	1,600	2,520	5,250
800	39	80	162	283	401	857	1,540	2,430	5,070
850	37	77	157	274	388	829	1,490	2,350	4,900
900	36	75	152	265	376	804	1,450	2,280	4,750
950	35	72	147	258	366	781	1,410	2,220	4,620
1,000	34	71	143	251	356	760	1,370	2,160	4,490
1,100	32	67	136	238	338	721	1,300	2,050	4,270
1,200	31	64	130	227	322	688	1,240	1,950	4,070
1,300	30	61	124	217	309	659	1,190	1,870	3,900
1,400	28	59	120	209	296	633	1,140	1,800	3,740
1,500	27	57	115	201	286	610	1,100	1,730	3,610
1,600	26	55	111	194	276	589	1,060	1,670	3,480
1,700	26	53	108	188	267	570	1,030	1,620	3,370
1,800	25	51	104	182	259	553	1,000	1,570	3,270
1,900	24	50	101	177	251	537	966	1,520	3,170
2,000	23	48	99	172	244	522	940	1,480	3,090

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products.

2.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(16) [402.4(32)]

CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST)

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	11.0 in. w.c.
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE OR SECOND STAGE (Low Pressure) REGULATOR AND THE APPLIANCE SHUTOFF VALVE
TUBE SIZE (EHD)
Flow
Designation
	13	15	18	19	23	25	30	31	37	39	46	48	60	62
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
5	72	99	181	211	355	426	744	863	1,420	1,638	2,830	3,270	5,780	6,550
10	50	69	129	150	254	303	521	605	971	1,179	1,990	2,320	4,110	4,640
15	39	55	104	121	208	248	422	490	775	972	1,620	1,900	3,370	3,790
20	34	49	91	106	183	216	365	425	661	847	1,400	1,650	2,930	3,290
25	30	42	82	94	164	192	325	379	583	762	1,250	1,480	2,630	2,940
30	28	39	74	87	151	177	297	344	528	698	1,140	1,350	2,400	2,680
40	23	33	64	74	131	153	256	297	449	610	988	1,170	2,090	2,330
50	20	30	58	66	118	137	227	265	397	548	884	1,050	1,870	2,080
60	19	26	53	60	107	126	207	241	359	502	805	961	1,710	1,900
70	17	25	49	57	99	117	191	222	330	466	745	890	1,590	1,760
80	15	23	45	52	94	109	178	208	307	438	696	833	1,490	1,650
90	15	22	44	50	90	102	169	197	286	414	656	787	1,400	1,550
100	14	20	41	47	85	98	159	186	270	393	621	746	1,330	1,480
150	11	15	31	36	66	75	123	143	217	324	506	611	1,090	1,210
200	9	14	28	33	60	69	112	129	183	283	438	531	948	1,050
250	8	12	25	30	53	61	99	117	163	254	390	476	850	934
300	8	11	23	26	50	57	90	107	147	234	357	434	777	854

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table includes losses for four 90-degree bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends or fittings shall be increased by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3n where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings or bends.

2.	EHD—Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater the gas capacity of the tubing.

3.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(17) [402.4(33)]

CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST)

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSI SERVICE AND THE LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR
TUBE SIZE (EHD)
Flow
Designation
	13	15	18	19	23	25	30	31	37	39	46	48	60	62
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	426	558	927	1,110	1,740	2,170	4,100	4,720	7,130	7,958	15,200	16,800	29,400	34,200
25	262	347	591	701	1,120	1,380	2,560	2,950	4,560	5,147	9,550	10,700	18,800	21,700
30	238	316	540	640	1,030	1,270	2,330	2,690	4,180	4,719	8,710	9,790	17,200	19,800
40	203	271	469	554	896	1,100	2,010	2,320	3,630	4,116	7,530	8,500	14,900	17,200
50	181	243	420	496	806	986	1,790	2,070	3,260	3,702	6,730	7,610	13,400	15,400
75	147	196	344	406	663	809	1,460	1,690	2,680	3,053	5,480	6,230	11,000	12,600
80	140	189	333	393	643	768	1,410	1,630	2,590	2,961	5,300	6,040	10,600	12,200
100	124	169	298	350	578	703	1,260	1,450	2,330	2,662	4,740	5,410	9,530	10,900
150	101	137	245	287	477	575	1,020	1,180	1,910	2,195	3,860	4,430	7,810	8,890
200	86	118	213	248	415	501	880	1,020	1,660	1,915	3,340	3,840	6,780	7,710
250	77	105	191	222	373	448	785	910	1,490	1,722	2,980	3,440	6,080	6,900
300	69	96	173	203	343	411	716	829	1,360	1,578	2,720	3,150	5,560	6,300
400	60	82	151	175	298	355	616	716	1,160	1,376	2,350	2,730	4,830	5,460
500	53	72	135	158	268	319	550	638	1,030	1,237	2,100	2,450	4,330	4,880

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 1/2 psi (based on 13 in. w.c. outlet pressure), DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with the regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across a regulator can vary with flow rate.

2.	CAUTION: Capacities shown in the table might exceed maximum capacity for a selected regulator. Consult with the regulator or tubing manufacturer for guidance.

3.	Table includes losses for four 90-degree bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends or fittings shall be increased by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3n where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings or bends.

4.	EHD—Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater the gas capacity of the tubing.

5.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(18) [402.4(34)]

CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST)

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	5.0 psi
Pressure Drop	3.5 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
TUBE SIZE (EHD)
Flow Designation	13	15	18	19	23	25	30	31	37	39	46	48	60	62
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	826	1,070	1,710	2,060	3,150	4,000	7,830	8,950	13,100	14,441	28,600	31,200	54,400	63,800
25	509	664	1,090	1,310	2,040	2,550	4,860	5,600	8,400	9,339	18,000	19,900	34,700	40,400
30	461	603	999	1,190	1,870	2,340	4,430	5,100	7,680	8,564	16,400	18,200	31,700	36,900
40	396	520	867	1,030	1,630	2,030	3,820	4,400	6,680	7,469	14,200	15,800	27,600	32,000
50	352	463	777	926	1,460	1,820	3,410	3,930	5,990	6,717	12,700	14,100	24,700	28,600
75	284	376	637	757	1,210	1,490	2,770	3,190	4,920	5,539	10,300	11,600	20,300	23,400
80	275	363	618	731	1,170	1,450	2,680	3,090	4,770	5,372	9,990	11,200	19,600	22,700
100	243	324	553	656	1,050	1,300	2,390	2,760	4,280	4,830	8,930	10,000	17,600	20,300
150	196	262	453	535	866	1,060	1,940	2,240	3,510	3,983	7,270	8,210	14,400	16,600
200	169	226	393	464	755	923	1,680	1,930	3,050	3,474	6,290	7,130	12,500	14,400
250	150	202	352	415	679	828	1,490	1,730	2,740	3,124	5,620	6,390	11,200	12,900
300	136	183	322	379	622	757	1,360	1,570	2,510	2,865	5,120	5,840	10,300	11,700
400	117	158	279	328	542	657	1,170	1,360	2,180	2,498	4,430	5,070	8,920	10,200
500	104	140	251	294	488	589	1,050	1,210	1,950	2,247	3,960	4,540	8,000	9,110

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Notes:

1.	Table does not include effect of pressure drop across line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 1 psi, DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with the regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drop across regulator can vary with the flow rate.

2.	CAUTION: Capacities shown in the table might exceed maximum capacity of selected regulator. Consult with the tubing manufacturer for guidance.

3.	Table includes losses for four 90-degree bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends or fittings shall be increased by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3n where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings or bends.

4.	EHD—Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater the gas capacity of the tubing.

5.	Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(19) [402.4(35)]

POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	11.0 in. w.c.
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PE PIPE SIZING BETWEEN INTEGRAL 2-STAGE REGULATOR AT TANK OR SECOND STAGE (low-pressure regulator) AND BUILDING
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal OD	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
Designation	SDR 9	SDR 11	SDR 11	SDR 10	SDR 11	SDR 11
Actual ID	0.660	0.860	1.077	1.328	1.554	1.943
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	340	680	1,230	2,130	3,210	5,770
20	233	468	844	1,460	2,210	3,970
30	187	375	677	1,170	1,770	3,180
40	160	321	580	1,000	1,520	2,730
50	142	285	514	890	1,340	2,420
60	129	258	466	807	1,220	2,190
70	119	237	428	742	1,120	2,010
80	110	221	398	690	1,040	1,870
90	103	207	374	648	978	1,760
100	98	196	353	612	924	1,660
125	87	173	313	542	819	1,470
150	78	157	284	491	742	1,330
175	72	145	261	452	683	1,230
200	67	135	243	420	635	1,140
250	60	119	215	373	563	1,010
300	54	108	195	338	510	916
350	50	99	179	311	469	843
400	46	92	167	289	436	784
450	43	87	157	271	409	736
500	41	82	148	256	387	695

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(20) [402.4(36)]

POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	2.0 psi
Pressure Drop	1.0 psi
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PE PIPE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE REGULATOR AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR
PIPE SIZE (inches)
Nominal OD	1/2	3/4	1	11/4	11/2	2
Designation	SDR 9	SDR 11	SDR 11	SDR 10	SDR 11	SDR 11
Actual ID	0.660	0.860	1.077	1.328	1.554	1.943
Length (ft)	Capacity in Thousands of Btu per Hour
10	3,130	6,260	11,300	19,600	29,500	53,100
20	2,150	4,300	7,760	13,400	20,300	36,500
30	1,730	3,450	6,230	10,800	16,300	29,300
40	1,480	2,960	5,330	9,240	14,000	25,100
50	1,310	2,620	4,730	8,190	12,400	22,200
60	1,190	2,370	4,280	7,420	11,200	20,100
70	1,090	2,180	3,940	6,830	10,300	18,500
80	1,010	2,030	3,670	6,350	9,590	17,200
90	952	1,910	3,440	5,960	9,000	16,200
100	899	1,800	3,250	5,630	8,500	15,300
125	797	1,600	2,880	4,990	7,530	13,500
150	722	1,450	2,610	4,520	6,830	12,300
175	664	1,330	2,400	4,160	6,280	11,300
200	618	1,240	2,230	3,870	5,840	10,500
250	548	1,100	1,980	3,430	5,180	9,300
300	496	994	1,790	3,110	4,690	8,430
350	457	914	1,650	2,860	4,320	7,760
400	425	851	1,530	2,660	4,020	7,220
450	399	798	1,440	2,500	3,770	6,770
500	377	754	1,360	2,360	3,560	6,390
550	358	716	1,290	2,240	3,380	6,070
600	341	683	1,230	2,140	3,220	5,790
650	327	654	1,180	2,040	3,090	5,550
700	314	628	1,130	1,960	2,970	5,330
750	302	605	1,090	1,890	2,860	5,140
800	292	585	1,050	1,830	2,760	4,960
850	283	566	1,020	1,770	2,670	4,800
900	274	549	990	1,710	2,590	4,650
950	266	533	961	1,670	2,520	4,520
1,000	259	518	935	1,620	2,450	4,400
1,100	246	492	888	1,540	2,320	4,170
1,200	234	470	847	1,470	2,220	3,980
1,300	225	450	811	1,410	2,120	3,810
1,400	216	432	779	1,350	2,040	3,660
1,500	208	416	751	1,300	1,960	3,530
1,600	201	402	725	1,260	1,900	3,410
1,700	194	389	702	1,220	1,840	3,300
1,800	188	377	680	1,180	1,780	3,200
1,900	183	366	661	1,140	1,730	3,110
2,000	178	356	643	1,110	1,680	3,020

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

TABLE G2413.4(21) [402.4(37)]

POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC TUBING

Gas	Undiluted Propane
Inlet Pressure	11.0 in. w.c.
Pressure Drop	0.5 in. w.c.
Specific Gravity	1.50
INTENDED USE: PE PIPE SIZING BETWEEN INTEGRAL 2-STAGE REGULATOR AT TANK OR SECOND STAGE (low-pressure regulator) AND BUILDING
Plastic Tubing Size (CTS) (inch)
Nominal OD	1/2	1
Designation	SDR 7	SDR 11
Actual ID	0.445	0.927
Length (ft)	Capacity in Cubic Feet of Gas per Hour
10	121	828
20	83	569
30	67	457
40	57	391
50	51	347
60	46	314
70	42	289
80	39	269
90	37	252
100	35	238
125	31	211
150	28	191
175	26	176
200	24	164
225	22	154
250	21	145
275	20	138
300	19	132
350	18	121
400	16	113
450	15	106
500	15	100

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1-inch water column = 0.2488 kPa, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m3/h, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

Note: Table entries have been rounded to three significant digits.

G2413.4.1 (402.4.1) Longest length method.

The pipe size of each section of gas piping shall be determined using the longest length of piping from the point of delivery to the most remote outlet and the load of the section.

G2413.4.2 (402.4.2) Branch length method.

Pipe shall be sized as follows:

1.	Pipe size of each section of the longest pipe run from the point of delivery to the most remote outlet shall be determined using the longest run of piping and the load of the section.

2.	The pipe size of each section of branch piping not previously sized shall be determined using the length of piping from the point of delivery to the most remote outlet in each branch and the load of the section.

G2413.4.3 (402.4.3) Hybrid pressure.

The pipe size for each section of higher pressure gas piping shall be determined using the longest length of piping from the point of delivery to the most remote line pressure regulator. The pipe size from the line pressure regulator to each outlet shall be determined using the length of piping from the regulator to the most remote outlet served by the regulator.

G2413.5 (402.5) Noncorrugated stainless steel tubing.

Noncorrugated stainless steel tubing shall be sized in accordance with Equations 24-3 and 24-4 of Section 2413.4 in conjunction with Section 2413.4.1, 2413.4.2 or 2413.4.3.

G2413.6 (402.6) Allowable pressure drop.

The design pressure loss in any piping system under maximum demand, from the point of delivery to the inlet connection of all appliances served, shall be such that the supply pressure at each appliance inlet is greater than or equal to the minimum pressure required by the appliance.

G2413.7 (402.7) Maximum operating pressure.

The maximum design operating pressure for piping systems located inside buildings shall not exceed 5 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (34 kPa gauge) except where one or more of the following conditions are met:

1.	The piping joints are welded or brazed.

2.	The piping is joined by fittings listed to ANSI LC4/CSA 6.32 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	The piping joints are flanged and pipe-to-flange connections are made by welding or brazing.

4.	The piping is located in a ventilated chase or otherwise enclosed for protection against accidental gas accumulation.

5.	The piping is a temporary installation for buildings under construction.

G2413.7.1 (402.7.1) Operation below -5°F (-21°C).

LP-gas systems designed to operate below -5°F (-21°C) or with butane or a propane-butane mix shall be designed to either accommodate liquid LP-gas or prevent LP-gas vapor from condensing into a liquid.

SECTION G2414 (403)
PIPING MATERIALS
G2414.1 (403.1) General.

Materials used for piping systems shall comply with the requirements of this chapter or shall be approved.

G2414.2 (403.2) Used materials.

Pipe, fittings, valves or other materials shall not be used again unless they are free from foreign materials and have been ascertained to be adequate for the service intended.

➡

G2414.3 (403.3) Metallic pipe.

Metallic pipe shall comply with Sections G2414.3.1 and G2414.3.2.

G2414.3.1 (403.3.1) Cast iron.

Cast-iron pipe shall not be used.

G2414.3.2 (403.3.2) Steel.

Steel, stainless steel and wrought-iron pipe shall not be lighter than Schedule 10 and shall comply with the dimensional standards of ASME B36.10M and one of the following standards:

1.	ASTM A53/A53M.

2.	ASTM A106.

3.	ASTM A312.

G2414.4 (403.4) Metallic tubing.

Tubing shall not be used with gases corrosive to the tubing material.

G2414.4.1 (403.4.1) Steel tubing.

Steel tubing shall comply with ASTM A254.

G2414.4.2 (403.4.2) Stainless steel.

Stainless steel tubing shall comply with ASTM A268 or ASTM A269.

G2414.4.3 (403.4.3) Copper or copper-alloy tubing.

Copper tubing shall comply with Standard Type K or L of ASTM B88 or ASTM B280.

Copper and copper-alloy tubing shall not be used if the gas contains more than an average of 0.3 grains of hydrogen sulfide per 100 standard cubic feet of gas (0.7 milligrams per 100 liters).

G2414.4.4 (403.4.5) Corrugated stainless steel tubing.

Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed in accordance with ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26.

G2414.5 (403.5) Plastic pipe, tubing and fittings.

Polyethylene plastic pipe, tubing and fittings used to supply fuel gas shall conform to ASTM D2513. Such pipe shall be marked “Gas” and “ASTM D2513.”

Polyamide pipe, tubing and fittings shall be identified and conform to ASTM F2945. Such pipe shall be marked “Gas” and “ASTM F2945.”

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic pipe, tubing and fittings shall not be used to supply fuel gas.

G2414.5.1 (403.5.1) Anodeless risers.

Plastic pipe, tubing and anodeless risers shall comply with the following:

1.	Factory-assembled anodeless risers shall be recommended by the manufacturer for the gas used and shall be leak tested by the manufacturer in accordance with written procedures.

2.	Service head adapters and field-assembled anodeless risers incorporating service head adapters shall be recommended by the manufacturer for the gas used, and shall be designed and certified to meet the requirements of Category I of ASTM D2513, and US Department of Transportation, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49 CFR, Part 192.281(e). The manufacturer shall provide the user with qualified installation instructions as prescribed by the US Department of Transportation, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49 CFR, Part 192.283(b).

G2414.5.2 (403.5.2) LP-gas systems.

The use of plastic pipe, tubing and fittings in undiluted liquefied petroleum gas piping systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 58.

G2414.5.3 (403.5.3) Regulator vent piping.

Plastic pipe and fittings used to connect regulator vents to remote vent terminations shall be of PVC conforming to ANSI/UL 651. PVC vent piping shall not be installed indoors.

G2414.6 (403.6) Workmanship and defects.

Pipe, tubing and fittings shall be clear and free from cutting burrs and defects in structure or threading, and shall be thoroughly brushed, and chip and scale blown.

Defects in pipe, tubing and fittings shall not be repaired. Defective pipe, tubing and fittings shall be replaced. (See Section G2417.1.2.)

G2414.7 (403.7) Protective coating.

Where in contact with material or atmosphere exerting a corrosive action, metallic piping and fittings coated with a corrosion-resistant material shall be used. External or internal coatings or linings used on piping or components shall not be considered as adding strength.

G2414.8 (403.8) Metallic pipe threads.

Metallic pipe and fitting threads shall be taper pipe threads and shall comply with ASME B1.20.1.

G2414.8.1 (403.8.1) Damaged threads.

Pipe with threads that are stripped, chipped, corroded or otherwise damaged shall not be used. Where a weld opens during the operation of cutting or threading, that portion of the pipe shall not be used.

G2414.8.2 (403.8.2) Number of threads.

Field threading of metallic pipe shall be in accordance with Table G2414.8.2.

TABLE G2414.8.2 (403.8.2)

SPECIFICATIONS FOR THREADING METALLIC PIPE

IRON PIPE SIZE
(inches)
	APPROXIMATE
LENGTH OF
THREADED PORTION
(inches)
	APPROXIMATE NO. OF
THREADS TO BE CUT

1/2	3/4	10
3/4	3/4	10
1	7/8	10
11/4	1	11
11/2	1	11

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

G2414.8.3 (403.8.3) Threaded joint sealing.

Threaded joints shall be made using a thread joint sealing material. Thread joint sealing materials shall be nonhardening and shall be resistant to the chemical constituents of the gases to be conveyed through the piping. Thread joint sealing materials shall be compatible with the pipe and fitting materials on which the sealing materials are used.

G2414.9 (403.9) Metallic piping joints and fittings.

The type of piping joint used shall be suitable for the pressure-temperature conditions and shall be selected giving consideration to joint tightness and mechanical strength under the service conditions. The joint shall be able to sustain the maximum end force caused by the internal pressure and any additional forces caused by temperature expansion or contraction, vibration, fatigue, or to the weight of the pipe and its contents.

G2414.9.1 (403.9.1) Pipe joints.

Schedule 40 and heavier pipe joints shall be threaded, flanged, brazed, welded or assembled with press-connect fittings listed in accordance with ANSI LC4/CSA 6.32. Pipe lighter than Schedule 40 shall be connected using press-connect fittings, flanges, brazing or welding. Where nonferrous pipe is brazed, the brazing materials shall have a melting point in excess of 1,000°F (538°C). Brazing alloys shall not contain more than 0.05-percent phosphorus.

G2414.9.2 (403.9.2) Copper tubing joints.

Copper tubing joints shall be assembled with approved gas tubing fittings, shall be brazed with a material having a melting point in excess of 1,000°F (538°C) or assembled with press-connect fittings listed in accordance with ANSI LC4/CSA 6.32. Brazing alloys shall not contain more than 0.05-percent phosphorus.

G2414.9.3 (403.9.3) Stainless steel tubing joints.

Stainless steel tubing joints shall be welded, assembled with approved tubing fittings, brazed with a material having a melting point in excess of 1,000°F (538°C), or assembled with press-connect fittings listed in accordance with ANSI LC4/CSA 6.32.

G2414.9.4 (403.10.4) Flared joints.

Flared joints shall be used only in systems constructed from nonferrous pipe and tubing where experience or tests have demonstrated that the joint is suitable for the conditions and where provisions are made in the design to prevent separation of the joints.

G2414.9.5 (403.9.5) Metallic fittings.

Metallic fittings shall comply with the following:

1.	Fittings used with steel, stainless steel or wrought-iron pipe shall be steel, stainless steel, copper alloy, malleable iron or cast iron.

2.	Fittings used with copper or copper alloy pipe shall be copper or copper alloy.

3.	Cast-iron bushings shall be prohibited.

4.	Special fittings. Fittings such as couplings, proprietary-type joints, saddle tees, gland-type compression fittings, and flared, flareless and compression-type tubing fittings shall be: used within the fitting manufacturer’s pressure-temperature recommendations; used within the service conditions anticipated with respect to vibration, fatigue, thermal expansion and contraction; and shall be approved.

5.	Where pipe fittings are drilled and tapped in the field, the operation shall be in accordance with all of the following:

5.1.	The operation shall be performed on systems having operating pressures of 5 psi (34.5 kPa) or less.

5.2.	The operation shall be performed by the gas supplier or the gas supplier’s designated representative.

5.3.	The drilling and tapping operation shall be performed in accordance with written procedures prepared by the gas supplier.

5.4.	The fittings shall be located outdoors.

5.5.	The tapped fitting assembly shall be inspected and proven to be free of leakage.

G2414.10 (403.10) Plastic piping, joints and fittings.

Plastic pipe, tubing and fittings shall be joined in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions. Such joints shall comply with the following:

1.	The joints shall be designed and installed so that the longitudinal pull-out resistance of the joint will be greater than or equal to the tensile strength of the plastic piping material.

2.	Heat-fusion joints shall be made in accordance with qualified procedures that have been established and proven by test to produce gastight joints as strong as or stronger than the pipe or tubing being joined. Joints shall be made with the joining method recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Polyethylene heat fusion fittings shall be marked “ASTM D2513.” Polyamide heat fusion fittings shall be marked “ASTM F2945.”

3.	Where compression-type mechanical joints are used, the gasket material in the fitting shall be compatible with the plastic piping and with the gas distributed by the system. An internal tubular rigid stiffener shall be used in conjunction with the fitting. The stiffener shall be flush with the end of the pipe or tubing and shall extend to or beyond the outside end of the compression fitting when installed. The stiffener shall be free of rough or sharp edges and shall not be a force-fit in the plastic. Split tubular stiffeners shall not be used.

4.	Plastic piping joints and fittings for use in liquefied petroleum gas piping systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 58.

SECTION G2415 (404)
PIPING SYSTEM INSTALLATION
G2415.1 (404.1) Installation of materials.

Materials used shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards under which the materials are accepted and approved. In the absence of such installation procedures, the manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed. Where the requirements of referenced standards or manufacturer’s instructions do not conform to minimum provisions of this code, the provisions of this code shall apply.

G2415.2 (404.2) CSST.

CSST piping systems shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their approval, the conditions of listing, the manufacturer’s instructions and this code.

G2415.3 (404.3) Prohibited locations.

Piping shall not be installed in or through a ducted supply, return or exhaust, or a clothes chute, chimney or gas vent, dumbwaiter or elevator shaft. Piping installed downstream of the point of delivery shall not extend through any townhouse unit other than the unit served by such piping.

G2415.4 (404.4) Piping in solid partitions and walls.

Concealed piping shall not be located in solid partitions and solid walls, unless installed in a chase or casing.

G2415.5 (404.5) Fittings in concealed locations.

Fittings installed in concealed locations shall be limited to the following types:

1.	Threaded elbows, tees, couplings, plugs and caps.

2.	Brazed fittings.

3.	Welded fittings.

4.	Fittings listed to ANSI LC1/CSA 6.26 or ANSI LC4/CSA 6.32.

G2415.6 (404.6) Underground penetrations prohibited.

Gas piping shall not penetrate building foundation walls at any point below grade. Gas piping shall enter and exit a building at a point above grade and the annular space between the pipe and the wall shall be sealed.

G2415.7 (404.7) Protection against physical damage.

Where piping will be concealed within light-frame construction assemblies, the piping shall be protected against penetration by fasteners in accordance with Sections G2415.7.1 through G2415.7.3.

Exception: Black steel piping and galvanized steel piping shall not be required to be protected.

G2415.7.1 (404.7.1) Piping through bored holes or notches.

Where piping is installed through holes or notches in framing members and the piping is located less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached, the pipe shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width of the pipe and the framing member and that extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) to each side of the framing member. Where the framing member that the piping passes through is a bottom plate, bottom track, top plate or top track, the shield plates shall cover the framing member and extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the bottom framing member and not less than 4 inches (102 mm) below the top framing member.

G2415.7.2 (404.7.2) Piping installed in other locations.

Where the piping is located within a framing member and is less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the framing member face to which wall, ceiling or floor membranes will be attached, the piping shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width and length of the piping. Where the piping is located outside of a framing member and is located less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the nearest edge of the face of the framing member to which the membrane will be attached, the piping shall be protected by shield plates that cover the width and length of the piping.

2415.7.3 (404.7.3) Shield plates.

Shield plates shall be of steel material having a thickness of not less than 0.0575 inch (1.463 mm) (No. 16 gage).

G2415.8 (404.8) Piping in solid floors.

Piping in solid floors shall be laid in channels in the floor and covered in a manner that will allow access to the piping with a minimum amount of damage to the building. Where such piping is subject to exposure to excessive moisture or corrosive substances, the piping shall be protected in an approved manner. As an alternative to installation in channels, the piping shall be installed in a conduit of Schedule 40 steel, wrought iron, PVC or ABS pipe in accordance with Section G2415.8.1 or G2415.8.2.

G2415.8.1 (404.8.1) Conduit with one end terminating outdoors.

The conduit shall extend into an occupiable portion of the building and, at the point where the conduit terminates in the building, the space between the conduit and the gas piping shall be sealed to prevent the possible entrance of any gas leakage. The conduit shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond the point where the pipe emerges from the floor. If the end sealing is capable of withstanding the full pressure of the gas pipe, the conduit shall be designed for the same pressure as the pipe. Such conduit shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) outside the building, shall be vented above grade to the outdoors and shall be installed so as to prevent the entrance of water and insects.

G2415.8.2 (404.8.2) Conduit with both ends terminating indoors.

Where the conduit originates and terminates within the same building, the conduit shall originate and terminate in an accessible portion of the building and shall not be sealed. The conduit shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond the point where the pipe emerges from the floor.

G2415.9 (404.9) Above-ground piping outdoors.

Piping installed outdoors shall be elevated not less than 31/2 inches (89 mm) above ground and where installed across roof surfaces, shall be elevated not less than 31/2 inches (89 mm) above the roof surface. Piping installed above ground, outdoors, and installed across the surface of roofs shall be securely supported and located where it will be protected from physical damage. Where passing through an outside wall, the piping shall be protected against corrosion by coating or wrapping with an inert material. Where piping is encased in a protective pipe sleeve, the annular space between the piping and the sleeve shall be sealed.

G2415.10 (404.10) Isolation.

Metallic piping and metallic tubing that conveys fuel gas from an LP-gas storage container shall be provided with an approved dielectric fitting to electrically isolate the underground portion of the pipe or tube from the above-ground portion that enters a building. Such dielectric fitting shall be installed above ground, outdoors.

G2415.11 (404.11) Protection against corrosion.

Steel pipe or tubing exposed to corrosive action, such as soil condition or moisture, shall be protected in accordance with Sections G2415.11.1 through G2415.11.4.

G2415.11.1 (404.11.1) Galvanizing.

Zinc coating shall not be deemed adequate protection for underground gas piping.

G2415.11.2 (404.11.2) Protection methods.

Underground piping shall comply with one or more of the following:

1.	The piping shall be made of corrosion-resistant material that is suitable for the environment in which it will be installed.

2.	Pipe shall have a factory-applied, electrically insulating coating. Fittings and joints between sections of coated pipe shall be coated in accordance with the coating manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	The piping shall have a cathodic protection system installed and the system shall be monitored and maintained in accordance with an approved program.

G2415.11.3 (404.11.3) Dissimilar metals.

Where dissimilar metals are joined underground, an insulating coupling or fitting shall be used.

G2415.11.4 (404.11.4) Protection of risers.

Steel risers connected to plastic piping shall be cathodically protected by means of a welded anode, except where such risers are anodeless risers.

➡

G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth.

Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade, except as provided for in Section G2415.12.1.

G2415.12.1 (404.12.1) Individual outdoor appliances.

Individual lines to outdoor lights, grills and other appliances shall be installed not less than 8 inches (203 mm) below finished grade, provided that such installation is approved and is installed in locations not susceptible to physical damage.

G2415.13 (404.13) Trenches.

The trench shall be graded so that the pipe has a firm, substantially continuous bearing on the bottom of the trench.

G2415.14 (404.14) Piping underground beneath buildings.

Piping installed underground beneath buildings is prohibited except where the piping is encased in a conduit of wrought iron, plastic pipe, steel pipe, a piping or encasement system listed for installation beneath buildings, or other approved conduit material designed to withstand the superimposed loads. The conduit shall be protected from corrosion in accordance with Section G2415.11 and shall be installed in accordance with Section G2415.14.1 or G2415.14.2.

G2415.14.1 (404.14.1) Conduit with one end terminating outdoors.

The conduit shall extend into an occupiable portion of the building and, at the point where the conduit terminates in the building, the space between the conduit and the gas piping shall be sealed to prevent the possible entrance of any gas leakage. The conduit shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond the point where the pipe emerges from the floor. Where the end sealing is capable of withstanding the full pressure of the gas pipe, the conduit shall be designed for the same pressure as the pipe. Such conduit shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) outside the building, shall be vented above grade to the outdoors and shall be installed so as to prevent the entrance of water and insects.

G2415.14.2 (404.14.2) Conduit with both ends terminating indoors.

Where the conduit originates and terminates within the same building, the conduit shall originate and terminate in an accessible portion of the building and shall not be sealed. The conduit shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond the point where the pipe emerges from the floor.

G2415.15 (404.15) Outlet closures.

Gas outlets that do not connect to appliances shall be capped gastight.

Exception: Listed and labeled flush-mounted-type quick-disconnect devices and listed and labeled gas convenience outlets shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2415.16 (404.16) Location of outlets.

The unthreaded portion of piping outlets shall extend not less than l inch (25 mm) through finished ceilings and walls and where extending through floors or outdoor patios and slabs, shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above them. The outlet fitting or piping shall be securely supported. Outlets shall not be placed behind doors. Outlets shall be located in the room or space where the appliance is installed.

Exception: Listed and labeled flush-mounted-type quick-disconnect devices and listed and labeled gas convenience outlets shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2415.17 (404.17) Plastic pipe.

The installation of plastic pipe shall comply with Sections G2415.17.1 through G2415.17.3.

G2415.17.1 (404.17.1) Limitations.

Plastic pipe shall be installed outdoors underground only. Plastic pipe shall not be used within or under any building or slab or be operated at pressures greater than 100 psig (689 kPa) for natural gas or 30 psig (207 kPa) for LP-gas.

Exceptions:

1.	Plastic pipe shall be permitted to terminate above ground outside of buildings where installed in premanufactured anodeless risers or service head adapter risers that are installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Plastic pipe shall be permitted to terminate with a wall head adapter within buildings where the plastic pipe is inserted in a piping material for fuel gas use in buildings.

3.	Plastic pipe shall be permitted under outdoor patio, walkway and driveway slabs provided that the burial depth complies with Section G2415.12.

G2415.17.2 (404.17.2) Connections.

Connections made outdoors and underground between metallic and plastic piping shall be made only with transition fittings conforming to ASTM D2513 Category I or ASTM F1973.

G2415.17.3 (404.17.3) Tracer.

A yellow-insulated copper tracer wire or other approved conductor, or a product specifically designed for that purpose, shall be installed adjacent to underground nonmetallic piping. Access shall be provided to the tracer wire or the tracer wire shall terminate above ground at each end of the nonmetallic piping. The tracer wire size shall be not less than 18 AWG and the insulation type shall be suitable for direct burial.

G2415.18 (404.18) Pipe debris removal.

The interior of piping shall be clear of debris. The use of a flammable or combustible gas to clean or remove debris from a piping system shall be prohibited.

G2415.19 (404.19) Prohibited devices.

A device shall not be placed inside the piping or fittings that will reduce the cross-sectional area or otherwise obstruct the free flow of gas.

Exceptions:

1.	Approved gas filters.

2.	An approved fitting or device where the gas piping system has been sized to accommodate the pressure drop of the fitting or device.

G2415.20 (404.20) Testing of piping.

Before any system of piping is put in service or concealed, it shall be tested to ensure that it is gastight. Testing, inspection and purging of piping systems shall comply with Section G2417.

SECTION G2416 (405)
PIPING BENDS AND CHANGES IN DIRECTION
G2416.1 (405.1) General.

Changes in direction of pipe shall be permitted to be made by the use of fittings, factory bends or field bends.

G2416.2 (405.2) Metallic pipe.

Metallic pipe bends shall comply with the following:

1.	Bends shall be made only with bending tools and procedures intended for that purpose.

2.	Bends shall be smooth and free from buckling, cracks or other evidence of mechanical damage.

3.	The longitudinal weld of the pipe shall be near the neutral axis of the bend.

4.	Pipe shall not be bent through an arc of more than 90 degrees (1.6 rad).

5.	The inside radius of a bend shall be not less than six times the outside diameter of the pipe.

G2416.3 (405.3) Plastic pipe.

Plastic pipe bends shall comply with the following:

1.	The pipe shall not be damaged and the internal diameter of the pipe shall not be effectively reduced.

2.	Joints shall not be located in pipe bends.

3.	The radius of the inner curve of such bends shall be not less than 25 times the inside diameter of the pipe.

4.	Where the piping manufacturer specifies the use of special bending tools or procedures, such tools or procedures shall be used.

SECTION G2417 (406)
INSPECTION, TESTING AND PURGING
G2417.1 (406.1) General.

Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be visually inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code.

G2417.1.1 (406.1.1) Inspections.

Inspection shall consist of visual examination, during or after manufacture, fabrication, assembly or pressure tests.

G2417.1.2 (406.1.2) Repairs and additions.

In the event repairs or additions are made after the pressure test, the affected piping shall be tested.

Minor repairs and additions are not required to be pressure tested provided that the work is inspected and connections are tested with a noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or other approved leak-detecting methods.

G2417.1.3 (406.1.3) New branches.

Where new branches are installed to new appliances, only the newly installed branches shall be required to be pressure tested. Connections between the new piping and the existing piping shall be tested with a noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or other approved leak-detecting methods.

G2417.1.4 (406.1.4) Section testing.

A piping system shall be permitted to be tested as a complete unit or in sections. A valve in a line shall not be used as a bulkhead between gas in one section of the piping system and test medium in an adjacent section, except where a double block and bleed valve system is installed. A valve shall not be subjected to the test pressure unless it can be determined that the valve, including the valve-closing mechanism, is designed to safely withstand the test pressure.

G2417.1.5 (406.1.5) Regulators and valve assemblies.

Regulator and valve assemblies fabricated independently of the piping system in which they are to be installed shall be permitted to be tested with inert gas or air at the time of fabrication.

G2417.1.6 (406.1.6) Pipe clearing.

Prior to testing, the interior of the pipe shall be cleared of all foreign material.

G2417.2 (406.2) Test medium.

The test medium shall be air, nitrogen, carbon dioxide or an inert gas. Oxygen shall not be used as a test medium.

G2417.3 (406.3) Test preparation.

Pipe joints, including welds, shall be left exposed for examination during the test.

Exception: Covered or concealed pipe end joints that have been previously tested in accordance with this code.

G2417.3.1 (406.3.1) Expansion joints.

Expansion joints shall be provided with temporary restraints, if required, for the additional thrust load under test.

G2417.3.2 (406.3.2) Appliance and equipment isolation.

Appliances and equipment that are not to be included in the test shall be either disconnected from the piping or isolated by blanks, blind flanges or caps.

G2417.3.3 (406.3.3) Appliance and equipment disconnection.

Where the piping system is connected to appliances or equipment designed for operating pressures of less than the test pressure, such appliances or equipment shall be isolated from the piping system by disconnecting them and capping the outlet(s).

G2417.3.4 (406.3.4) Valve isolation.

Where the piping system is connected to appliances or equipment designed for operating pressures equal to or greater than the test pressure, such appliances or equipment shall be isolated from the piping system by closing the individual appliance or equipment shutoff valve(s).

G2417.3.5 (406.3.5) Testing precautions.

Testing of piping systems shall be performed in a manner that protects the safety of employees and the public during the test.

G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement.

Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Mechanical gauges used to measure test pressures shall have a range such that the highest end of the scale is not greater than five times the test pressure.

G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure.

The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 11/2 times the proposed maximum working pressure, but not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), irrespective of design pressure. Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe.

G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration.

The test duration shall be not less than 10 minutes.

G2417.5 (406.5) Detection of leaks and defects.

The piping system shall withstand the test pressure specified without showing any evidence of leakage or other defects. Any reduction of test pressures as indicated by pressure gauges shall be deemed to indicate the presence of a leak unless such reduction can be readily attributed to some other cause.

G2417.5.1 (406.5.1) Detection methods.

The leakage shall be located by means of an approved gas detector, a noncorrosive leak detection fluid or other approved leak detection methods.

G2417.5.2 (406.5.2) Corrections.

Where leakage or other defects are located, the affected portion of the piping system shall be repaired or replaced and retested.

G2417.6 (406.6) Piping system and equipment leakage check.

Leakage checking of systems and equipment shall be in accordance with Sections G2417.6.1 through G2417.6.4.

G2417.6.1 (406.6.1) Test gases.

Leak checks using fuel gas shall be permitted in piping systems that have been pressure tested in accordance with Section G2417.

G2417.6.2 (406.6.2) Before turning gas on.

During the process of turning gas on into a system of new gas piping, the entire system shall be inspected to determine that there are no open fittings or ends and that all valves at unused outlets are closed and plugged or capped.

G2417.6.3 (406.6.3) Leak check.

Immediately after the gas is turned on into a new system or into a system that has been initially restored after an interruption of service, the piping system shall be checked for leakage. Where leakage is indicated, the gas supply shall be shut off until the necessary repairs have been made.

G2417.6.4 (406.6.4) Placing appliances and equipment in operation.

Appliances and equipment shall not be placed in operation until after the piping system has been checked for leakage in accordance with Section G2417.6.3, the piping system has been purged in accordance with Section G2417.7 and the connections to the appliances have been checked for leakage.

G2417.7 (406.7) Purging.

The purging of piping shall be in accordance with Sections G2417.7.1 through 2417.7.3.

G2417.7.1 (406.7.1) Piping systems required to be purged outdoors.

The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections G2417.7.1.1 through G2417.7.1.4 where the piping system meets either of the following:

1.	The design operating gas pressure is greater than 2 psig (13.79 kPa).

2.	The piping being purged contains one or more sections of pipe or tubing meeting the size and length criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1.

G2417.7.1.1 (406.7.1.1) Removal from service.

Where existing gas piping is opened, the section that is opened shall be isolated from the gas supply and the line pressure vented in accordance with Section G2417.7.1.3. Where gas piping meeting the criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1 is removed from service, the residual fuel gas in the piping shall be displaced with an inert gas.

TABLE G2417.7.1.1 (406.7.1.1)

SIZE AND LENGTH OF PIPING

NOMINAL PIPE SIZE (inches)a	LENGTH OF PIPING (feet)
≥ 21/2 < 3	> 50
≥ 3 < 4	> 30
≥ 4 < 6	> 15
≥ 6 < 8	> 10
≥ 8	Any length

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	CSST EHD size of 62 is equivalent to nominal 2-inch pipe or tubing size.

G2417.7.1.2 (406.7.1.2) Placing in operation.

Where gas piping containing air and meeting the criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1 is placed in operation, the air in the piping shall first be displaced with an inert gas. The inert gas shall then be displaced with fuel gas in accordance with Section G2417.7.1.3.

G2417.7.1.3 (406.7.1.3) Outdoor discharge of purged gases.

The open end of a piping system being pressure vented or purged shall discharge directly to an outdoor location. Purging operations shall comply with all of the following requirements:

1.	The point of discharge shall be controlled with a shutoff valve.

2.	The point of discharge shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from sources of ignition, not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from building openings and not less than 25 feet (7620 mm) from mechanical air intake openings.

3.	During discharge, the open point of discharge shall be continuously attended and monitored with a combustible gas indicator that complies with Section G2417.7.1.4.

4.	Purging operations introducing fuel gas shall be stopped when 90 percent fuel gas by volume is detected within the pipe.

5.	Persons not involved in the purging operations shall be evacuated from all areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the point of discharge.

G2417.7.1.4 (406.7.1.4) Combustible gas indicator.

Combustible gas indicators shall be listed and shall be calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Combustible gas indicators shall numerically display a volume scale from zero percent to 100 percent in 1-percent or smaller increments.

G2417.7.2 (406.7.2) Piping systems allowed to be purged indoors or outdoors.

The purging of piping systems shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section G2417.7.2.1 where the piping system meets both of the following:

1.	The design operating gas pressure is 2 psig (13.79 kPa) or less.

2.	The piping being purged is constructed entirely from pipe or tubing not meeting the size and length criteria of Table G2417.7.1.1.

G2417.7.2.1 (406.7.2.1) Purging procedure.

The piping system shall be purged in accordance with one or more of the following:

1.	The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the outdoors.

2.	The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors through an appliance burner not located in a combustion chamber. Such burner shall be provided with a continuous source of ignition.

3.	The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors through a burner that has a continuous source of ignition and that is designed for such purpose.

4.	The piping shall be purged with fuel gas that is discharged to the indoors or outdoors, and the point of discharge shall be monitored with a listed combustible gas detector in accordance with Section G2417.7.2.2. Purging shall be stopped when fuel gas is detected.

5.	The piping shall be purged by the gas supplier in accordance with written procedures.

G2417.7.2.2 (406.7.2.2) Combustible gas detector.

Combustible gas detectors shall be listed and shall be calibrated or tested in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Combustible gas detectors shall be capable of indicating the presence of fuel gas.

G2417.7.3 (406.7.3) Purging appliances and equipment.

After the piping system has been placed in operation, appliances and equipment shall be purged before being placed into operation.

SECTION G2418 (407)
PIPING SUPPORT
G2418.1 (407.1) General.

Piping shall be provided with support in accordance with Section G2418.2.

G2418.2 (407.2) Design and installation.

Piping shall be supported with metal pipe hooks, metal pipe straps, metal bands, metal brackets, metal hangers or building structural components suitable for the size of piping, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration. Piping shall be anchored to prevent undue strains on connected appliances and shall not be supported by other piping. Pipe hangers and supports shall conform to the requirements of MSS SP-58 and shall be spaced in accordance with Section G2424. Supports, hangers and anchors shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the piping between anchors. The components of the supporting equipment shall be designed and installed so that they will not be disengaged by movement of the supported piping.

SECTION G2419 (408)
DRIPS AND SLOPED PIPING
G2419.1 (408.1) Slopes.

Piping for other than dry gas conditions shall be sloped not less than 1/4 inch in 15 feet (6.3 mm in 4572 mm) to prevent traps.

G2419.2 (408.2) Drips.

Where wet gas exists, a drip shall be provided at any point in the line of pipe where condensate could collect. A drip shall be provided at the outlet of the meter and shall be installed so as to constitute a trap wherein an accumulation of condensate will shut off the flow of gas before the condensate will run back into the meter.

G2419.3 (408.3) Location of drips.

Drips shall be provided with ready access to permit cleaning or emptying. A drip shall not be located where the condensate is subject to freezing.

G2419.4 (408.4) Sediment trap.

Where a sediment trap is not incorporated as part of the appliance, a sediment trap shall be installed downstream of the appliance shutoff valve as close to the inlet of the appliance as practical. The sediment trap shall be either a tee fitting having a capped nipple of any length installed vertically in the bottommost opening of the tee as illustrated in Figure G2419.4 or other device approved as an effective sediment trap. Illuminating appliances, ranges, clothes dryers, decorative vented appliances for installation in vented fireplaces, gas fireplaces and outdoor grills need not be so equipped.

FIGURE G2419.4 (408.4)

METHOD OF INSTALLING A TEE FITTING SEDIMENT TRAP

SECTION G2420 (409)
SHUTOFF VALVES
G2420.1 (409.1) General.

Piping systems shall be provided with shutoff valves in accordance with this section.

G2420.1.1 (409.1.1) Valve approval.

Shutoff valves shall be of an approved type; shall be constructed of materials compatible with the piping; and shall comply with the standard that is applicable for the pressure and application, in accordance with Table G2420.1.1.

TABLE G2420.1.1 (409.1.1)

MANUAL GAS VALVE STANDARDS

VALVE STANDARDS	APPLIANCE SHUTOFF VALVE
APPLICATION UP TO1/2 psig PRESSURE
	OTHER VALVE APPLICATIONS
UP TO 1/2 psig
PRESSURE
	UP TO 2 psig
PRESSURE
	UP TO 5 psig
PRESSURE
	UP TO 125 psig
PRESSURE

ANSI Z21.15/CSA 9.1	X	—	—	—	—
ASME B16.44	X	X	Xa	Xb	—
ASME B16.33	X	X	X	X	X

For SI: 1 pound per square inch gauge = 6.895 kPa.

a.	If labeled 2G.

b.	If labeled 5G.

G2420.1.2 (409.1.2) Prohibited locations.

Shutoff valves shall be prohibited in concealed locations and furnace plenums.

G2420.1.3 (409.1.3) Access to shutoff valves.

Shutoff valves shall be located in places so as to provide access for operation and shall be installed so as to be protected from damage.

G2420.2 (409.2) Meter valve.

Every meter shall be equipped with a shutoff valve located on the supply side of the meter.

G2420.3 (409.3.2) Individual buildings.

In a common system serving more than one building, shutoff valves shall be installed outdoors at each building.

G2420.4 (409.4) MP regulator valves.

A listed shutoff valve shall be installed immediately ahead of each MP regulator.

G2420.5 (409.5) Appliance shutoff valve.

Each appliance shall be provided with a shutoff valve in accordance with Section G2420.5.1, G2420.5.2 or G2420.5.3.

G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within same room.

The shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance, and shall be installed upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect device it serves. Such shutoff valves shall be provided with access. Shutoff valves serving movable appliances, such as cooking appliances and clothes dryers, shall be considered to be provided with access where installed behind such appliances. Appliance shutoff valves located in the firebox of a fireplace shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

G2420.5.2 (409.5.2) Vented decorative appliances and room heaters.

Shutoff valves for vented decorative appliances, room heaters and decorative appliances for installation in vented fireplaces shall be permitted to be installed in an area remote from the appliances where such valves are provided with ready access. Such valves shall be permanently identified and shall not serve another appliance. The piping from the shutoff valve to within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance shall be designed, sized and installed in accordance with Sections G2412 through G2419.

G2420.5.3 (409.5.3) Located at manifold.

Where the appliance shutoff valve is installed at a manifold, such shutoff valve shall be located within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of the appliance served and shall be readily accessible and permanently identified. The piping from the manifold to within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance shall be designed, sized and installed in accordance with Sections G2412 through G2419.

G2420.6 (409.7) Shutoff valves in tubing systems.

Shutoff valves installed in tubing systems shall be rigidly and securely supported independently of the tubing.

SECTION G2421 (410)
FLOW CONTROLS
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators.

A line pressure regulator shall be installed where the appliance is designed to operate at a lower pressure than the supply pressure. Line gas pressure regulators shall be listed as complying with ANSI Z21.80. Access shall be provided to pressure regulators. Pressure regulators shall be protected from physical damage. Regulators installed on the exterior of the building shall be approved for outdoor installation.

G2421.2 (410.2) MP regulators.

MP pressure regulators shall comply with the following:

1.	The MP regulator shall be approved and shall be suitable for the inlet and outlet gas pressures for the application.

2.	The MP regulator shall maintain a reduced outlet pressure under lock-up (no-flow) conditions.

3.	The capacity of the MP regulator, determined by published ratings of its manufacturer, shall be adequate to supply the appliances served.

4.	The MP pressure regulator shall be provided with access. Where located indoors, the regulator shall be vented to the outdoors or shall be equipped with a leak-limiting device, in either case complying with Section G2421.3.

5.	A tee fitting with one opening capped or plugged shall be installed between the MP regulator and its upstream shutoff valve. Such tee fitting shall be positioned to allow connection of a pressure-measuring instrument and to serve as a sediment trap.

6.	A tee fitting with one opening capped or plugged shall be installed not less than 10 pipe diameters downstream of the MP regulator outlet. Such tee fitting shall be positioned to allow connection of a pressure-measuring instrument. The tee fitting is not required where the MP regulator serves an appliance that has a pressure test port on the gas control inlet side and the appliance is located in the same room as the MP regulator.

7.	Where connected to rigid piping, a union shall be installed within 1 foot (304 mm) of either side of the MP regulator.

G2421.3 (410.3) Venting of regulators.

Pressure regulators that require a vent shall be vented directly to the outdoors. The vent shall be designed to prevent the entry of insects, water and foreign objects.

Exception: A vent to the outdoors is not required for regulators equipped with and labeled for utilization with an approved vent-limiting device installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2421.3.1 (410.3.1) Vent piping.

Vent piping for relief vents and breather vents shall be constructed of materials allowed for gas piping in accordance with Section G2414. Vent piping shall be not smaller than the vent connection on the pressure-regulating device. Vent piping serving relief vents and combination relief and breather vents shall be run independently to the outdoors and shall serve only a single device vent. Vent piping serving only breather vents is permitted to be connected in a manifold arrangement where sized in accordance with an approved design that minimizes backpressure in the event of diaphragm rupture. Regulator vent piping shall not exceed the length specified in the regulator manufacturer’s instructions.

G2421.4 (410.4) Excess flow valves.

Where automatic excess flow valves are installed, they shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.93/CSA 6.30 and shall be sized and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2421.5 (410.5) Flashback arrestor check valve.

Where fuel gas is used with oxygen in any hot work operation, a listed protective device that serves as a combination flashback arrestor and backflow check valve shall be installed at an approved location on both the fuel gas and oxygen supply lines. Where the pressure of the piped fuel gas supply is insufficient to ensure such safe operation, approved equipment shall be installed between the gas meter and the appliance that increases pressure to the level required for such safe operation.

SECTION G2422 (411)
APPLIANCE CONNECTIONS
G2422.1 (411.1) Connecting appliances.

Appliances shall be connected to the piping system by one of the following:

1.	Rigid metallic pipe and fittings.

2.	Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) where installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	Listed and labeled appliance connectors in compliance with ANSI Z21.24/CSA 6.10 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and located entirely in the same room as the appliance.

4.	Listed and labeled quick-disconnect devices in compliance with ANSI Z21.41/CSA 6.9 used in conjunction with listed and labeled appliance connectors.

5.	Listed and labeled convenience outlets in compliance with ANSI Z21.90/CSA 6.24 used in conjunction with listed and labeled appliance connectors.

6.	Listed and labeled outdoor appliance connectors in compliance with ANSI Z21.75/CSA 6.27 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

7.	Listed outdoor gas hose connectors in compliance with ANSI Z21.54 used to connect portable outdoor appliances. The gas hose connection shall be made only in the outdoor area where the appliance is used, and shall be to the gas piping supply at an appliance shutoff valve, a listed quick-disconnect device or listed gas convenience outlet.

G2422.1.1 (411.1.2) Protection from damage.

Connectors and tubing shall be installed so as to be protected against physical damage.

G2422.1.2 (411.1.3) Connector installation.

Appliance fuel connectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and Sections G2422.1.2.1 through G2422.1.2.4.

G2422.1.2.1 (411.1.3.1) Maximum length.

Connectors shall have an overall length not to exceed 6 feet (1829 mm). Measurement shall be made along the centerline of the connector. Only one connector shall be used for each appliance.

Exception: Rigid metallic piping used to connect an appliance to the piping system shall be permitted to have a total length greater than 6 feet (1829 mm), provided that the connecting pipe is sized as part of the piping system in accordance with Section G2413 and the location of the appliance shutoff valve complies with Section G2420.5.

G2422.1.2.2 (411.1.3.2) Minimum size.

Connectors shall have the capacity for the total demand of the connected appliance.

G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) Prohibited locations and penetrations.

Connectors shall not be concealed within, or extended through, walls, floors, partitions, ceilings or appliance housings.

Exceptions:

1.	Connectors constructed of materials allowed for piping systems in accordance with Section G2414 shall be permitted to pass through walls, floors, partitions and ceilings where installed in accordance with Section G2420.5.2 or G2420.5.3.

2.	Rigid steel pipe connectors shall be permitted to extend through openings in appliance housings.

3.	Fireplace inserts that are factory equipped with grommets, sleeves or other means of protection in accordance with the listing of the appliance.

4.	Semirigid tubing and listed connectors shall be permitted to extend through an opening in an appliance housing, cabinet or casing where the tubing or connector is protected against damage.

G2422.1.2.4 (411.1.3.4) Shutoff valve.

A shutoff valve not less than the nominal size of the connector shall be installed ahead of the connector in accordance with Section G2420.5.

G2422.1.3 (411.1.5) Connection of gas engine-powered air conditioners.

Internal combustion engines shall not be rigidly connected to the gas supply piping.

G2422.1.4 (411.1.6) Unions.

A union fitting shall be provided for appliances connected by rigid metallic pipe. Such unions shall be accessible and located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance.

G2422.1.5 (411.1.4) Movable appliances.

Where appliances are equipped with casters or are otherwise subject to periodic movement or relocation for purposes such as routine cleaning and maintenance, such appliances shall be connected to the supply system piping by means of an appliance connector listed as complying with ANSI Z21.69/CSA 6.16 or by means of Item 1 of Section G2422.1. Such flexible connectors shall be installed and protected against physical damage in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2422.2 (411.3) Suspended low-intensity infrared tube heaters.

Suspended low-intensity infrared tube heaters shall be connected to the building piping system with a connector listed for the application complying with ANSI Z21.24/CSA 6.10. The connector shall be installed as specified by the tube heater manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2423 (413)
COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS MOTOR
VEHICLE FUEL-DISPENSING FACILITIES
G2423.1 (413.1) General.

Motor fuel-dispensing facilities for CNG fuel shall be in accordance with Section 413 of the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

SECTION G2424 (415)
PIPING SUPPORT INTERVALS
G2424.1 (415.1) Interval of support.

Piping shall be supported at intervals not exceeding the spacing specified in Table G2424.1. Spacing of supports for CSST shall be in accordance with the CSST manufacturer’s instructions.

TABLE G2424.1 (415.1)

SUPPORT OF PIPING

STEEL PIPE,
NOMINAL SIZE
OF PIPE
(inches)
	SPACING OF
SUPPORTS
(feet)	NOMINAL SIZE
OF TUBING
SMOOTH-WALL
(inch O.D.)	SPACING OF
SUPPORTS
(feet)
1/2	6	1/2	4
3/4 or 1	8	5/8 or 3/4	6
11/4 or larger
(horizontal)
	10	7/8 or 1
(horizontal)
	8
11/4 or larger
(vertical)
	Every floor
level
	1 or larger
(vertical)
	Every floor
level

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

SECTION G2425 (501)
GENERAL
G2425.1 (501.1) Scope.

This section shall govern the installation, maintenance, repair and approval of factory-built chimneys, chimney liners, vents and connectors and the utilization of masonry chimneys serving gas-fired appliances.

G2425.2 (501.2) General.

Every appliance shall discharge the products of combustion to the outdoors, except for appliances exempted by Section G2425.8.

G2425.3 (501.3) Masonry chimneys.

Masonry chimneys shall be constructed in accordance with Section G2427.5 and Chapter 10.

G2425.4 (501.4) Minimum size of chimney or vent.

Chimneys and vents shall be sized in accordance with Sections G2427 and G2428.

G2425.5 (501.5) Abandoned inlet openings.

Abandoned inlet openings in chimneys and vents shall be closed by an approved method.

G2425.6 (501.6) Positive pressure.

Where an appliance equipped with a mechanical forced draft system creates a positive pressure in the venting system, the venting system shall be designed for positive pressure applications.

G2425.7 (501.7) Connection to fireplace.

Connection of appliances to chimney flues serving fireplaces shall be in accordance with Sections G2425.7.1 through G2425.7.3.

G2425.7.1 (501.7.1) Closure and access.

A noncombustible seal shall be provided below the point of connection to prevent entry of room air into the flue. Means shall be provided for access to the flue for inspection and cleaning.

G2425.7.2 (501.7.2) Connection to factory-built fireplace flue.

An appliance shall not be connected to a flue serving a factory-built fireplace unless the appliance is specifically listed for such installation. The connection shall be made in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions.

G2425.7.3 (501.7.3) Connection to masonry fireplace flue.

A connector shall extend from the appliance to the flue serving a masonry fireplace such that the flue gases are exhausted directly into the flue. The connector shall be accessible or removable for inspection and cleaning of both the connector and the flue. Listed direct connection devices shall be installed in accordance with their listing.

G2425.8 (501.8) Appliances not required to be vented.

The following appliances shall not be required to be vented:

1.	Ranges.

2.	Built-in domestic cooking units listed and marked for optional venting.

3.	Hot plates and laundry stoves.

4.	Type 1 clothes dryers (Type 1 clothes dryers shall be exhausted in accordance with the requirements of Section G2439).

5.	Refrigerators.

6.	Counter appliances.

7.	Room heaters listed for unvented use.

Where the appliances listed in Items 5 through 7 are installed so that the aggregate input rating exceeds 20 Btu per hour per cubic foot (207 W/m3) of volume of the room or space in which such appliances are installed, one or more shall be provided with venting systems or other approved means for conveying the vent gases to the outdoor atmosphere so that the aggregate input rating of the remaining unvented appliances does not exceed 20 Btu per hour per cubic foot (207 W/m3). Where the room or space in which the appliance is installed is directly connected to another room or space by a doorway, archway or other opening of comparable size that cannot be closed, the volume of such adjacent room or space shall be permitted to be included in the calculations.

G2425.9 (501.9) Chimney entrance.

Connectors shall connect to a masonry chimney flue at a point not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the lowest portion of the interior of the chimney flue.

G2425.10 (501.10) Connections to exhauster.

Appliance connections to a chimney or vent equipped with a power exhauster shall be made on the inlet side of the exhauster. Joints on the positive pressure side of the exhauster shall be sealed to prevent flue-gas leakage as specified by the manufacturer’s installation instructions for the exhauster.

G2425.11 (501.11) Masonry chimneys.

Masonry chimneys utilized to vent appliances shall be located, constructed and sized as specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions for the appliances being vented and Section G2427.

G2425.12 (501.12) Residential and low-heat appliances flue lining systems.

Flue lining systems for use with residential-type and low-heat appliances shall be limited to the following:

1.	Clay flue lining complying with the requirements of ASTM C315 or equivalent. Clay flue lining shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 10.

2.	Listed chimney lining systems complying with UL 1777.

3.	Other approved materials that will resist, without cracking, softening or corrosion, flue gases and condensate at temperatures up to 1,800°F (982°C).

G2425.13 (501.13) Category I appliance flue lining systems.

Flue lining systems for use with Category I appliances shall be limited to the following:

1.	Flue lining systems complying with Section G2425.12.

2.	Chimney lining systems listed and labeled for use with gas appliances with draft hoods and other Category I gas appliances listed and labeled for use with Type B vents.

G2425.14 (501.14) Category II, III and IV appliance venting systems.

The design, sizing and installation of vents for Category II, III and IV appliances shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

G2425.15 (501.15) Existing chimneys and vents.

Where an appliance is permanently disconnected from an existing chimney or vent, or where an appliance is connected to an existing chimney or vent during the process of a new installation, the chimney or vent shall comply with Sections G2425.15.1 through G2425.15.4.

G2425.15.1 (501.15.1) Size.

The chimney or vent shall be resized as necessary to control flue gas condensation in the interior of the chimney or vent and to provide the appliance or appliances served with the required draft. For Category I appliances, the resizing shall be in accordance with Section G2426.

G2425.15.2 (501.15.2) Flue passageways.

The flue gas passageway shall be free of obstructions and combustible deposits and shall be cleaned if previously used for venting a solid or liquid fuel-burning appliance or fireplace. The flue liner, chimney inner wall or vent inner wall shall be continuous and shall be free of cracks, gaps, perforations, or other damage or deterioration that would allow the escape of combustion products, including gases, moisture and creosote.

G2425.15.3 (501.15.3) Cleanout.

Masonry chimney flues shall be provided with a cleanout opening having a minimum height of 6 inches (152 mm). The upper edge of the opening shall be located not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the lowest chimney inlet opening. The cleanout shall be provided with a tight-fitting, noncombustible cover.

G2425.15.4 (501.15.4) Clearances.

Chimneys and vents shall have airspace clearance to combustibles in accordance with Chapter 10 and the chimney or vent manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Exception: Masonry chimneys without the required airspace clearances shall be permitted to be used if lined or relined with a chimney lining system listed for use in chimneys with reduced clearances in accordance with UL 1777. The chimney clearance shall be not less than permitted by the terms of the chimney liner listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2425.15.4.1 (501.15.4.1) Fireblocking.

Noncombustible fireblocking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10.

SECTION G2426 (502)
VENTS
G2426.1 (502.1) General.

Vents, except as provided in Section G2427.7, shall be listed and labeled. Type B and BW vents shall be tested in accordance with UL 441. Type L vents shall be tested in accordance with UL 641. Vents for Category II and III appliances shall be tested in accordance with UL 1738. Plastic vents for Category IV appliances shall not be required to be listed and labeled where such vents are as specified by the appliance manufacturer and are installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

G2426.2 (502.2) Connectors required.

Connectors shall be used to connect appliances to the vertical chimney or vent, except where the chimney or vent is attached directly to the appliance. Vent connector size, material, construction and installation shall be in accordance with Section G2427.

G2426.3 (502.3) Vent application.

The application of vents shall be in accordance with Table G2427.4.

G2426.4 (502.4) Insulation shield.

Where vents pass through insulated assemblies, an insulation shield constructed of steel having a minimum thickness of 0.0187 inch (0.4712 mm) (No. 26 gage) shall be installed to provide clearance between the vent and the insulation material. The clearance shall be not less than the clearance to combustibles specified by the vent manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where vents pass through attic space, the shield shall terminate not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the insulation materials and shall be secured in place to prevent displacement. Insulation shields provided as part of a listed vent system shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2426.5 (502.5) Installation.

Vent systems shall be sized, installed and terminated in accordance with the vent and appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions and Section G2427.

G2426.6 (502.6) Support of vents.

All portions of vents shall be adequately supported for the design and weight of the materials employed.

G2426.7 (502.7) Protection against physical damage.

In concealed locations, where a vent is installed through holes or notches in studs, joists, rafters or similar members less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) from the nearest edge of the member, the vent shall be protected by shield plates. Protective steel shield plates having a minimum thickness of 0.0575-inch (1.463 mm) (No. 16 gage) shall cover the area of the vent where the member is notched or bored and shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above sole plates, below top plates and to each side of a stud, joist or rafter.

G2426.7.1 (502.7.1) Door swing.

Appliance and equipment vent terminals shall be located such that doors cannot swing within 12 inches (305 mm) horizontally of the vent terminal. Door stops or closures shall not be installed to obtain this clearance.

SECTION G2427 (503)
VENTING OF APPLIANCES
G2427.1 (503.1) General.

The venting of appliances shall be in accordance with Sections G2427.2 through G2427.16.

G2427.2 (503.2) Venting systems required.

Except as permitted in Sections G2425.8, G2427.2.1 and G2427.2.2, all appliances shall be connected to venting systems.

G2427.2.1 (503.2.3) Direct-vent appliances.

Listed direct-vent appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Through-the-wall vent terminations for listed direct-vent appliances shall be in accordance with Section G2427.8.

G2427.2.2 (503.2.4) Appliances with integral vents.

Appliances incorporating integral venting means shall be installed in accordance with Section G2427.8, Items 1 and 2.

G2427.3 (503.3) Design and construction.

Venting systems shall be designed and constructed so as to convey all flue and vent gases to the outdoors.

G2427.3.1 (503.3.1) Appliance draft requirements.

A venting system shall satisfy the draft requirements of the appliance in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.3.2 (503.3.2) Design and construction.

Appliances required to be vented shall be connected to a venting system designed and installed in accordance with the provisions of Sections G2427.4 through G2427.16.

G2427.3.3 (503.3.3) Mechanical draft systems.

Mechanical draft systems shall comply with the following:

1.	Mechanical draft systems shall be listed in accordance with UL 378 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for both the appliance and the mechanical draft system.

2.	Appliances requiring venting shall be permitted to be vented by means of mechanical draft systems of either forced or induced draft design.

3.	Forced draft systems and all portions of induced draft systems under positive pressure during operation shall be designed and installed so as to prevent leakage of flue or vent gases into a building.

4.	Vent connectors serving appliances vented by natural draft shall not be connected into any portion of mechanical draft systems operating under positive pressure.

5.	Where a mechanical draft system is employed, provisions shall be made to prevent the flow of gas to the main burners when the draft system is not performing so as to satisfy the operating requirements of the appliance for safe performance.

➡

G2427.3.4 (503.3.5) Air ducts and furnace plenums.

Venting systems shall not extend into or pass through any fabricated air duct or furnace plenum.

G2427.3.5 (503.3.6) Above-ceiling air-handling spaces.

Where a venting system passes through an above-ceiling air-handling space or other nonducted portion of an air-handling system, the venting system shall conform to one of the following requirements:

1.	The venting system shall be a listed special gas vent; other venting system serving a Category III or Category IV appliance; or other positive pressure vent, with joints sealed in accordance with the appliance or vent manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	The venting system shall be installed such that fittings and joints between sections are not installed in the above-ceiling space.

3.	The venting system shall be installed in a conduit or enclosure with sealed joints separating the interior of the conduit or enclosure from the ceiling space.

G2427.4 (503.4) Type of venting system to be used.

The type of venting system to be used shall be in accordance with Table G2427.4.

TABLE G2427.4 (503.4)

TYPE OF VENTING SYSTEM TO BE USED

APPLIANCES	TYPE OF VENTING SYSTEM
Listed Category I appliances
Listed appliances equipped with draft hood
Appliances listed for use with Type B gas vent	Type B gas vent (Section G2427.6)
Chimney (Section G2427.5)
Single-wall metal pipe (Section G2427.7)
Listed chimney lining system for gas venting (Section G2427.5.2)
Special gas vent listed for these appliances (Section G2427.4.2)
Listed vented wall furnaces	Type B-W gas vent (Sections G2427.6, G2436)
Category II, Category III and Category IV appliances	As specified or furnished by manufacturers of listed appliances
(Sections G2427.4.1, G2427.4.2)

Unlisted appliances	Chimney (Section G2427.5)
Decorative appliances in vented fireplaces	Chimney
Direct-vent appliances	See Section G2427.2.1
Appliances with integral vent	See Section G2427.2.2
G2427.4.1 (503.4.1) Plastic piping.

Where plastic piping is used to vent an appliance, the appliance shall be listed for use with such venting materials and the appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions shall identify the specific plastic piping material. The plastic pipe venting materials shall be labeled in accordance with the product standards specified by the appliance manufacturer or shall be listed in accordance with UL 1738.

G2427.4.1.1 (503.4.1.1) Plastic vent joints.

Plastic pipe and fittings used to vent appliances shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions. Plastic pipe venting materials listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1738 shall be installed in accordance with the vent manufacturer’s instructions. Where a primer is required, it shall be of a contrasting color.

G2427.4.2 (503.4.2) Special gas vent.

Special gas vent shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1738 and installed in accordance with the special gas vent manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.5 (503.5) Masonry, metal and factory-built chimneys.

Masonry, metal and factory-built chimneys shall comply with Sections G2427.5.1 through G2427.5.10.

G2427.5.1 (503.5.1) Factory-built chimneys.

Factory-built chimneys shall be listed in accordance with UL 103. Factory-built chimneys used to vent appliances that operate at a positive vent pressure shall be listed for such application.

G2427.5.2 (503.5.3) Masonry chimneys.

Masonry chimneys shall be built and installed in accordance with NFPA 211 and shall be lined with an approved clay flue lining, a chimney lining system listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1777 or other approved material that will resist corrosion, erosion, softening or cracking from vent gases at temperatures up to 1,800°F (982°C).

Exception: Masonry chimney flues serving listed gas appliances with draft hoods, Category I appliances and other gas appliances listed for use with Type B vents shall be permitted to be lined with a chimney lining system specifically listed for use only with such appliances. The liner shall be installed in accordance with the liner manufacturer’s instructions. A permanent identifying label shall be attached at the point where the connection is to be made to the liner. The label shall read: “This chimney liner is for appliances that burn gas only. Do not connect to solid or liquid fuel-burning appliances or incinerators.”

G2427.5.3 (503.5.4) Chimney termination.

Chimneys for residential-type or low-heat appliances shall extend not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the highest point where they pass through a roof of a building and not less than 2 feet (610 mm) higher than any portion of a building within a horizontal distance of 10 feet (3048 mm). Chimneys for medium-heat appliances shall extend not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) higher than any portion of any building within 25 feet (7620 mm). Chimneys shall extend not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the highest connected appliance draft hood outlet or flue collar. Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of factory-built chimneys except where such shrouds are listed and labeled for use with the specific factory-built chimney system and are installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.5.4 (503.5.5) Size of chimneys.

The effective area of a chimney venting system serving listed appliances with draft hoods, Category I appliances, and other appliances listed for use with Type B vents shall be determined in accordance with one of the following methods:

1.	The provisions of Section G2428.

2.	The effective areas of the vent connector and chimney flue of a venting system serving a single appliance with a draft hood shall be not less than the area of the appliance flue collar or draft hood outlet, nor greater than seven times the draft hood outlet area.

3.	The effective area of a chimney flue or a venting system serving two appliances with draft hoods.

4.	Chimney venting systems using mechanical draft shall be sized in accordance with approved engineering methods.

5.	Other approved engineering methods.

G2427.5.5 (503.5.6) Inspection of chimneys.

Before replacing an existing appliance or connecting a vent connector to a chimney, the chimney passageway shall be examined to ascertain that it is clear and free of obstructions and it shall be cleaned if previously used for venting solid or liquid fuel-burning appliances or fireplaces.

G2427.5.5.1 (503.5.6.1) Chimney lining.

Chimneys shall be lined in accordance with NFPA 211.

➡

G2427.5.5.2 (503.5.6.2) Cleanouts.

Cleanouts shall be examined and where they do not remain tightly closed when not in use, they shall be repaired or replaced.

G2427.5.5.3 (503.5.6.3) Unsafe chimneys.

Where inspection reveals that an existing chimney is not safe for the intended application, it shall be repaired, rebuilt, lined, relined or replaced with a vent or chimney to conform to NFPA 211 and it shall be suitable for the appliances to be vented.

G2427.5.6 (503.5.7) Chimneys serving appliances burning other fuels.

Chimneys serving appliances burning other fuels shall comply with Sections G2427.5.6.1 through G2427.5.6.4.

G2427.5.6.1 (503.5.7.1) Solid fuel-burning appliances.

An appliance shall not be connected to a chimney flue serving a separate appliance designed to burn solid fuel.

G2427.5.6.2 (503.5.7.2) Liquid fuel-burning appliances.

Where one chimney flue serves gas appliances and liquid fuel-burning appliances, the appliances shall be connected through separate openings or shall be connected through a single opening where joined by a suitable fitting located as close as practical to the chimney. Where two or more openings are provided into one chimney flue, they shall be at different levels. Where the appliances are automatically controlled, they shall be equipped with safety shutoff devices.

G2427.5.6.3 (503.5.7.3) Combination gas- and solid fuel-burning appliances.

A combination gas- and solid fuel-burning appliance shall be permitted to be connected to a single chimney flue where equipped with a manual reset device to shut off gas to the main burner in the event of sustained backdraft or flue gas spillage. The chimney flue shall be sized to properly vent the appliance.

G2427.5.6.4 (503.5.7.4) Combination gas- and oil fuel-burning appliances.

Where a single chimney flue serves a listed combination gas- and oil fuel-burning appliance, such flue shall be sized in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.5.7 (503.5.8) Support of chimneys.

All portions of chimneys shall be supported for the design and weight of the materials employed. Factory-built chimneys shall be supported and spaced in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

G2427.5.8 (503.5.9) Cleanouts.

Where a chimney that formerly carried flue products from liquid or solid fuel-burning appliances is used with an appliance using fuel gas, an accessible cleanout shall be provided. The cleanout shall have a tight-fitting cover and be installed so its upper edge is not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the lower edge of the lowest chimney inlet opening.

G2427.5.9 (503.5.10) Space surrounding lining or vent.

The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special gas vent or plastic piping installed within a masonry chimney flue shall not be used to vent another appliance. The insertion of another liner or vent within the chimney as provided in this code and the liner or vent manufacturer’s instructions shall not be prohibited.

The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special gas vent or plastic piping installed within a masonry, metal or factory-built chimney shall not be used to supply combustion air. Such space shall not be prohibited from supplying combustion air to direct-vent appliances designed for installation in a solid fuel-burning fireplace and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.5.10 (503.5.11) Insulation shield.

Where a factory-built chimney passes through insulated assemblies, an insulation shield constructed of steel having a thickness of not less than 0.0187 inch (0.475 mm) (nominal 26 gage) shall be installed to provide clearance between the chimney and the insulation material. The clearance shall be not less than the clearance to combustibles specified by the chimney manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where chimneys pass through attic space, the shield shall terminate not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the installation materials and shall be secured in place to prevent displacement.

G2427.6 (503.6) Gas vents.

Gas vents shall comply with Sections G2427.6.1 through G2427.6.12. (See Section G2403, General Definitions.)

G2427.6.1 (503.6.1) Materials.

Type B and BW gas vents shall be listed in accordance with UL 441. Vents for listed combination gas- and oil-burning appliances shall be listed in accordance with UL 641.

G2427.6.2 (503.6.2) Installation, general.

Gas vents shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.6.3 (503.6.3) Type B-W vent capacity.

A Type B-W gas vent shall have a listed capacity not less than that of the listed vented wall furnace to which it is connected.

G2427.6.4 (503.6.5) Gas vent terminations.

A gas vent shall terminate in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Gas vents that are 12 inches (305 mm) or less in size and located not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) from a vertical wall or similar obstruction shall terminate above the roof in accordance with Figure G2427.6.4.

2.	Gas vents that are over 12 inches (305 mm) in size or are located less than 8 feet (2438 mm) from a vertical wall or similar obstruction shall terminate not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above the highest point where they pass through the roof and not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above any portion of a building within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally.

3.	As provided for direct-vent systems in Section G2427.2.1.

4.	As provided for appliances with integral vents in Section G2427.2.2.

5.	As provided for mechanical draft systems in Section G2427.3.3.

ROOF SLOPE	H (minimum) ft
Flat to 6/12	1.0
Over 6/12 to 7/12	1.25
Over 7/12 to 8/12	1.5
Over 8/12 to 9/12	2.0
Over 9/12 to 10/12	2.5
Over 10/12 to 11/12	3.25
Over 11/12 to 12/12	4.0
Over 12/12 to 14/12	5.0
Over 14/12 to 16/12	6.0
Over 16/12 to 18/12	7.0
Over 18/12 to 20/12	7.5
Over 20/12 to 21/12	8.0

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE G2427.6.4 (503.6.5)

TERMINATION LOCATIONS FOR GAS VENTS WITH LISTED CAPS 12 INCHES OR LESS IN SIZE NOT LESS THAN 8 FEET FROM A VERTICAL WALL

G2427.6.4.1 (503.6.5.1) Decorative shrouds.

Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of gas vents except where such shrouds are listed for use with the specific gas venting system and are installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.6.5 (503.6.6) Minimum height.

A Type B or L gas vent shall terminate not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in vertical height above the highest connected appliance draft hood or flue collar. A Type B-W gas vent shall terminate not less than 12 feet (3658 mm) in vertical height above the bottom of the wall furnace.

G2427.6.6 (503.6.7) Roof terminations.

Gas vents shall extend through the roof flashing, roof jack or roof thimble and terminate with a listed cap or listed roof assembly.

G2427.6.7 (503.6.8) Forced air inlets.

Gas vents shall terminate not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above any forced air inlet located within 10 feet (3048 mm).

G2427.6.8 (503.6.9) Exterior wall penetrations.

A gas vent extending through an exterior wall shall not terminate adjacent to the wall or below eaves or parapets, except as provided in Sections G2427.2.1 and G2427.3.3.

G2427.6.9 (503.6.10) Size of gas vents.

Venting systems shall be sized and constructed in accordance with Sections G2427.6.9.1 through G2427.6.9.4 and the appliance manufacturer’s installation instructions.

G2427.6.9.1 (503.6.10.1) Category I appliances.

The sizing of natural draft venting systems serving one or more listed appliances equipped with a draft hood or appliances listed for use with Type B gas vent, installed in a single story of a building, shall be in accordance with one of the following methods:

1.	The provisions of Section G2428.

2.	For sizing an individual gas vent for a single, draft hood-equipped appliance, the effective area of the vent connector and the gas vent shall be not less than the area of the appliance draft hood outlet, nor greater than seven times the draft hood outlet area.

3.	For sizing a gas vent connected to two appliances with draft hoods, the effective area of the vent shall be not less than the area of the larger draft hood outlet plus 50 percent of the area of the smaller draft hood outlet, nor greater than seven times the smaller draft hood outlet area.

4.	Approved engineering methods.

G2427.6.9.2 (503.6.10.2) Vent offsets.

Type B and L vents sized in accordance with Item 2 or 3 of Section G2427.6.9.1 shall extend in a generally vertical direction with offsets not exceeding 45 degrees (0.79 rad), except that a vent system having not more than one 60-degree (1.04 rad) offset shall be permitted. Any angle greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the vertical is considered horizontal. The total horizontal distance of a vent plus the horizontal vent connector serving draft hood-equipped appliances shall be not greater than 75 percent of the vertical height of the vent.

G2427.6.9.3 (503.6.10.3) Category II, III and IV appliances.

The sizing of gas vents for Category II, III and IV appliances shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions. The sizing of plastic pipe that is specified by the appliance manufacturer as a venting material for Category II, III and IV appliances, shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.6.9.4 (503.6.10.4) Mechanical draft.

Chimney venting systems using mechanical draft shall be sized in accordance with approved engineering methods.

G2427.6.10 (503.6.12) Support of gas vents.

Gas vents shall be supported and spaced in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

G2427.6.11 (503.6.13) Marking.

In those localities where solid and liquid fuels are used extensively, gas vents shall be permanently identified by a label attached to the wall or ceiling at a point where the vent connector enters the gas vent. The determination of where such localities exist shall be made by the code official. The label shall read:

“This gas vent is for appliances that burn gas. Do not connect to solid or liquid fuel-burning appliances or incinerators.”

G2427.6.12 (503.6.14) Fastener penetrations.

Screws, rivets and other fasteners shall not penetrate the inner wall of double-wall gas vents, except at the transition from an appliance draft hood outlet, a flue collar or a single-wall metal connector to a double-wall vent.

G2427.7 (503.7) Single-wall metal pipe.

Single-wall metal pipe vents shall comply with Sections G2427.7.1 through G2427.7.13.

G2427.7.1 (503.7.1) Construction.

Single-wall metal pipe shall be constructed of galvanized sheet steel not less than 0.0304 inch (0.7 mm) thick, or other approved, noncombustible, corrosion-resistant material.

G2427.7.2 (503.7.2) Cold climate.

Uninsulated single-wall metal pipe shall not be used outdoors for venting appliances in regions where the 99-percent winter design temperature is below 32°F (0°C).

G2427.7.3 (503.7.3) Termination.

Single-wall metal pipe shall terminate not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in vertical height above the highest connected appliance draft hood outlet or flue collar. Single-wall metal pipe shall extend not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above the highest point where it passes through a roof of a building and not less than 2 feet (610 mm) higher than any portion of a building within a horizontal distance of 10 feet (3048 mm). An approved cap or roof assembly shall be attached to the terminus of a single-wall metal pipe.

G2427.7.4 (503.7.4) Limitations of use.

Single-wall metal pipe shall be used only for runs directly from the space in which the appliance is located through the roof or exterior wall to the outdoor atmosphere.

G2427.7.5 (503.7.5) Roof penetrations.

A pipe passing through a roof shall extend without interruption through the roof flashing, roof jack or roof thimble. Where a single-wall metal pipe passes through a roof constructed of combustible material, a noncombustible, nonventilating thimble shall be used at the point of passage. The thimble shall extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above and 6 inches (152 mm) below the roof with the annular space open at the bottom and closed only at the top. The thimble shall be sized in accordance with Section G2427.7.7.

G2427.7.6 (503.7.6) Installation.

Single-wall metal pipe shall not originate in any unoccupied attic or concealed-space and shall not pass through any attic, inside wall, concealed space, or floor. The installation of a single-wall metal pipe through an exterior combustible wall shall comply with Section G2427.7.7.

G2427.7.7 (503.7.7) Single-wall penetrations of combustible walls.

A single-wall metal pipe shall not pass through a combustible exterior wall unless guarded at the point of passage by a ventilated metal thimble not smaller than the following:

1.	For listed appliances with draft hoods and appliances listed for use with Type B gas vents, the thimble shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe. Where there is a run of not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) of metal pipe in the open between the draft hood outlet and the thimble, the thimble shall be permitted to be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe.

2.	For unlisted appliances having draft hoods, the thimble shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe.

3.	For residential and low-heat appliances, the thimble shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe.

Exception: In lieu of thimble protection, all combustible material in the wall shall be removed a sufficient distance from the metal pipe to provide the specified clearance from such metal pipe to combustible material. Any material used to close up such opening shall be noncombustible.

G2427.7.8 (503.7.8) Clearances.

Minimum clearances from single-wall metal pipe to combustible material shall be in accordance with Table G2427.10.5. The clearance from single-wall metal pipe to combustible material shall be permitted to be reduced where the combustible material is protected as specified for vent connectors in Table G2409.2.

G2427.7.9 (503.7.9) Size of single-wall metal pipe.

A venting system constructed of single-wall metal pipe shall be sized in accordance with one of the following methods and the appliance manufacturer’s instructions:

1.	For a draft hood-equipped appliance, in accordance with Section G2428.

2.	For a venting system for a single appliance with a draft hood, the areas of the connector and the pipe each shall be not less than the area of the appliance flue collar or draft hood outlet, whichever is smaller. The vent area shall be not greater than seven times the draft hood outlet area.

3.	Approved engineering methods.

G2427.7.10 (503.7.10) Pipe geometry.

Any shaped single-wall metal pipe shall be permitted to be used, provided that its equivalent effective area is equal to the effective area of the round pipe for which it is substituted, and provided that the minimum internal dimension of the pipe is not less than 2 inches (51 mm).

G2427.7.11 (503.7.11) Termination capacity.

The vent cap or a roof assembly shall have a venting capacity of not less than that of the pipe to which it is attached.

G2427.7.12 (503.7.12) Support of single-wall metal pipe.

All portions of single-wall metal pipe shall be supported for the design and weight of the material employed.

G2427.7.13 (503.7.13) Marking.

Single-wall metal pipe shall comply with the marking provisions of Section G2427.6.11.

G2427.8 (503.8) Venting system terminal clearances.

The clearances for through-the-wall direct-vent and nondirect-vent terminals shall be in accordance with Figure G2427.8 and Table G2427.8.

Exception: The clearances in Table G2427.8 shall not apply to the combustion air intake of a direct-vent appliance.

➡

FIGURE G2427.8 (503.8)

THROUGH-THE-WALL VENT TERMINAL CLEARANCES

TABLE G2427.8 (503.8)

THROUGH-THE-WALL VENT TERMINAL CLEARANCES

FIGURE
CLEARANCE
	CLEARANCE
LOCATION
	MINIMUM CLEARANCES FOR
DIRECT-VENT TERMINALS
	MINIMUM
CLEARANCES FOR
NONDIRECT-VENT
TERMINALS

A	Clearance above finished grade level, veranda, porch, deck or balcony	12 inches
B	Clearance to window or door that is openable	6 inches: Appliances ≤ 10,000 Btu/hr
9 inches: Appliances > 10,000 Btu/hr ≤ 50,000 Btu/hr
12 inches: Appliances > 50,000 Btu/hr ≤ 150,000 Btu/hr
Appliances > 150,000 Btu/hr, in accordance with the
appliance manufacturer’s instructions and not less than
the clearances specified for nondirect-vent terminals in
Row B
	4 feet below or to side of opening or 1 foot above opening
C	Clearance to nonopenable window	None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer
D	Vertical clearance to ventilated soffit located above the terminal within a horizontal distance of 2 feet from the centerline of the terminal	None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer
E	Clearance to unventilated soffit	None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer
F	Clearance to outside corner of building	None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer
G	Clearance to inside corner of building	None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer
H	Clearance to each side of centerline extended above regulator vent outlet	3 feet up to a height of 15 feet above the regulator vent outlet
I	Clearance to service regulator vent outlet in all directions	3 feet for gas pressures up to 2 psi; 10 feet for gas pressures above 2 psi
J	Clearance to nonmechanical air supply inlet to building and the combustion air inlet to any other appliance	Same clearance as specified for Row B
K	Clearance to a mechanical air supply inlet	10 feet horizontally from inlet or 3 feet above inlet
L	Clearance above paved sidewalk or paved driveway located on public property	7 feet and shall not be located above public walkways or other areas where condensate or vapor can cause a nuisance or hazard
M	Clearance to underside of veranda, porch deck or balcony	12 inches where the area beneath the veranda, porch deck or balcony is open on not less than two sides. The vent terminal is prohibited in this location where only one side is open.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 Btu/h = 0.293 W.

G2427.9 (503.9) Condensation drainage.

Provisions shall be made to collect and dispose of condensate from venting systems serving Category II and IV appliances and noncategorized condensing appliances. Drains for condensate shall be installed in accordance with the appliance and vent manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.10 (503.10) Vent connectors for Category I appliances.

Vent connectors for Category I appliances shall comply with Sections G2427.10.1 through G2427.10.14.

G2427.10.1 (503.10.1) Where required.

A vent connector shall be used to connect an appliance to a gas vent, chimney or single-wall metal pipe, except where the gas vent, chimney or single-wall metal pipe is directly connected to the appliance.

G2427.10.2 (503.10.2) Materials.

Vent connectors shall be constructed in accordance with Sections G2427.10.2.1 through G2427.10.2.4.

G2427.10.2.1 (503.10.2.1) General.

A vent connector shall be made of noncombustible corrosion-resistant material capable of withstanding the vent gas temperature produced by the appliance and of sufficient thickness to withstand physical damage.

G2427.10.2.2 (503.10.2.2) Vent connectors located in unconditioned areas.

Where the vent connector used for an appliance having a draft hood or a Category I appliance is located in or passes through attics, crawl spaces or other unconditioned spaces, that portion of the vent connector shall be listed Type B, Type L or listed vent material having equivalent insulation properties.

Exception: Single-wall metal pipe located within the exterior walls of the building in areas having a local 99-percent winter design temperature of 5°F (-15°C) or higher shall be permitted to be used in unconditioned spaces other than attics and crawl spaces.

G2427.10.2.3 (503.10.2.3) Residential-type appliance connectors.

Where vent connectors for residential-type appliances are not installed in attics or other unconditioned spaces, connectors for listed appliances having draft hoods, appliances having draft hoods and equipped with listed conversion burners and Category I appliances shall be one of the following:

1.	Type B or L vent material.

2.	Galvanized sheet steel not less than 0.018 inch (0.46 mm) thick.

3.	Aluminum (1100 or 3003 alloy or equivalent) sheet not less than 0.027 inch (0.69 mm) thick.

4.	Stainless steel sheet not less than 0.012 inch (0.31 mm) thick.

5.	Smooth interior wall metal pipe having resistance to heat and corrosion equal to or greater than that of Item 2, 3 or 4.

6.	A listed vent connector.

Vent connectors shall not be covered with insulation.

Exception: Listed insulated vent connectors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.10.2.4 (503.10.2.4) Low-heat appliance.

A vent connector for a nonresidential, low-heat appliance shall be a factory-built chimney section or steel pipe having resistance to heat and corrosion equivalent to that for the appropriate galvanized pipe as specified in Table G2427.10.2.4. Factory-built chimney sections shall be joined together in accordance with the chimney manufacturer’s instructions.

TABLE G2427.10.2.4 (503.10.2.4)

MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR GALVANIZED STEEL VENT CONNECTORS FOR LOW-HEAT APPLIANCES

DIAMETER OF CONNECTOR
(inches)
	MINIMUM THICKNESS (inch)
Less than 6	0.019
6 to less than 10	0.023
10 to 12 inclusive	0.029
14 to 16 inclusive	0.034
Over 16	0.056

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

G2427.10.3 (503.10.3) Size of vent connector.

Vent connectors shall be sized in accordance with Sections G2427.10.3.1 through G2427.3.5.

G2427.10.3.1 (503.10.3.1) Single draft hood and fan-assisted.

A vent connector for an appliance with a single draft hood or for a Category I fan-assisted combustion system appliance shall be sized and installed in accordance with Section G2428 or approved engineering methods.

G2427.10.3.2 (503.10.3.2) Multiple draft hood.

Where a single appliance having more than one draft hood outlet or flue collar is installed, the manifold shall be constructed according to the instructions of the appliance manufacturer. Where there are no instructions, the manifold shall be designed and constructed in accordance with approved engineering methods. As an alternate method, the effective area of the manifold shall equal the combined area of the flue collars or draft hood outlets and the vent connectors shall have a rise of not less than 12 inches (305 mm).

G2427.10.3.3 (503.10.3.3) Multiple appliances.

Where two or more appliances are connected to a common vent or chimney, each vent connector shall be sized in accordance with Section G2428 or approved engineering methods.

As an alternative method applicable only where all of the appliances are draft hood equipped, each vent connector shall have an effective area not less than the area of the draft hood outlet of the appliance to which it is connected.

G2427.10.3.4 (503.10.3.4) Common connector/manifold.

Where two or more appliances are vented through a common vent connector or vent manifold, the common vent connector or vent manifold shall be located at the highest level consistent with available headroom and the required clearance to combustible materials and shall be sized in accordance with Section G2428 or approved engineering methods.

As an alternate method applicable only where there are two draft hood-equipped appliances, the effective area of the common vent connector or vent manifold and all junction fittings shall be not less than the area of the larger vent connector plus 50 percent of the area of the smaller flue collar outlet.

G2427.10.3.5 (503.10.3.5) Size increase.

Where the size of a vent connector is increased to overcome installation limitations and obtain connector capacity equal to the appliance input, the size increase shall be made at the appliance draft hood outlet.

G2427.10.4 (503.10.4) Two or more appliances connected to a single vent or chimney.

Where two or more vent connectors enter a common vent, chimney flue, or single-wall metal pipe, the smaller connector shall enter at the highest level consistent with the available headroom or clearance to combustible material. Vent connectors serving Category I appliances shall not be connected to any portion of a mechanical draft system operating under positive static pressure, such as those serving Category III or IV appliances.

G2427.10.4.1 (503.10.4.1) Two or more openings.

Where two or more openings are provided into one chimney flue or vent, the openings shall be at different levels, or the connectors shall be attached to the vertical portion of the chimney or vent at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) or less relative to the vertical.

G2427.10.5 (503.10.5) Clearance.

Minimum clearances from vent connectors to combustible material shall be in accordance with Table G2427.10.5.

Exception: The clearance between a vent connector and combustible material shall be permitted to be reduced where the combustible material is protected as specified for vent connectors in Table G2409.2.

TABLE G2427.10.5 (503.10.5)

CLEARANCES FOR CONNECTORSa

APPLIANCE	MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
Listed Type B
gas vent material
	Listed Type L
vent material
	Single-wall
metal pipe
	Factory-built
chimney sections

Listed appliances with draft hoods and appliances listed for use with Type B gas vents	As listed	As listed	6 inches	As listed
Residential boilers and furnaces with listed gas conversion burner and with draft hood	6 inches	6 inches	9 inches	As listed
Residential appliances listed for use with Type L vents	Not permitted	As listed	9 inches	As listed
Listed gas-fired toilets	Not permitted	As listed	As listed	As listed
Unlisted residential appliances with draft hood	Not permitted	6 inches	9 inches	As listed
Residential and low-heat appliances other than above	Not permitted	9 inches	18 inches	As listed
Medium-heat appliances	Not permitted	Not permitted	36 inches	As listed

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	These clearances shall apply unless the manufacturer’s installation instructions for a listed appliance or connector specify different clearances, in which case the listed clearances shall apply.

G2427.10.6 (503.10.6) Joints.

Joints between sections of connector piping and connections to flue collars and draft hood outlets shall be fastened by one of the following methods:

1.	Sheet metal screws.

2.	Vent connectors of listed vent material assembled and connected to flue collars or draft hood outlets in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	Other approved means.

G2427.10.7 (503.10.7) Connector junctions.

Where vent connectors are joined together, the connection shall be made with a tee or wye

G2427.10.8 (503.10.8) Slope.

A vent connector shall be installed without dips or sags and shall slope upward toward the vent or chimney not less than 1/4 inch per foot (21 mm/m).

Exception: Vent connectors attached to a mechanical draft system installed in accordance with the appliance and draft system manufacturers’ instructions.

G2427.10.9 (503.10.9) Length of vent connector.

The maximum horizontal length of a single-wall connector shall be 75 percent of the height of the chimney or vent except for engineered systems. The maximum horizontal length of a Type B double-wall connector shall be 100 percent of the height of the chimney or vent except for engineered systems.

G2427.10.10 (503.10.10) Support.

A vent connector shall be supported for the design and weight of the material employed to maintain clearances and prevent physical damage and separation of joints.

G2427.10.11 (503.10.11) Chimney connection.

Where entering a flue in a masonry or metal chimney, the vent connector shall be installed above the extreme bottom to avoid stoppage. Where a thimble or slip joint is used to facilitate removal of the connector, the connector shall be firmly attached to or inserted into the thimble or slip joint to prevent the connector from falling out. Means shall be employed to prevent the connector from entering so far as to restrict the space between its end and the opposite wall of the chimney flue (see Section G2425.9).

G2427.10.12 (503.10.12) Inspection.

The entire length of a vent connector shall be provided with ready access for inspection, cleaning and replacement.

G2427.10.13 (503.10.13) Fireplaces.

A vent connector shall not be connected to a chimney flue serving a fireplace unless the fireplace flue opening is permanently sealed.

G2427.10.14 (503.10.14) Passage through ceilings, floors or walls.

Single-wall metal pipe connectors shall not pass through any wall, floor or ceiling except as permitted by Section G2427.7.4.

G2427.11 (503.11) Vent connectors for Category II, III and IV appliances.

Vent connectors for Category II, III and IV appliances shall be as specified for the venting systems in accordance with Section G2427.4.

G2427.12 (503.12) Draft hoods and draft controls.

The installation of draft hoods and draft controls shall comply with Sections G2427.12.1 through G2427.12.7.

G2427.12.1 (503.12.1) Appliances requiring draft hoods.

Vented appliances shall be installed with draft hoods.

Exception: Dual oven-type combination ranges; direct-vent appliances; fan-assisted combustion system appliances; appliances requiring chimney draft for operation; single firebox boilers equipped with conversion burners with inputs greater than 400,000 Btu per hour (117 kW); appliances equipped with blast, power or pressure burners that are not listed for use with draft hoods; and appliances designed for forced venting.

G2427.12.2 (503.12.2) Installation.

A draft hood supplied with or forming a part of a listed vented appliance shall be installed without alteration, exactly as furnished and specified by the appliance manufacturer.

G2427.12.2.1 (503.12.2.1) Draft hood required.

If a draft hood is not supplied by the appliance manufacturer where one is required, a draft hood shall be installed, shall be of a listed or approved type and, in the absence of other instructions, shall be of the same size as the appliance flue collar. Where a draft hood is required with a conversion burner, it shall be of a listed or approved type.

➡

G2427.12.3 (503.12.3) Draft control devices.

Where a draft control device is part of the appliance or is supplied by the appliance manufacturer, it shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In the absence of manufacturer’s instructions, the device shall be attached to the flue collar of the appliance or as near to the appliance as practical.

G2427.12.4 (503.12.4) Additional devices.

Appliances requiring a controlled chimney draft shall be permitted to be equipped with a listed double-acting barometric-draft regulator installed and adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2427.12.5 (503.12.5) Location.

Draft hoods and barometric draft regulators shall be installed in the same room or enclosure as the appliance in such a manner as to prevent any difference in pressure between the hood or regulator and the combustion air supply.

G2427.12.6 (503.12.6) Positioning.

Draft hoods and draft regulators shall be installed in the position for which they were designed with reference to the horizontal and vertical planes and shall be located so that the relief opening is not obstructed by any part of the appliance or adjacent construction. The appliance and its draft hood shall be located so that the relief opening is accessible for checking vent operation.

G2427.12.7 (503.12.7) Clearance.

A draft hood shall be located so its relief opening is not less than 6 inches (152 mm) from any surface except that of the appliance it serves and the venting system to which the draft hood is connected. Where a greater or lesser clearance is indicated on the appliance label, the clearance shall be not less than that specified on the label. Such clearances shall not be reduced.

G2427.13 (503.13) Manually operated dampers.

A manually operated damper shall not be placed in the vent connector for any appliance. Fixed baffles and balancing baffles shall not be classified as manually operated dampers.

G2427.13.1 (503.13.1) Balancing baffles.

Balancing baffles shall be listed in accordance with UL 378 and shall be mechanically locked in the desired position before placing the appliance in operation.

G2427.14 (503.14) Automatically operated vent dampers.

An automatically operated vent damper shall be listed.

G2427.15 (503.15) Obstructions.

Devices that retard the flow of vent gases shall not be installed in a vent connector, chimney or vent. The following shall not be considered as obstructions:

1.	Draft regulators and safety controls specifically listed for installation in venting systems and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

2.	Approved draft regulators and safety controls that are designed and installed in accordance with approved engineering methods.

3.	Listed heat reclaimers and automatically operated vent dampers installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

4.	Approved economizers, heat reclaimers and recuperators installed in venting systems of appliances not required to be equipped with draft hoods, provided that the appliance manufacturer’s instructions cover the installation of such a device in the venting system and performance in accordance with Sections G2427.3 and G2427.3.1 is obtained.

5.	Vent dampers serving listed appliances installed in accordance with Sections G2428.2.1 and G2428.3.1 or approved engineering methods.

G2427.16 (503.16) (IFGS) Outside wall penetrations.

Where vents, including those for direct-vent appliances, penetrate outside walls of buildings, the annular spaces around such penetrations shall be permanently sealed using approved materials to prevent entry of combustion products into the building.

SECTION G2428 (504)
SIZING OF CATEGORY I
APPLIANCE VENTING SYSTEMS
G2428.1 (504.1) Definitions.

The following definitions apply to the tables in this section:

APPLIANCE CATEGORIZED VENT DIAMETER/AREA. The minimum vent area/diameter permissible for Category I appliances to maintain a nonpositive vent static pressure when tested in accordance with nationally recognized standards.

FAN + FAN. The maximum combined appliance input rating of two or more Category I fan-assisted appliances attached to the common vent.

FAN Max. The maximum input rating of a Category I fan-assisted appliance attached to a vent or connector.

FAN Min. The minimum input rating of a Category I fan-assisted appliance attached to a vent or connector.

FAN + NAT. The maximum combined appliance input rating of one or more Category I fan-assisted appliances and one or more Category I draft hood-equipped appliances attached to the common vent.

FAN-ASSISTED COMBUSTION SYSTEM. An appliance equipped with an integral mechanical means to either draw or force products of combustion through the combustion chamber or heat exchanger.

NA. Vent configuration is not allowed due to potential for condensate formation or pressurization of the venting system, or not applicable due to physical or geometric restraints.

NAT Max. The maximum input rating of a Category I draft hood-equipped appliance attached to a vent or connector.

NAT + NAT. The maximum combined appliance input rating of two or more Category I draft hood-equipped appliances attached to the common vent.

G2428.2 (504.2) Application of single-appliance vent Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2).

The application of Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2) shall be subject to the requirements of Sections G2428.2.1 through G2428.2.17.

TABLE G2428.2(1) [504.2(1)]

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT

Number of Appliances	Single
Appliance Type	Category I
Appliance Vent Connection	Connected directly to vent
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)	LATERAL
(L) (feet)
	VENT DIAMETER—(D) inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	0	0	78	46	0	152	86	0	251	141	0	375	205	0	524	285	0	698	370	0	897	470
2	13	51	36	18	97	67	27	157	105	32	232	157	44	321	217	53	425	285	63	543	370
4	21	49	34	30	94	64	39	153	103	50	227	153	66	316	211	79	419	279	93	536	362
6	25	46	32	36	91	61	47	149	100	59	223	149	78	310	205	93	413	273	110	530	354
8	0	0	84	50	0	165	94	0	276	155	0	415	235	0	583	320	0	780	415	0	1,006	537
2	12	57	40	16	109	75	25	178	120	28	263	180	42	365	247	50	483	322	60	619	418
5	23	53	38	32	103	71	42	171	115	53	255	173	70	356	237	83	473	313	99	607	407
8	28	49	35	39	98	66	51	164	109	64	247	165	84	347	227	99	463	303	117	596	396
10	0	0	88	53	0	175	100	0	295	166	0	447	255	0	631	345	0	847	450	0	1,096	585
2	12	61	42	17	118	81	23	194	129	26	289	195	40	402	273	48	533	355	57	684	457
5	23	57	40	32	113	77	41	187	124	52	280	188	68	392	263	81	522	346	95	671	446
10	30	51	36	41	104	70	54	176	115	67	267	175	88	376	245	104	504	330	122	651	427
15	0	0	94	58	0	191	112	0	327	187	0	502	285	0	716	390	0	970	525	0	1,263	682
2	11	69	48	15	136	93	20	226	150	22	339	225	38	475	316	45	633	414	53	815	544
5	22	65	45	30	130	87	39	219	142	49	330	217	64	463	300	76	620	403	90	800	529
10	29	59	41	40	121	82	51	206	135	64	315	208	84	445	288	99	600	386	116	777	507
15	35	53	37	48	112	76	61	195	128	76	301	198	98	429	275	115	580	373	134	755	491
20	0	0	97	61	0	202	119	0	349	202	0	540	307	0	776	430	0	1,057	575	0	1,384	752
2	10	75	51	14	149	100	18	250	166	20	377	249	33	531	346	41	711	470	50	917	612
5	21	71	48	29	143	96	38	242	160	47	367	241	62	519	337	73	697	460	86	902	599
10	28	64	44	38	133	89	50	229	150	62	351	228	81	499	321	95	675	443	112	877	576
15	34	58	40	46	124	84	59	217	142	73	337	217	94	481	308	111	654	427	129	853	557
20	48	52	35	55	116	78	69	206	134	84	322	206	107	464	295	125	634	410	145	830	537
30	0	0	100	64	0	213	128	0	374	220	0	587	336	0	853	475	0	1,173	650	0	1,548	855
2	9	81	56	13	166	112	14	283	185	18	432	280	27	613	394	33	826	535	42	1,072	700
5	21	77	54	28	160	108	36	275	176	45	421	273	58	600	385	69	811	524	82	1,055	688
10	27	70	50	37	150	102	48	262	171	59	405	261	77	580	371	91	788	507	107	1,028	668
15	33	64	NA	44	141	96	57	249	163	70	389	249	90	560	357	105	765	490	124	1,002	648
20	56	58	NA	53	132	90	66	237	154	80	374	237	102	542	343	119	743	473	139	977	628
30	NA	NA	NA	73	113	NA	88	214	NA	104	346	219	131	507	321	149	702	444	171	929	594
50	0	0	101	67	0	216	134	0	397	232	0	633	363	0	932	518	0	1,297	708	0	1,730	952
2	8	86	61	11	183	122	14	320	206	15	497	314	22	715	445	26	975	615	33	1,276	813
5	20	82	NA	27	177	119	35	312	200	43	487	308	55	702	438	65	960	605	77	1,259	798
10	26	76	NA	35	168	114	45	299	190	56	471	298	73	681	426	86	935	589	101	1,230	773
15	59	70	NA	42	158	NA	54	287	180	66	455	288	85	662	413	100	911	572	117	1,203	747
20	NA	NA	NA	50	149	NA	63	275	169	76	440	278	97	642	401	113	888	556	131	1,176	722
30	NA	NA	NA	69	131	NA	84	250	NA	99	410	259	123	605	376	141	844	522	161	1,125	670

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

TABLE G2428.2(2) [504.2(2)]

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT

Number of Appliances	Single
Appliance Type	Category I
Appliance Vent Connection	Single-wall metal connector
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)	LATERAL
(L)(feet)
	VENT DIAMETER—(D) inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	12
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	0	38	77	45	59	151	85	85	249	140	126	373	204	165	522	284	211	695	369	267	894	469	371	1,118	569	537	1,639	849
2	39	51	36	60	96	66	85	156	104	123	231	156	159	320	213	201	423	284	251	541	368	347	673	453	498	979	648
4	NA	NA	33	74	92	63	102	152	102	146	225	152	187	313	208	237	416	277	295	533	360	409	664	443	584	971	638
6	NA	NA	31	83	89	60	114	147	99	163	220	148	207	307	203	263	409	271	327	526	352	449	656	433	638	962	627
8	0	37	83	50	58	164	93	83	273	154	123	412	234	161	580	319	206	777	414	258	1,002	536	360	1,257	658	521	1,852	967
2	39	56	39	59	108	75	83	176	119	121	261	179	155	363	246	197	482	321	246	617	417	339	768	513	486	1,120	743
5	NA	NA	37	77	102	69	107	168	114	151	252	171	193	352	235	245	470	311	305	604	404	418	754	500	598	1,104	730
8	NA	NA	33	90	95	64	122	161	107	175	243	163	223	342	225	280	458	300	344	591	392	470	740	486	665	1,089	715
10	0	37	87	53	57	174	99	82	293	165	120	444	254	158	628	344	202	844	449	253	1,093	584	351	1,373	718	507	2,031	1,057
2	39	61	41	59	117	80	82	193	128	119	287	194	153	400	272	193	531	354	242	681	456	332	849	559	475	1,242	848
5	52	56	39	76	111	76	105	185	122	148	277	186	190	388	261	241	518	344	299	667	443	409	834	544	584	1,224	825
10	NA	NA	34	97	100	68	132	171	112	188	261	171	237	369	241	296	497	325	363	643	423	492	808	520	688	1,194	788
15	0	36	93	57	56	190	111	80	325	186	116	499	283	153	713	388	195	966	523	244	1,259	681	336	1,591	838	488	2,374	1,237
2	38	69	47	57	136	93	80	225	149	115	337	224	148	473	314	187	631	413	232	812	543	319	1,015	673	457	1,491	983
5	51	63	44	75	128	86	102	216	140	144	326	217	182	459	298	231	616	400	287	795	526	392	997	657	562	1,469	963
10	NA	NA	39	95	116	79	128	201	131	182	308	203	228	438	284	284	592	381	349	768	501	470	966	628	664	1,433	928
15	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	72	158	186	124	220	290	192	272	418	269	334	568	367	404	742	484	540	937	601	750	1,399	894
20	0	35	96	60	54	200	118	78	346	201	114	537	306	149	772	428	190	1,053	573	238	1,379	750	326	1,751	927	473	2,631	1,346
2	37	74	50	56	148	99	78	248	165	113	375	248	144	528	344	182	708	468	227	914	611	309	1,146	754	443	1,689	1,098
5	50	68	47	73	140	94	100	239	158	141	363	239	178	514	334	224	692	457	279	896	596	381	1,126	734	547	1,665	1,074
10	NA	NA	41	93	129	86	125	223	146	177	344	224	222	491	316	277	666	437	339	866	570	457	1,092	702	646	1,626	1,037
15	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	80	155	208	136	216	325	210	264	469	301	325	640	419	393	838	549	526	1,060	677	730	1,587	1,005
20	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	186	192	126	254	306	196	309	448	285	374	616	400	448	810	526	592	1,028	651	808	1,550	973
30	0	34	99	63	53	211	127	76	372	219	110	584	334	144	849	472	184	1,168	647	229	1,542	852	312	1,971	1,056	454	2,996	1,545
2	37	80	56	55	164	111	76	281	183	109	429	279	139	610	392	175	823	533	219	1,069	698	296	1,346	863	424	1,999	1,308
5	49	74	52	72	157	106	98	271	173	136	417	271	171	595	382	215	806	521	269	1,049	684	366	1,324	846	524	1,971	1,283
10	NA	NA	NA	91	144	98	122	255	168	171	397	257	213	570	367	265	777	501	327	1,017	662	440	1,287	821	620	1,927	1,234
15	NA	NA	NA	115	131	NA	151	239	157	208	377	242	255	547	349	312	750	481	379	985	638	507	1,251	794	702	1,884	1,205
20	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	181	223	NA	246	357	228	298	524	333	360	723	461	433	955	615	570	1,216	768	780	1,841	1,166
30	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	389	477	305	461	670	426	541	895	574	704	1,147	720	937	1,759	1,101
50	0	33	99	66	51	213	133	73	394	230	105	629	361	138	928	515	176	1,292	704	220	1,724	948	295	2,223	1,189	428	3,432	1,818
2	36	84	61	53	181	121	73	318	205	104	495	312	133	712	443	168	971	613	209	1,273	811	280	1,615	1,007	401	2,426	1,509
5	48	80	NA	70	174	117	94	308	198	131	482	305	164	696	435	204	953	602	257	1,252	795	347	1,591	991	496	2,396	1,490
10	NA	NA	NA	89	160	NA	118	292	186	162	461	292	203	671	420	253	923	583	313	1,217	765	418	1,551	963	589	2,347	1,455
15	NA	NA	NA	112	148	NA	145	275	174	199	441	280	244	646	405	299	894	562	363	1,183	736	481	1,512	934	668	2,299	1,421
20	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	176	257	NA	236	420	267	285	622	389	345	866	543	415	1,150	708	544	1,473	906	741	2,251	1,387
30	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	315	376	NA	373	573	NA	442	809	502	521	1,086	649	674	1,399	848	892	2,159	1,318

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

G2428.2.1 (504.2.1) Vent obstructions.

These venting tables shall not be used where obstructions, as described in Section G2427.15, are installed in the venting system. The installation of vents serving listed appliances with vent dampers shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions or in accordance with the following:

1.	The maximum capacity of the vent system shall be determined using the “NAT Max” column.

2.	The minimum capacity shall be determined as if the appliance were a fan-assisted appliance, using the “FAN Min” column to determine the minimum capacity of the vent system. Where the corresponding “FAN Min” is “NA,” the vent configuration shall not be permitted and an alternative venting configuration shall be utilized.

G2428.2.2 (504.2.2) Minimum size.

Where the vent size determined from the tables is smaller than the appliance draft hood outlet or flue collar, the smaller size shall be permitted to be used provided that all of the following requirements are met:

1.	The total vent height (H) is not less than 10 feet (3048 mm).

2.	Vents for appliance draft hood outlets or flue collars 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter or smaller are not reduced more than one table size.

3.	Vents for appliance draft hood outlets or flue collars larger than 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter are not reduced more than two table sizes.

4.	The maximum capacity listed in the tables for a fan-assisted appliance is reduced by 10 percent (0.90 × maximum table capacity).

5.	The draft hood outlet is greater than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter. Do not connect a 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) vent to a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) draft hood outlet. This provision shall not apply to fan-assisted appliances.

G2428.2.3 (504.2.3) Vent offsets.

Single-appliance venting configurations with zero (0) lateral lengths in Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2) shall not have elbows in the venting system. Single-appliance venting configurations with lateral lengths include two 90-degree (1.57 rad) elbows. For each additional elbow up to and including 45 degrees (0.79 rad), the maximum capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each additional elbow greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to and including 90 degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 10 percent. Where multiple offsets occur in a vent, the total lateral length of all offsets combined shall not exceed that specified in Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2).

G2428.2.4 (504.2.4) Zero lateral.

Zero (0) lateral (L) shall apply only to a straight vertical vent attached to a top outlet draft hood or flue collar.

G2428.2.5 (504.2.5) High-altitude installations.

Sea-level input ratings shall be used when determining maximum capacity for high-altitude installation. Actual input, derated for altitude, shall be used for determining minimum capacity for high-altitude installation.

G2428.2.6 (504.2.6) Multiple input rate appliances.

For appliances with more than one input rate, the minimum vent capacity (FAN Min) determined from the tables shall be less than the lowest appliance input rating, and the maximum vent capacity (FAN Max/NAT Max) determined from the tables shall be greater than the highest appliance rating input.

G2428.2.7 (504.2.7) Liner system sizing and connections.

Listed corrugated metallic chimney liner systems in masonry chimneys shall be sized by using Table G2428.2(1) or G2428.2(2) for Type B vents with the maximum capacity reduced by 20 percent (0.80 × maximum capacity) and the minimum capacity as shown in Table G2428.2(1) or G2428.2(2). Corrugated metallic liner systems installed with bends or offsets shall have their maximum capacity further reduced in accordance with Section G2428.2.3. The 20-percent reduction for corrugated metallic chimney liner systems includes an allowance for one long-radius 90-degree (1.57 rad) turn at the bottom of the liner.

Connections between chimney liners and listed double-wall connectors shall be made with listed adapters designed for such purpose.

G2428.2.8 (504.2.8) Vent area and diameter.

Where the vertical vent has a larger diameter than the vent connector, the vertical vent diameter shall be used to determine the minimum vent capacity, and the connector diameter shall be used to determine the maximum vent capacity. The flow area of the vertical vent shall not exceed seven times the flow area of the listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet area unless designed in accordance with approved engineering methods.

G2428.2.9 (504.2.9) Chimney and vent locations.

Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2) shall be used only for chimneys and vents not exposed to the outdoors below the roof line. A Type B vent or listed chimney lining system passing through an unused masonry chimney flue shall not be considered to be exposed to the outdoors. Where vents extend outdoors above the roof more than 5 feet (1524 mm) higher than required by Figure G2427.6.4 and where vents terminate in accordance with Section G2427.6.4, Item 2, the outdoor portion of the vent shall be enclosed as required by this section for vents not considered to be exposed to the outdoors or such venting system shall be engineered. A Type B vent shall not be considered to be exposed to the outdoors where it passes through an unventilated enclosure or chase insulated to a value of not less than R-8.

G2428.2.10 (504.2.10) Corrugated vent connector size.

Corrugated vent connectors shall be not smaller than the listed appliance categorized vent diameter, flue collar diameter, or draft hood outlet diameter.

G2428.2.11 (504.2.11) Vent connector size limitation.

Vent connectors shall not be increased in size more than two sizes greater than the listed appliance categorized vent diameter, flue collar diameter or draft hood outlet diameter.

G2428.2.12 (504.2.12) Component commingling.

In a single run of vent or vent connector, different diameters and types of vent and connector components shall be permitted to be used, provided that all such sizes and types are permitted by the tables.

G2428.2.13 (504.2.13) Draft hood conversion accessories.

Draft hood conversion accessories for use with masonry chimneys venting listed Category I fan-assisted appliances shall be listed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for such listed accessories.

G2428.2.14 (504.2.14) Table interpolation.

Interpolation shall be permitted in calculating capacities for vent dimensions that fall between the table entries.

G2428.2.15 (504.2.15) Extrapolation prohibited.

Extrapolation beyond the table entries shall not be permitted.

G2428.2.16 (504.2.16) Engineering calculations.

Where a vent height is less than 6 feet (1829 mm) or greater than shown in the tables, an engineering method shall be used to calculate the vent capacity.

G2428.2.17 (504.2.17) Height entries.

Where the actual height of a vent falls between entries in the height column of the applicable table in Tables G2428.2(1) and G2428.2(2), either interpolation shall be used or the lower appliance input rating shown in the table entries shall be used for FAN Max and NAT Max column values and the higher appliance input rating shall be used for the FAN Min column values.

G2428.3 (504.3) Application of multiple appliance vent Tables G2428.3(1) through G2428.3(4).

The application of Tables G2428.3(1) through G2428.3(4) shall be subject to the requirements of Sections G2428.3.1 through G2428.3.24.

TABLE G2428.3(1) [504.3(1)]

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT

Number of Appliances	Two or more
Appliances Type	Category I
Appliances Vent Connection	Type B double-wall connector
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H) (feet)	CONNECTOR
RISE (R) (feet)
	TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND CONNECTOR DIAMETER—(D) inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	1	22	37	26	35	66	46	46	106	72	58	164	104	77	225	142	92	296	185	109	376	237	128	466	289
2	23	41	31	37	75	55	48	121	86	60	183	124	79	253	168	95	333	220	112	424	282	131	526	345
3	24	44	35	38	81	62	49	132	96	62	199	139	82	275	189	97	363	248	114	463	317	134	575	386
8	1	22	40	27	35	72	48	49	114	76	64	176	109	84	243	148	100	320	194	118	408	248	138	507	303
2	23	44	32	36	80	57	51	128	90	66	195	129	86	269	175	103	356	230	121	454	294	141	564	358
3	24	47	36	37	87	64	53	139	101	67	210	145	88	290	198	105	384	258	123	492	330	143	612	402
10	1	22	43	28	34	78	50	49	123	78	65	189	113	89	257	154	106	341	200	125	436	257	146	542	314
2	23	47	33	36	86	59	51	136	93	67	206	134	91	282	182	109	374	238	128	479	305	149	596	372
3	24	50	37	37	92	67	52	146	104	69	220	150	94	303	205	111	402	268	131	515	342	152	642	417
15	1	21	50	30	33	89	53	47	142	83	64	220	120	88	298	163	110	389	214	134	493	273	162	609	333
2	22	53	35	35	96	63	49	153	99	66	235	142	91	320	193	112	419	253	137	532	323	165	658	394
3	24	55	40	36	102	71	51	163	111	68	248	160	93	339	218	115	445	286	140	565	365	167	700	444
20	1	21	54	31	33	99	56	46	157	87	62	246	125	86	334	171	107	436	224	131	552	285	158	681	347
2	22	57	37	34	105	66	48	167	104	64	259	149	89	354	202	110	463	265	134	587	339	161	725	414
3	23	60	42	35	110	74	50	176	116	66	271	168	91	371	228	113	486	300	137	618	383	164	764	466
30	1	20	62	33	31	113	59	45	181	93	60	288	134	83	391	182	103	512	238	125	649	305	151	802	372
2	21	64	39	33	118	70	47	190	110	62	299	158	85	408	215	105	535	282	129	679	360	155	840	439
3	22	66	44	34	123	79	48	198	124	64	309	178	88	423	242	108	555	317	132	706	405	158	874	494
COMMON VENT CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H) (feet)
	TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER (D)—inches
4	5	6	7	8	9	10
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT

6	92	81	65	140	116	103	204	161	147	309	248	200	404	314	260	547	434	335	672	520	410
8	101	90	73	155	129	114	224	178	163	339	275	223	444	348	290	602	480	378	740	577	465
10	110	97	79	169	141	124	243	194	178	367	299	242	477	377	315	649	522	405	800	627	495
15	125	112	91	195	164	144	283	228	206	427	352	280	556	444	365	753	612	465	924	733	565
20	136	123	102	215	183	160	314	255	229	475	394	310	621	499	405	842	688	523	1,035	826	640
30	152	138	118	244	210	185	361	297	266	547	459	360	720	585	470	979	808	605	1,209	975	740
50	167	153	134	279	244	214	421	353	310	641	547	423	854	706	550	1,164	977	705	1,451	1,188	860

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

TABLE G2428.3(2) [504.3(2)]

TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT

Number of Appliances	Two or more
Appliances Type	Category I
Appliances Vent Connection	Single-wall metal connector
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)
	CONNECTOR
RISE (R) (feet)
	SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER—(D) inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	1	NA	NA	26	NA	NA	46	NA	NA	71	NA	NA	102	207	223	140	262	293	183	325	373	234	447	463	286
2	NA	NA	31	NA	NA	55	NA	NA	85	168	182	123	215	251	167	271	331	219	334	422	281	458	524	344
3	NA	NA	34	NA	NA	62	121	131	95	175	198	138	222	273	188	279	361	247	344	462	316	468	574	385
8	1	NA	NA	27	NA	NA	48	NA	NA	75	NA	NA	106	226	240	145	285	316	191	352	403	244	481	502	299
2	NA	NA	32	NA	NA	57	125	126	89	184	193	127	234	266	173	293	353	228	360	450	292	492	560	355
3	NA	NA	35	NA	NA	64	130	138	100	191	208	144	241	287	197	302	381	256	370	489	328	501	609	400
10	1	NA	NA	28	NA	NA	50	119	121	77	182	186	110	240	253	150	302	335	196	372	429	252	506	534	308
2	NA	NA	33	84	85	59	124	134	91	189	203	132	248	278	183	311	369	235	381	473	302	517	589	368
3	NA	NA	36	89	91	67	129	144	102	197	217	148	257	299	203	320	398	265	391	511	339	528	637	413
15	1	NA	NA	29	79	87	52	116	138	81	177	214	116	238	291	158	312	380	208	397	482	266	556	596	324
2	NA	NA	34	83	94	62	121	150	97	185	230	138	246	314	189	321	411	248	407	522	317	568	646	387
3	NA	NA	39	87	100	70	127	160	109	193	243	157	255	333	215	331	438	281	418	557	360	579	690	437
20	1	49	56	30	78	97	54	115	152	84	175	238	120	233	325	165	306	425	217	390	538	276	546	664	336
2	52	59	36	82	103	64	120	163	101	182	252	144	243	346	197	317	453	259	400	574	331	558	709	403
3	55	62	40	87	107	72	125	172	113	190	264	164	252	363	223	326	476	294	412	607	375	570	750	457
30	1	47	60	31	77	110	57	112	175	89	169	278	129	226	380	175	296	497	230	378	630	294	528	779	358
2	51	62	37	81	115	67	117	185	106	177	290	152	236	397	208	307	521	274	389	662	349	541	819	425
3	54	64	42	85	119	76	122	193	120	185	300	172	244	412	235	316	542	309	400	690	394	555	855	482
COMMON VENT CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H) (feet)
	TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER—(D) inches
4	5	6	7	8	9	10
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT

6	NA	78	64	NA	113	99	200	158	144	304	244	196	398	310	257	541	429	332	665	515	407
8	NA	87	71	NA	126	111	218	173	159	331	269	218	436	342	285	592	473	373	730	569	460
10	NA	94	76	163	137	120	237	189	174	357	292	236	467	369	309	638	512	398	787	617	487
15	121	108	88	189	159	140	275	221	200	416	343	274	544	434	357	738	599	456	905	718	553
20	131	118	98	208	177	156	305	247	223	463	383	302	606	487	395	824	673	512	1,013	808	626
30	145	132	113	236	202	180	350	286	257	533	446	349	703	570	459	958	790	593	1,183	952	723
50	159	145	128	268	233	208	406	337	296	622	529	410	833	686	535	1,139	954	689	1,418	1,157	838

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

TABLE G2428.3(3) [504.3(3)]

MASONRY CHIMNEY

Number of Appliances	Two or more
Appliances Type	Category I
Appliances Vent Connection	Type B double-wall connector
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)
	CONNECTOR
RISE (R) (feet)
	TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER—(D) inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	1	24	33	21	39	62	40	52	106	67	65	194	101	87	274	141	104	370	201	124	479	253	145	599	319
2	26	43	28	41	79	52	53	133	85	67	230	124	89	324	173	107	436	232	127	562	300	148	694	378
3	27	49	34	42	92	61	55	155	97	69	262	143	91	369	203	109	491	270	129	633	349	151	795	439
8	1	24	39	22	39	72	41	55	117	69	71	213	105	94	304	148	113	414	210	134	539	267	156	682	335
2	26	47	29	40	87	53	57	140	86	73	246	127	97	350	179	116	473	240	137	615	311	160	776	394
3	27	52	34	42	97	62	59	159	98	75	269	145	99	383	206	119	517	276	139	672	358	163	848	452
10	1	24	42	22	38	80	42	55	130	71	74	232	108	101	324	153	120	444	216	142	582	277	165	739	348
2	26	50	29	40	93	54	57	153	87	76	261	129	103	366	184	123	498	247	145	652	321	168	825	407
3	27	55	35	41	105	63	58	170	100	78	284	148	106	397	209	126	540	281	147	705	366	171	893	463
15	1	24	48	23	38	93	44	54	154	74	72	277	114	100	384	164	125	511	229	153	658	297	184	824	375
2	25	55	31	39	105	55	56	174	89	74	299	134	103	419	192	128	558	260	156	718	339	187	900	432
3	26	59	35	41	115	64	57	189	102	76	319	153	105	448	215	131	597	292	159	760	382	190	960	486
20	1	24	52	24	37	102	46	53	172	77	71	313	119	98	437	173	123	584	239	150	752	312	180	943	397
2	25	58	31	39	114	56	55	190	91	73	335	138	101	467	199	126	625	270	153	805	354	184	1,011	452
3	26	63	35	40	123	65	57	204	104	75	353	157	104	493	222	129	661	301	156	851	396	187	1,067	505
COMMON VENT CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H) (feet)
	MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches)
12	19	28	38	50	63	78	113
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT

6	NA	74	25	NA	119	46	NA	178	71	NA	257	103	NA	351	143	NA	458	188	NA	582	246	1,041	853	NA
8	NA	80	28	NA	130	53	NA	193	82	NA	279	119	NA	384	163	NA	501	218	724	636	278	1,144	937	408
10	NA	84	31	NA	138	56	NA	207	90	NA	299	131	NA	409	177	606	538	236	776	686	302	1,226	1,010	454
15	NA	NA	36	NA	152	67	NA	233	106	NA	334	152	523	467	212	682	611	283	874	781	365	1,374	1,156	546
20	NA	NA	41	NA	NA	75	NA	250	122	NA	368	172	565	508	243	742	668	325	955	858	419	1,513	1,286	648
30	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	270	137	NA	404	198	615	564	278	816	747	381	1,062	969	496	1,702	1,473	749
50	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	620	328	879	831	461	1,165	1,089	606	1,905	1,692	922

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

TABLE G2428.3(4) [504.3(4)]

MASONRY CHIMNEY

Number of Appliances	Two or more
Appliances Type	Category I
Appliances Vent Connection	Single-wall connector
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)
	CONNECTOR
RISE (R) (feet)
	SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER (D)—inches
3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT	FAN	NAT
Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max	Min	Max	Max
6	1	NA	NA	21	NA	NA	39	NA	NA	66	179	191	100	231	271	140	292	366	200	362	474	252	499	594	316
2	NA	NA	28	NA	NA	52	NA	NA	84	186	227	123	239	321	172	301	432	231	373	557	299	509	696	376
3	NA	NA	34	NA	NA	61	134	153	97	193	258	142	247	365	202	309	491	269	381	634	348	519	793	437
8	1	NA	NA	21	NA	NA	40	NA	NA	68	195	208	103	250	298	146	313	407	207	387	530	263	529	672	331
2	NA	NA	28	NA	NA	52	137	139	85	202	240	125	258	343	177	323	465	238	397	607	309	540	766	391
3	NA	NA	34	NA	NA	62	143	156	98	210	264	145	266	376	205	332	509	274	407	663	356	551	838	450
10	1	NA	NA	22	NA	NA	41	130	151	70	202	225	106	267	316	151	333	434	213	410	571	273	558	727	343
2	NA	NA	29	NA	NA	53	136	150	86	210	255	128	276	358	181	343	489	244	420	640	317	569	813	403
3	NA	NA	34	97	102	62	143	166	99	217	277	147	284	389	207	352	530	279	430	694	363	580	880	459
15	1	NA	NA	23	NA	NA	43	129	151	73	199	271	112	268	376	161	349	502	225	445	646	291	623	808	366
2	NA	NA	30	92	103	54	135	170	88	207	295	132	277	411	189	359	548	256	456	706	334	634	884	424
3	NA	NA	34	96	112	63	141	185	101	215	315	151	286	439	213	368	586	289	466	755	378	646	945	479
20	1	NA	NA	23	87	99	45	128	167	76	197	303	117	265	425	169	345	569	235	439	734	306	614	921	347
2	NA	NA	30	91	111	55	134	185	90	205	325	136	274	455	195	355	610	266	450	787	348	627	986	443
3	NA	NA	35	96	119	64	140	199	103	213	343	154	282	481	219	365	644	298	461	831	391	639	1,042	496
COMMON VENT CAPACITY
VENT
HEIGHT
(H)
(feet)	MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches)
12	19	28	38	50	63	78	113
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU/H
FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT
	FAN
+FAN
	FAN
+NAT
	NAT
+NAT

6	NA	NA	25	NA	118	45	NA	176	71	NA	255	102	NA	348	142	NA	455	187	NA	579	245	NA	846	NA
8	NA	NA	28	NA	128	52	NA	190	81	NA	276	118	NA	380	162	NA	497	217	NA	633	277	1,136	928	405
10	NA	NA	31	NA	136	56	NA	205	89	NA	295	129	NA	405	175	NA	532	234	171	680	300	1,216	1,000	450
15	NA	NA	36	NA	NA	66	NA	230	105	NA	335	150	NA	400	210	677	602	280	866	772	360	1,359	1,139	540
20	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	74	NA	247	120	NA	362	170	NA	503	240	765	661	321	947	849	415	1,495	1,264	640
30	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	135	NA	398	195	NA	558	275	808	739	377	1,052	957	490	1,682	1,447	740
50	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	612	325	NA	821	456	1,152	1,076	600	1,879	1,672	910

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 British thermal unit per hour = 0.2931 W.

G2428.3.1 (504.3.1) Vent obstructions.

These venting tables shall not be used where obstructions, as described in Section G2427.15, are installed in the venting system. The installation of vents serving listed appliances with vent dampers shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer’s instructions or in accordance with the following:

1.	The maximum capacity of the vent connector shall be determined using the NAT Max column.

2.	The maximum capacity of the vertical vent or chimney shall be determined using the FAN + NAT column where the second appliance is a fan-assisted appliance, or the NAT + NAT column where the second appliance is equipped with a draft hood.

3.	The minimum capacity shall be determined as if the appliance were a fan-assisted appliance.

3.1.	The minimum capacity of the vent connector shall be determined using the FAN Min column.

3.2.	The FAN + FAN column shall be used where the second appliance is a fan-assisted appliance, and the FAN + NAT column shall be used where the second appliance is equipped with a draft hood, to determine whether the vertical vent or chimney configuration is not permitted (NA). Where the vent configuration is NA, the vent configuration shall not be permitted and an alternative venting configuration shall be utilized.

G2428.3.2 (504.3.2) Connector length limit.

The vent connector shall be routed to the vent utilizing the shortest possible route. Except as provided in Section G2428.3.3, the maximum vent connector horizontal length shall be 11/2 feet for each inch (18 mm per mm) of connector diameter as shown in Table G2428.3.2.

TABLE G2428.3.2 (504.3.2)

MAXIMUM VENT CONNECTOR LENGTH

CONNECTOR DIAMETER
(inches)
	CONNECTOR MAXIMUM HORIZONTAL
LENGTH (feet)

3	41/2
4	6
5	71/2
6	9
7	101/2
8	12
9	131/2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

G2428.3.3 (504.3.3) Connectors with longer lengths.

Connectors with longer horizontal lengths than those listed in Section G2428.3.2 are permitted under the following conditions:

1.	The maximum capacity (FAN Max or NAT Max) of the vent connector shall be reduced 10 percent for each additional multiple of the length allowed by Section G2428.3.2. For example, the maximum length listed in Table G2428.3.2 for a 4-inch (102 mm) connector is 6 feet (1829 mm). With a connector length greater than 6 feet (1829 mm) but not exceeding 12 feet (3658 mm), the maximum capacity must be reduced by 10 percent (0.90 × maximum vent connector capacity). With a connector length greater than 12 feet (3658 mm), but not exceeding 18 feet (5486 mm), the maximum capacity must be reduced by 20 percent (0.80 × maximum vent capacity).

2.	For a connector serving a fan-assisted appliance, the minimum capacity (FAN Min) of the connector shall be determined by referring to the corresponding single-appliance table. For Type B double-wall connectors, Table G2428.2(1) shall be used. For single-wall connectors, Table G2428.2(2) shall be used. The height (H) and lateral (L) shall be measured according to the procedures for a single-appliance vent, as if the other appliances were not present.

G2428.3.4 (504.3.4) Vent connector manifold.

Where the vent connectors are combined prior to entering the vertical portion of the common vent to form a common vent manifold, the size of the common vent manifold and the common vent shall be determined by applying a 10-percent reduction (0.90 × maximum common vent capacity) to the common vent capacity part of the common vent tables. The length of the common vent connector manifold (Lm) shall not exceed 11/2 feet for each inch (18 mm per mm) of common vent connector manifold diameter (D).

G2428.3.5 (504.3.5) Common vertical vent offset.

Where the common vertical vent is offset, the maximum capacity of the common vent shall be reduced in accordance with Section G2428.3.6. The horizontal length of the common vent offset (Lo) shall not exceed 11/2 feet for each inch (18 mm per mm) of common vent diameter (D). Where multiple offsets occur in a common vent, the total horizontal length of all offsets combined shall not exceed 11/2 feet for each inch (18 mm per mm) of the common vent diameter (D).

G2428.3.6 (504.3.6) Elbows in vents.

For each elbow up to and including 45 degrees (0.79 rad) in the common vent, the maximum common vent capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each elbow greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to and including 90 degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum common vent capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 10 percent.

G2428.3.7 (504.3.7) Elbows in connectors.

The vent connector capacities listed in the common vent sizing tables include allowance for two 90-degree (1.57 rad) elbows. For each additional elbow up to and including 45 degrees (0.79 rad), the maximum vent connector capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each elbow greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to and including 90 degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum vent connector capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 10 percent.

G2428.3.8 (504.3.8) Common vent minimum size.

The cross-sectional area of the common vent shall be equal to or greater than the cross-sectional area of the largest connector.

G2428.3.9 (504.3.9) Common vent fittings.

At the point where tee or wye fittings connect to a common vent, the opening size of the fitting shall be equal to the size of the common vent. Such fittings shall not be prohibited from having reduced-size openings at the point of connection of appliance vent connectors.

G2428.3.9.1 (504.3.9.1) Tee and wye fittings.

Tee and wye fittings connected to a common gas vent shall be considered to be part of the common gas vent and shall be constructed of materials consistent with that of the common gas vent.

G2428.3.10 (504.3.10) High-altitude installations.

Sealevel input ratings shall be used when determining maximum capacity for high-altitude installation. Actual input, derated for altitude, shall be used for determining minimum capacity for high-altitude installation.

G2428.3.11 (504.3.11) Connector rise measurement.

Connector rise (R) for each appliance connector shall be measured from the draft hood outlet or flue collar to the centerline where the vent gas streams come together.

G2428.3.12 (504.3.12) Vent height measurement.

For multiple appliances all located on one floor, available total height (H) shall be measured from the highest draft hood outlet or flue collar up to the level of the outlet of the common vent.

G2428.3.13 (504.3.17) Vertical vent maximum size.

Where two or more appliances are connected to a vertical vent or chimney, the flow area of the largest section of vertical vent or chimney shall not exceed seven times the smallest listed appliance categorized vent areas, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet area unless designed in accordance with approved engineering methods.

G2428.3.14 (504.3.18) Multiple input rate appliances.

The minimum vent connector capacity (FAN Min) for appliances with more than one input rate shall be determined from the tables and shall be less than the lowest appliance input rating. The maximum vent connector capacity (FAN Max or NAT Max) for appliances with more than one input rate shall be determined from the tables and shall be greater than the highest appliance input rating.

G2428.3.15 (504.3.19) Liner system sizing and connections.

Listed, corrugated metallic chimney liner systems in masonry chimneys shall be sized by using Table G2428.3(1) or G2428.3(1) for Type B vents, with the maximum capacity reduced by 20 percent (0.80 × maximum capacity) and the minimum capacity as shown in Table G2428.3(1) or G2428.3(1). Corrugated metallic liner systems installed with bends or offsets shall have their maximum capacity further reduced in accordance with Sections G2428.3.5 and G2428.3.6. The 20-percent reduction for corrugated metallic chimney liner systems includes an allowance for one long-radius 90-degree (1.57 rad) turn at the bottom of the liner. Where double-wall connectors are required, tee and wye fittings used to connect to the common vent chimney liner shall be listed double-wall fittings. Connections between chimney liners and listed double-wall fittings shall be made with listed adapter fittings designed for such purpose.

G2428.3.16 (504.3.20) Chimney and vent location.

Tables G2428.3(1), G2428.3(2), G2428.3(3) and G2428.3(4) shall be used only for chimneys and vents not exposed to the outdoors below the roof line. A Type B vent or listed chimney lining system passing through an unused masonry chimney flue shall not be considered to be exposed to the outdoors. Where vents extend outdoors above the roof more than 5 feet (1524 mm) higher than required by Figure G2427.6.4 and where vents terminate in accordance with Section G2427.6.4, Item 2, the outdoor portion of the vent shall be enclosed as required by this section for vents not considered to be exposed to the outdoors or such venting system shall be engineered. A Type B vent shall not be considered to be exposed to the outdoors where it passes through an unventilated enclosure or chase insulated to a value of not less than R-8.

G2428.3.17 (504.3.21) Connector maximum and minimum size.

Vent connectors shall not be increased in size more than two sizes greater than the listed appliance categorized vent diameter, flue collar diameter or draft hood outlet diameter. Vent connectors for draft hood-equipped appliances shall not be smaller than the draft hood outlet diameter. Where a vent connector size(s) determined from the tables for a fan-assisted appliance(s) is smaller than the flue collar diameter, the use of the smaller size(s) shall be permitted provided that the installation complies with all of the following conditions:

1.	Vent connectors for fan-assisted appliance flue collars 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter or smaller are not reduced by more than one table size [for example, 12 inches to 10 inches (305 mm to 254 mm) is a one-size reduction] and those larger than 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter are not reduced more than two table sizes [for example, 24 inches to 20 inches (610 mm to 508 mm) is a two-size reduction].

2.	The fan-assisted appliance(s) is common vented with a draft hood-equipped appliance(s).

3.	The vent connector has a smooth interior wall.

G2428.3.18 (504.3.22) Component commingling.

Combinations of pipe sizes and combinations of single-wall and double-wall metal pipe shall be allowed within any connector run(s) or within the common vent, provided that all of the appropriate tables permit all of the desired sizes and types of pipe, as if they were used for the entire length of the subject connector or vent. Where single-wall and Type B double-wall metal pipes are used for vent connectors within the same venting system, the common vent must be sized using Table G2428.3(2) or G2428.3(4), as appropriate.

G2428.3.19 (504.3.23) Draft hood conversion accessories.

Draft hood conversion accessories for use with masonry chimneys venting listed Category I fan-assisted appliances shall be listed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for such listed accessories.

G2428.3.20 (504.3.24) Multiple sizes permitted.

Where a table permits more than one diameter of pipe to be used for a connector or vent, all of the permitted sizes shall be permitted to be used.

G2428.3.21 (504.3.25) Table interpolation.

Interpolation shall be permitted in calculating capacities for vent dimensions that fall between table entries.

G2428.3.22 (504.3.26) Extrapolation prohibited.

Extrapolation beyond the table entries shall not be permitted.

G2428.3.23 (504.3.27) Engineering calculations.

For vent heights less than 6 feet (1829 mm) and greater than shown in the tables, engineering methods shall be used to calculate vent capacities.

G2428.3.24 (504.3.28) Height entries.

Where the actual height of a vent falls between entries in the height column of the applicable table in Tables G2428.3(1) through G2428.3(4), either interpolation shall be used or the lower appliance input rating shown in the table shall be used for FAN Max and NAT Max column values and the higher appliance input rating shall be used for the FAN Min column values.

SECTION G2429 (505)
DIRECT-VENT, INTEGRAL VENT,
MECHANICAL VENT AND
VENTILATION/EXHAUST HOOD VENTING
G2429.1 (505.1) General.

The installation of direct-vent and integral vent appliances shall be in accordance with Section G2427. Mechanical venting systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section G2427.

SECTION G2430 (506)
FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEYS
G2430.1 (506.1) Listing.

Factory-built chimneys for building heating appliances producing flue gases having a temperature not greater than 1,000°F (538°C), measured at the entrance to the chimney, shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 103 and shall be installed and terminated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2430.2 (506.2) Support.

Where factory-built chimneys are supported by structural members, such as joists and rafters, such members shall be designed to support the additional load.

SECTION G2431 (601)
GENERAL
G2431.1 (601.1) Scope.

Sections G2432 through G2453 shall govern the approval, design, installation, construction, maintenance, alteration and repair of the appliances and equipment specifically identified herein.

SECTION G2432 (602)
DECORATIVE APPLIANCES FOR
INSTALLATION IN FIREPLACES
G2432.1 (602.1) General.

Decorative appliances for installation in approved solid fuel-burning fireplaces shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.60/CSA 6.26 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Manually lighted natural gas decorative appliances shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.84.

G2432.2 (602.2) Flame safeguard device.

Decorative appliances for installation in approved solid fuel-burning fireplaces, with the exception of those listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.84, shall utilize a direct ignition device, an ignitor or a pilot flame to ignite the fuel at the main burner, and shall be equipped with a flame safeguard device. The flame safeguard device shall automatically shut off the fuel supply to a main burner or group of burners when the means of ignition of such burners becomes inoperative.

G2432.3 (602.3) Prohibited installations.

Decorative appliances for installation in fireplaces shall not be installed where prohibited by Section G2406.2.

SECTION G2433 (603)
LOG LIGHTERS
G2433.1 (603.1) General.

Log lighters shall be listed in accordance with CSA 8 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2434 (604)
VENTED GAS FIREPLACES
(DECORATIVE APPLIANCES)
G2434.1 (604.1) General.

Vented gas fireplaces shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.50/CSA 2.22, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall be designed and equipped as specified in Section G2432.2.

G2434.2 (604.2) Access.

Panels, grilles and access doors that are required to be removed for normal servicing operations shall not be attached to the building.

SECTION G2435 (605)
VENTED GAS FIREPLACE HEATERS
G2435.1 (605.1) General.

Vented gas fireplace heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, shall be listed in accordance with Z21.88/CSA 2.33 and shall be designed and equipped as specified in Section G2432.2.

SECTION G2436 (608)
VENTED WALL FURNACES
G2436.1 (608.1) General.

Vented wall furnaces shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.86/CSA 2.32 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2436.2 (608.2) Venting.

Vented wall furnaces shall be vented in accordance with Section G2427.

G2436.3 (608.3) Location.

Vented wall furnaces shall be located so as not to cause a fire hazard to walls, floors, combustible furnishings or doors. Vented wall furnaces installed between bathrooms and adjoining rooms shall not circulate air from bathrooms to other parts of the building.

G2436.4 (608.4) Door swing.

Vented wall furnaces shall be located so that a door cannot swing within 12 inches (305 mm) of an air inlet or air outlet of such furnace measured at right angles to the opening. Doorstops or door closers shall not be installed to obtain this clearance.

G2436.5 (608.5) Ducts prohibited.

Ducts shall not be attached to wall furnaces. Casing extension boots shall not be installed unless listed as part of the appliance.

G2436.6 (608.6) Access.

Vented wall furnaces shall be provided with access for cleaning of heating surfaces, removal of burners, replacement of sections, motors, controls, filters and other working parts, and for adjustments and lubrication of parts requiring such attention. Panels, grilles and access doors that are required to be removed for normal servicing operations shall not be attached to the building construction.

SECTION G2437 (609)
FLOOR FURNACES
G2437.1 (609.1) General.

Floor furnaces shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.86/CSA 2.32 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2437.2 (609.2) Placement.

The following provisions apply to floor furnaces:

1.	Floors. Floor furnaces shall not be installed in the floor of any doorway, stairway landing, aisle or passageway of any enclosure, public or private, or in an exitway from any such room or space.

2.	Walls and corners. The register of a floor furnace with a horizontal warm air outlet shall not be placed closer than 6 inches (152 mm) to the nearest wall. A distance of not less than 18 inches (457 mm) from two adjoining sides of the floor furnace register to walls shall be provided to eliminate the necessity of occupants walking over the warm-air discharge. The remaining sides shall be permitted to be placed not closer than 6 inches (152 mm) to a wall. Wall-register models shall not be placed closer than 6 inches (152 mm) to a corner.

3.	Draperies. The furnace shall be placed so that a door, drapery, or similar object cannot be nearer than 12 inches (305 mm) to any portion of the register of the furnace.

4.	Floor construction. Floor furnaces shall not be installed in concrete floor construction built on grade.

5.	Thermostat. The controlling thermostat for a floor furnace shall be located within the same room or space as the floor furnace or shall be located in an adjacent room or space that is permanently open to the room or space containing the floor furnace.

G2437.3 (609.3) Bracing.

The floor around the furnace shall be braced and headed with a support framework designed in accordance with Chapter 5.

G2437.4 (609.4) Clearance.

The lowest portion of the floor furnace shall have not less than a 6-inch (152 mm) clearance from the grade level; except where the lower 6-inch (152 mm) portion of the floor furnace is sealed by the manufacturer to prevent entrance of water, the minimum clearance shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm). Where such clearances cannot be provided, the ground below and to the sides shall be excavated to form a pit under the furnace so that the required clearance is provided beneath the lowest portion of the furnace. A 12-inch (305 mm) minimum clearance shall be provided on all sides except the control side, which shall have an 18-inch (457 mm) minimum clearance.

G2437.5 (609.5) First floor installation.

Where the basement story level below the floor in which a floor furnace is installed is utilized as habitable space, such floor furnaces shall be enclosed as specified in Section G2437.6 and shall project into a nonhabitable space.

G2437.6 (609.6) Upper floor installations.

Floor furnaces installed in upper stories of buildings shall project below into nonhabitable space and shall be separated from the nonhabitable space by an enclosure constructed of noncombustible materials. The floor furnace shall be provided with access, clearance to all sides and bottom of not less than 6 inches (152 mm) and combustion air in accordance with Section G2407.

SECTION G2438 (613)
CLOTHES DRYERS
G2438.1 (613.1) General.

Clothes dryers shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.5.1/CSA 7.1 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2439 (614)
CLOTHES DRYER EXHAUST
G2439.1 (614.1) Installation.

Clothes dryers shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall convey the moisture and any products of combustion to the outside of the building.

G2439.2 (614.2) Duct penetrations.

Ducts that exhaust clothes dryers shall not penetrate or be located within any fireblocking, draftstopping or any wall, floor/ceiling or other assembly required by this code to be fire-resistance rated, unless such duct is constructed of galvanized steel or aluminum of the thickness specified in the mechanical provisions of this code and the fire-resistance rating is maintained in accordance with this code. Fire dampers shall not be installed in clothes dryer exhaust duct systems.

G2439.3 (614.4) Exhaust installation.

Exhaust ducts for clothes dryers shall terminate on the outside of the building and shall be equipped with a backdraft damper. Screens shall not be installed at the duct termination. Ducts shall not be connected or installed with sheet metal screws or other fasteners that will obstruct the flow. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not be connected to a vent connector, vent or chimney. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall not extend into or through ducts or plenums. Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall be sealed in accordance with Section M1601.4.1.

G2439.3.1 (614.4.2) Exhaust termination outlet and passageway.

The passageway of dryer exhaust duct terminals shall be undiminished in size and shall provide an open area of not less than 12.5 square inches (8065 mm2).

G2439.4 (614.5) Dryer exhaust duct power ventilators.

Domestic dryer exhaust duct power ventilators shall be listed and labeled to UL 705 for use in dryer exhaust duct systems. The dryer exhaust duct power ventilator shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2439.5 (614.7) Makeup air.

Installations exhausting more than 200 cfm (0.09 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air.

G2439.5.1 (614.7.1) Closet installation.

Where a closet is designed for the installation of a clothes dryer, an opening having an area of not less than 100 square inches (645 mm2) for makeup air shall be provided in the closet enclosure, or makeup air shall be provided by other approved means.

G2439.6 (614.8) Protection required.

Protective shield plates shall be placed where nails or screws from finish or other work are likely to penetrate the clothes dryer exhaust duct. Shield plates shall be placed on the finished face of all framing members where there is less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) between the duct and the finished face of the framing member. Protective shield plates shall be constructed of steel, shall have a minimum thickness of 0.062 inch (1.6 mm) and shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above sole plates and below top plates.

G2439.7 (614.9) Domestic clothes dryer exhaust ducts.

Exhaust ducts for domestic clothes dryers shall conform to the requirements of Sections G2439.7.1 through G2439.7.6.

G2439.7.1 (614.9.1) Material and size.

Exhaust ducts shall have a smooth interior finish and shall be constructed of metal not less than 0.016-inch (0.4 mm) in thickness. The exhaust duct size shall be 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in diameter.

G2439.7.2 (614.9.2) Duct installation.

Exhaust ducts shall be supported at 4-foot (1219 mm) intervals and secured in place. The insert end of the duct shall extend into the adjoining duct or fitting in the direction of airflow. Ducts shall not be joined with screws or similar fasteners that protrude more than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) into the inside of the duct. Where dryer exhaust ducts are enclosed in wall or ceiling cavities, such cavities shall allow the installation of the duct without deformation.

G2439.7.3 (614.9.3) Transition ducts.

Transition ducts used to connect the dryer to the exhaust duct system shall be a single length that is listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2158A. Transition ducts shall be not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) in length and shall not be concealed within construction.

G2439.7.4 (614.9.4) Duct length.

The maximum allowable exhaust duct length shall be determined by one of the methods specified in Sections G2439.7.4.1 through G2439.7.4.3.

G2439.7.4.1 (614.9.4.1) Specified length.

The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be 35 feet (10 668 mm) from the connection to the transition duct from the dryer to the outlet terminal. Where fittings are used, the maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be reduced in accordance with Table G2439.7.4.1.

TABLE G2439.7.4.1 (TABLE 614.9.4.1)

DRYER EXHAUST DUCT FITTING EQUIVALENT LENGTH

DRYER EXHAUST DUCT FITTING TYPE	EQUIVALENT LENGTH
4 inch radius mitered 45-degree elbow	2 feet 6 inches
4 inch radius mitered 90-degree elbow	5 feet
6 inch radius smooth 45-degree elbow	1 foot
6 inch radius smooth 90-degree elbow	1 foot 9 inches
8 inch radius smooth 45-degree elbow	1 foot
8 inch radius smooth 90-degree elbow	1 foot 7 inches
10 inch radius smooth 45-degree elbow	9 inches
10 inch radius smooth 90-degree elbow	1 foot 6 inches

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

G2439.7.4.2 (614.9.4.2) Manufacturer’s instructions.

The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be determined by the dryer manufacturer’s installation instructions. The code official shall be provided with a copy of the installation instructions for the make and model of the dryer. Where the exhaust duct is to be concealed, the installation instructions shall be provided to the code official prior to the concealment inspection. In the absence of fitting equivalent length calculations from the clothes dryer manufacturer, Table G2439.7.4.1 shall be utilized.

G2439.7.4.3 (614.9.4.3) Dryer exhaust duct power ventilator length.

The maximum length of the exhaust duct shall be determined by the dryer exhaust duct power ventilator manufacturer’s installation instructions.

G2439.7.5 (614.9.5) Length identification.

Where the exhaust duct equivalent length exceeds 35 feet (10 668 mm), the equivalent length of the exhaust duct shall be identified on a permanent label or tag. The label or tag shall be located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the exhaust duct connection

G2439.7.6 (614.9.6) Exhaust duct required.

Where space for a clothes dryer is provided, an exhaust duct system shall be installed.

Where the clothes dryer is not installed at the time of occupancy, the exhaust duct shall be capped at the location of the future dryer.

Exception: Where a listed condensing clothes dryer is installed prior to occupancy of the structure.

SECTION G2440 (615)
SAUNA HEATERS
G2440.1 (615.1) General.

Sauna heaters shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2440.2 (615.2) Location and protection.

Sauna heaters shall be located so as to minimize the possibility of accidental contact by a person in the room.

G2440.2.1 (615.2.1) Guards.

Sauna heaters shall be protected from accidental contact by an approved guard or barrier of material having a low coefficient of thermal conductivity. The guard shall not substantially affect the transfer of heat from the heater to the room.

G2440.3 (615.3) Access.

Panels, grilles and access doors that are required to be removed for normal servicing operations, shall not be attached to the building.

G2440.4 (615.4) Combustion and dilution air intakes.

Sauna heaters of other than the direct-vent type shall be installed with the draft hood and combustion air intake located outside the sauna room. Where the combustion air inlet and the draft hood are in a dressing room adjacent to the sauna room, there shall be provisions to prevent physically blocking the combustion air inlet and the draft hood inlet, and to prevent physical contact with the draft hood and vent assembly, or warning notices shall be posted to avoid such contact. Any warning notice shall be easily readable, shall contrast with its background and the wording shall be in letters not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) high.

G2440.5 (615.5) Combustion and ventilation air.

Combustion air shall not be taken from inside the sauna room. Combustion and ventilation air for a sauna heater not of the direct-vent type shall be provided to the area in which the combustion air inlet and draft hood are located in accordance with Section G2407.

G2440.6 (615.6) Heat and time controls.

Sauna heaters shall be equipped with a thermostat that will limit room temperature to 194°F (90°C). If the thermostat is not an integral part of the sauna heater, the heat-sensing element shall be located within 6 inches (152 mm) of the ceiling. If the heat-sensing element is a capillary tube and bulb, the assembly shall be attached to the wall or other support, and shall be protected against physical damage.

G2440.6.1 (615.6.1) Timers.

A timer, if provided to control main burner operation, shall have a maximum operating time of 1 hour. The control for the timer shall be located outside the sauna room.

G2440.7 (615.7) Sauna room.

A ventilation opening into the sauna room shall be provided. The opening shall be not less than 4 inches by 8 inches (102 mm by 203 mm) located near the top of the door into the sauna room.

SECTION G2441 (617)
POOL AND SPA HEATERS
G2441.1 (617.1) General.

Pool and spa heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.56/CSA 4.7 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2442 (618)
FORCED-AIR WARM-AIR FURNACES
G2442.1 (618.1) General.

Forced-air warm-air furnaces shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.47/CSA 2.3 or UL 795 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2442.2 (618.2) Dampers.

Volume dampers shall not be placed in the air inlet to a furnace in a manner that will reduce the required air to the furnace.

G2442.3 (618.3) Prohibited sources.

Outdoor or return air for forced-air heating and cooling systems shall not be taken from the following locations:

1.	Closer than 10 feet (3048 mm) from an appliance vent outlet, a vent opening from a plumbing drainage system or the discharge outlet of an exhaust fan, unless the outlet is 3 feet (914 mm) above the outside air inlet.

2.	Where there is the presence of objectionable odors, fumes or flammable vapors; or where located less than 10 feet (3048 mm) above the surface of any abutting public way or driveway; or where located at grade level by a sidewalk, street, alley or driveway.

3.	A hazardous or insanitary location or a refrigeration machinery room as defined in the Florida Building Code, Mechanical.

4.	A room or space, the volume of which is less than 25 percent of the entire volume served by such system. Where connected by a permanent opening having an area sized in accordance with this code, adjoining rooms or spaces shall be considered to be a single room or space for the purpose of determining the volume of such rooms or spaces.

Exception: The minimum volume requirement shall not apply where the amount of return air taken from a room or space is less than or equal to the amount of supply air delivered to such room or space.

5.	A room or space containing an appliance where such a room or space serves as the sole source of return air.

Exceptions: This shall not apply where:

1.	The appliance is a direct-vent appliance or an appliance not requiring a vent in accordance with Section G2425.8.

2.	The room or space complies with the following requirements:

2.1.	The return air shall be taken from a room or space having a volume exceeding 1 cubic foot for each 10 Btu/h (9.6 L/W) of combined input rating of all fuel-burning appliances therein.

2.2.	The volume of supply air discharged back into the same space shall be approximately equal to the volume of return air taken from the space.

2.3.	Return-air inlets shall not be located within 10 feet (3048 mm) of a draft hood in the same room or space or the combustion chamber of any atmospheric burner appliance in the same room or space.

3.	Rooms or spaces containing solid fuel-burning appliances, provided that return-air inlets are located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from the firebox of such appliances.

6.	A closet, bathroom, toilet room, kitchen, garage, boiler room, furnace room or unconditioned attic.

Exceptions:

1.	Where return air intakes are located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from cooking appliances and serve only the kitchen area, taking return air from a kitchen area shall not be prohibited.

2.	Dedicated forced air systems serving only a garage shall not be prohibited from obtaining return air from the garage.

7.	A crawl space by means of direct connection to the return side of a forced-air system. Transfer openings in the crawl space enclosure shall not be prohibited.

G2442.4 (618.4) Screen.

Required outdoor air inlets shall be covered with a screen having 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) openings.

G2442.5 (618.5) Return-air limitation.

Return air from one dwelling unit shall not be discharged into another dwelling unit.

G2442.6 (618.6) Furnace plenums and air ducts.

Where a furnace is installed so that supply ducts carry air circulated by the furnace to areas outside of the space containing the furnace, the return air shall be handled by a duct(s) sealed to the furnace casing and terminating outside of the space containing the furnace.

SECTION G2443 (619)
CONVERSION BURNERS
G2443.1 (619.1) Conversion burners.

The installation of conversion burners shall conform to ANSI Z21.8.

SECTION G2444 (620)
UNIT HEATERS
G2444.1 (620.1) General.

Unit heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z83.8/CSA 2.6 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2444.2 (620.2) Support.

Suspended-type unit heaters shall be supported by elements that are designed and constructed to accommodate the weight and dynamic loads. Hangers and brackets shall be of noncombustible material.

G2444.3 (620.3) Ductwork.

Ducts shall not be connected to a unit heater unless the heater is listed for such installation.

G2444.4 (620.4) Clearance.

Suspended-type unit heaters shall be installed with clearances to combustible materials of not less than 18 inches (457 mm) at the sides, 12 inches (305 mm) at the bottom and 6 inches (152 mm) above the top where the unit heater has an internal draft hood or 1 inch (25 mm) above the top of the sloping side of the vertical draft hood.

Floor-mounted-type unit heaters shall be installed with clearances to combustible materials at the back and one side only of not less than 6 inches (152 mm). Where the flue gases are vented horizontally, the 6-inch (152 mm) clearance shall be measured from the draft hood or vent instead of the rear wall of the unit heater. Floor-mounted-type unit heaters shall not be installed on combustible floors unless listed for such installation.

Clearances for servicing all unit heaters shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

Exception: Unit heaters listed for reduced clearance shall be permitted to be installed with such clearances in accordance with their listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2445 (621)
UNVENTED ROOM HEATERS
G2445.1 (621.1) General.

Unvented room heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.11.2 and shall be installed in accordance with the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use.

One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit.

G2445.3 (621.3) Input rating.

Unvented room heaters shall not have an input rating in excess of 40,000 Btu/h (11.7 kW).

G2445.4 (621.4) Prohibited locations.

The location of unvented room heaters shall comply with Section G2406.2.

G2445.5 (621.5) Room or space volume.

The aggregate input rating of all unvented appliances installed in a room or space shall not exceed 20 Btu/h per cubic foot (207 W/m3) of volume of such room or space. Where the room or space in which the appliances are installed is directly connected to another room or space by a doorway, archway or other opening of comparable size that cannot be closed, the volume of such adjacent room or space shall be permitted to be included in the calculations.

G2445.6 (621.6) Oxygen-depletion safety system.

Unvented room heaters shall be equipped with an oxygen-depletion-sensitive safety shutoff system. The system shall shut off the gas supply to the main and pilot burners when the oxygen in the surrounding atmosphere is depleted to the percent concentration specified by the manufacturer, but not lower than 18 percent. The system shall not incorporate field adjustment means capable of changing the set point at which the system acts to shut off the gas supply to the room heater.

G2445.7 (621.7) Unvented decorative room heaters.

An unvented decorative room heater shall not be installed in a factory-built fireplace unless the fireplace system has been specifically tested, listed and labeled for such use in accordance with UL 127.

G2445.7.1 (621.7.1) Ventless firebox enclosures.

Ventless firebox enclosures used with unvented decorative room heaters shall be listed as complying with ANSI Z21.91.

SECTION G2446 (622)
VENTED ROOM HEATERS
G2446.1 (622.1) General.

Vented room heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.86/CSA 2.32, shall be designed and equipped as specified in Section G2432.2 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION G2447 (623)
COOKING APPLIANCES
G2447.1 (623.1) Cooking appliances.

Cooking appliances that are designed for permanent installation, including ranges, ovens, stoves, broilers, grills, fryers, griddles, hot plates and barbecues, shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.1 or ANSI Z21.58/CSA 1.6 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2447.2 (623.2) Prohibited location.

Cooking appliances designed, tested, listed and labeled for use in commercial occupancies shall not be installed within dwelling units or within any area where domestic cooking operations occur.

Exception: Appliances that are also listed as domestic cooking appliances.

➡

G2447.3 (623.3) Domestic appliances.

Cooking appliances installed within dwelling units and within areas where domestic cooking operations occur shall be listed and labeled as household-type appliances for domestic use.

G2447.4 (623.4) Range installation.

Ranges installed on combustible floors shall be set on their own bases or legs and shall be installed with clearances of not less than that shown on the label.

G2447.5 (623.7) Vertical clearance above cooking top.

Household cooking appliances shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less than 30 inches (760 mm) to combustible material and metal cabinets. A minimum clearance of 24 inches (610 mm) is permitted where one of the following is installed:

1.	The underside of the combustible material or metal cabinet above the cooking top is protected with not less than 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) insulating millboard covered with sheet metal not less than 0.0122 inch (0.3 mm) thick.

2.	A metal ventilating hood constructed of sheet metal not less than 0.0122 inch (0.3 mm) thick is installed above the cooking top with a clearance of not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) between the hood and the underside of the combustible material or metal cabinet. The hood shall have a width not less than the width of the appliance and shall be centered over the appliance.

3.	A listed cooking appliance or microwave oven is installed over a listed cooking appliance and in compliance with the terms of the manufacturer’s installation instructions for the upper appliance.

SECTION G2448 (624)
WATER HEATERS
G2448.1 (624.1) General.

Water heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.10.1/CSA 4.1 or ANSI Z21.10.3/CSA 4.3 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements.

The requirements for water heaters relative to sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code.

G2448.2 (624.2) Water heaters utilized for space heating.

Water heaters utilized both to supply potable hot water and provide hot water for space-heating applications shall be listed and labeled for such applications by the manufacturer and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and this code.

SECTION G2449 (627)
AIR-CONDITIONING APPLIANCES
G2449.1 (627.1) General.

Gas-fired air-conditioning appliances shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.40.1/CSA 2.91 or ANSI Z21.40.2/CSA 2.92 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2449.2 (627.2) Independent piping.

Gas piping serving heating appliances shall be permitted to also serve cooling appliances where such heating and cooling appliances cannot be operated simultaneously (see Section G2413).

G2449.3 (627.3) Connection of gas engine-powered air conditioners.

To protect against the effects of normal vibration in service, gas engines shall not be rigidly connected to the gas supply piping.

G2449.4 (627.6) Installation.

Air conditioning appliances shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Unless the appliance is listed for installation on a combustible surface such as a floor or roof, or unless the surface is protected in an approved manner, the appliance shall be installed on a surface of noncombustible construction with noncombustible material and surface finish, and combustible material shall not be against the underside thereof.

SECTION G2450 (628)
ILLUMINATING APPLIANCES
G2450.1 (628.1) General.

Illuminating appliances shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.42 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2450.2 (628.2) Mounting on buildings.

Illuminating appliances designed for wall or ceiling mounting shall be securely attached to substantial structures in such a manner that they are not dependent on the gas piping for support.

G2450.3 (628.3) Mounting on posts.

Illuminating appliances designed for post mounting shall be securely and rigidly attached to a post. Posts shall be rigidly mounted. The strength and rigidity of posts greater than 3 feet (914 mm) in height shall be at least equivalent to that of a 21/2-inch-diameter (64 mm) post constructed of 0.064-inch-thick (1.6 mm) steel or a 1-inch (25 mm) Schedule 40 steel pipe. Posts 3 feet (914 mm) or less in height shall not be smaller than a 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) Schedule 40 steel pipe. Drain openings shall be provided near the base of posts where there is a possibility of water collecting inside them.

G2450.4 (628.4) Appliance pressure regulators.

Where an appliance pressure regulator is not supplied with an illuminating appliance and the service line is not equipped with a service pressure regulator, an appliance pressure regulator shall be installed in the line to the illuminating appliance. For multiple installations, one regulator of adequate capacity shall be permitted to serve more than one illuminating appliance.

SECTION G2451 (630)
INFRARED RADIANT HEATERS
G2451.1 (630.1) General.

Infrared radiant heaters shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z83.19 or Z83.20 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

G2451.2 (630.2) Support.

Infrared radiant heaters shall be fixed in a position independent of gas and electric supply lines. Hangers and brackets shall be of noncombustible material.

SECTION G2452 (631)
BOILERS
G2452.1 (631.1) Standards.

Boilers shall be listed in accordance with the requirements of ANSI Z21.13/CSA 4.9 or UL 795. If applicable, the boiler shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of ASME CSD-1 and as applicable, the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sections I, II, IV, V and IX and NFPA 85.

G2452.2 (631.2) Installation.

In addition to the requirements of this code, the installation of boilers shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Operating instructions of a permanent type shall be attached to the boiler. Boilers shall have all controls set, adjusted and tested by the installer. A complete control diagram together with complete boiler operating instructions shall be furnished by the installer. The manufacturer’s rating data and the nameplate shall be attached to the boiler.

G2452.3 (631.3) Clearance to combustible material.

Clearances to combustible materials shall be in accordance with Section G2409.4.

➡

SECTION G2453 (635)
OUTDOOR DECORATIVE APPLIANCES
G2453.1 (635.1) General.

Permanently fixed-in-place outdoor decorative appliances shall be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.97 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-25]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 25
PLUMBING ADMINISTRATION
SECTION P2501
GENERAL
P2501.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall establish the general administrative requirements applicable to plumbing systems and inspection requirements of this code.

P2501.2 Application.

In addition to the general administration requirements of Chapter 1, the administrative provisions of this chapter shall also apply to the plumbing requirements of Chapters 25 through 33.

SECTION P2502
EXISTING PLUMBING SYSTEMS
P2502.1 Existing building sewers and building drains.

Where the entire sanitary drainage system of an existing building is replaced, existing building drains under concrete slabs and existing building sewers that will serve the new system shall be internally examined to verify that the piping is sloping in the correct direction, is not broken, is not obstructed and is sized for the drainage load of the new plumbing drainage system to be installed.

P2502.2 Additions, alterations or repairs.

Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to any plumbing system shall conform to that required for a new plumbing system without requiring the existing plumbing system to comply with the requirements of this code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe, insanitary or overloaded.

Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing plumbing systems shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacement are not hazardous and are approved.

SECTION P2503
INSPECTION AND TESTS
P2503.1 Inspection required.

New plumbing work and parts of existing systems affected by new work or alterations shall be inspected by the building official to ensure compliance with the requirements of this code.

P2503.2 Concealment.

A plumbing or drainage system, or part thereof, shall not be covered, concealed or put into use until it has been tested, inspected and approved by the building official.

P2503.3 Responsibility of permittee.

Test equipment, materials and labor shall be furnished by the permittee.

P2503.4 Building sewer testing.

The building sewer shall be tested by insertion of a test plug at the point of connection with the public sewer, completely filling the building sewer with water from the lowest to the highest point thereof. The test pressure shall not decrease during a period of not less than 15 minutes. The building sewer shall be watertight at all points.

A forced sewer test shall consist of pressurizing the piping to a pressure of not less than 5 psi (34.5 kPa) greater than the pump rating and maintaining such pressure for not less than 15 minutes. The forced sewer shall be watertight at all points.

P2503.5 Drain, waste and vent systems testing.

Rough-in and finished plumbing installations of drain, waste and vent systems shall be tested in accordance with Sections P2503.5.1 and P2503.5.2.

P2503.5.1 Rough plumbing.

DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water, air for piping systems other than plastic, or by a vacuum of air for plastic piping systems, without evidence of leakage. The test shall be applied to the drainage system in its entirety or in sections after rough-in piping has been installed, as follows:

1.	Water test. Each section shall be filled with water to a point not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the highest fitting connection in that section, or to the highest point in the completed system. Water shall be held in the section under test for a period of 15 minutes. The system shall prove leak free by visual inspection.

2.	Air test. The portion under test shall be maintained at a gauge pressure of 5 pounds per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) or 10 inches of mercury column (34 kPa). This pressure shall be held without introduction of additional air for a period of 15 minutes.

3.	Vacuum Test. The portion under test shall be evacuated of air by a vacuum type pump to achieve a uniform gauge pressure of -5 pounds per square inch or a negative 10-inches of mercury column (-34 kPa). This pressure shall be held without the removal of additional air for a period of 15 minutes.

P2503.5.2 Finished plumbing.

After the plumbing fixtures have been set and their traps filled with water, their connections shall be tested and proved gas tight or watertight as follows:

1.	Water tightness. Each fixture shall be filled and then drained. Traps and fixture connections shall be proven water tight by visual inspection.

2.	Gas tightness. Where required by the local administrative authority, a final test for gas tightness of the DWV system shall be made by the smoke or peppermint test as follows:

2.1.	Smoke test. Introduce a pungent, thick smoke into the system. When the smoke appears at vent terminals, such terminals shall be sealed and a pressure equivalent to a 1-inch water column (249 Pa) shall be applied and maintained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes.

2.2.	Peppermint test. Introduce 2 ounces (59 mL) of oil of peppermint into the system. Add 10 quarts (9464 mL) of hot water and seal the vent terminals. The odor of peppermint shall not be detected at any trap or other point in the system.

P2503.6 Shower liner test.

Where shower floors and receptors are made water tight by the application of materials required by Section P2709.2, the completed liner installation shall be tested. The pipe from the shower drain shall be plugged water tight for the test. The floor and receptor area shall be filled with potable water to a depth of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured at the threshold. Where a threshold of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in height does not exist, a temporary threshold shall be constructed to retain the test water in the lined floor or receptor area to a level not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in depth measured at the threshold. The water shall be retained for a test period of not less than 15 minutes and there shall not be evidence of leakage.

P2503.7 Water-supply system testing.

Upon completion of the water-supply system or a section of it, the system or portion completed shall be tested and proved tight under a water pressure of not less than the working pressure of the system or, for piping systems other than plastic, by an air test of not less than 50 psi (345 kPa). This pressure shall be held for not less than 15 minutes. The water used for tests shall be obtained from a potable water source.

Exception: For PEX piping systems, testing with a compressed gas shall be an alternative to hydrostatic testing where compressed air or other gas pressure testing is specifically authorized by all of the manufacturer’s instructions for the PEX pipe and fittings products installed at the time the system is being tested, and compressed air or other gas testing is not otherwise prohibited by applicable codes, laws or regulations outside of this code.

P2503.8 Inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices.

Inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices shall comply with Sections P2503.8.1 and P2503.8.2.

P2503.8.1 Inspections.

Inspections shall be made of backflow prevention assemblies to determine whether they are operable.

P2503.8.2 Testing.

Reduced pressure principle, double check, double check detector and pressure vacuum breaker backflow preventer assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation and immediately after repairs or relocation.

P2503.9 Test gauges.

Gauges used for testing shall be as follows:

1.	Tests requiring a pressure of 10 psi or less shall utilize a testing gauge having increments of 0.10 psi (0.69 kPa) or less.

2.	Tests requiring a pressure higher than 10 psi (0.69 kPa) but less than or equal to 100 psi (690 kPa) shall use a testing gauge having increments of 1 psi (6.9 kPa) or less.

3.	Tests requiring a pressure higher than 100 psi (690 kPa) shall use a testing gauge having increments of 2 psi (14 kPa) or less.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-26]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 26
GENERAL PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION P2601
GENERAL
P2601.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the installation of plumbing not specifically covered in other chapters applicable to plumbing systems. The installation of plumbing, appliances, equipment and systems not addressed by this code shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

P2601.2 Connections to drainage system.

Plumbing fixtures, drains, appurtenances and appliances used to receive or discharge liquid wastes or sewage shall be directly connected to the sanitary drainage system of the building or premises, in accordance with the requirements of this code. This section shall not be construed to prevent indirect waste connections where required by the code.

Exception: Bathtubs, showers, lavatories, clothes washers and laundry trays shall not be required to discharge to the sanitary drainage system where such fixtures discharge to systems complying with Sections P2910 and P2911.

P2601.3 Flood hazard areas.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), plumbing fixtures, drains, and appliances shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

SECTION P2602
INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY AND
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
P2602.1 General.

The water-distribution and drainage system of any building or premises where plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water supply or sewer system, respectively, if available. Where either a public watersupply or sewer system, or both, are not available, or connection to them is not feasible, an individual water supply or individual (private) sewage-disposal system, or both, shall be provided. Individual water supplies shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable state and local laws. Where such laws do not address all of the requirements set forth in NGWA-01, individual water supplies shall comply with NGWA-01 for those requirements not addressed by state and local laws.

P2602.2 Flood-resistant installation.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1):

1.	Water supply systems shall be designed and constructed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.

2.	Pipes for sewage disposal systems shall be designed and constructed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.

SECTION P2603
STRUCTURAL AND PIPING PROTECTION
P2603.1 General.

In the process of installing or repairing any part of a plumbing and drainage installation, the finished floors, walls, ceilings, tile work or any other part of the building or premises that must be changed or replaced shall be left in a safe structural condition in accordance with the requirements of the building portion of this code.

P2603.2 Drilling and notching.

Wood-framed structural members shall not be drilled, notched or altered in any manner except as provided in Sections R502.2, R602.3, R802.7 and R802.7.1. Holes in load-bearing members of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall be made only in accordance with Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1. In accordance with the provisions in Sections R505.1, R603.1 and R804.1, cutting and notching of flanges and lips of load-bearing members of cold-formed steel light-frame construction shall be prohibited. Structural insulated panels (SIPs) shall be drilled and notched or altered in accordance with the provisions of Section R613.7.

P2603.2.1 Protection against physical damage.

In concealed locations, where piping, other than cast-iron or galvanized steel, is installed through holes or notches in studs, joists, rafters or similar members less than 11/4 inches (31.8 mm) from the nearest edge of the member, the pipe shall be protected by steel shield plates. Such shield plates shall have a thickness of not less than 0.0575 inch (1.463 mm) (No. 16 Gage). Such plates shall cover the area of the pipe where the member is notched or bored, and shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above sole plates and below top plates.

P2603.3 Protection against corrosion.

Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing material thickness shall be 0.010 inch (0.254 mm) and shall be made of plastic. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing.

Exception: Sleeving is not required for installation of CPVC into concrete or similar material.

P2603.3.1 Penetration.

Protective sleeves around piping penetrating concrete slab-on-grade floors shall not be of cellulose-containing materials. If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite protection, the sleeve shall have a maximum wall thickness of 0.010 inch, and be sealed within the slab using a noncorrosive clamping device to eliminate the annular space between the pipe and the sleeve. No termiticides shall be applied inside the sleeve.

P2603.4 Pipes through foundation walls.

A pipe that passes through a foundation wall shall be provided with a relieving arch, or a pipe sleeve shall be built into the foundation wall. The sleeve shall be two pipe sizes greater than the pipe passing through the wall.

P2603.5 Freezing.

In localities having a winter design temperature of 32°F (0°C) or lower as shown in Table R301.2(1) of this code, a water, soil or waste pipe shall not be installed outside of a building, in exterior walls, in attics or crawl spaces, or in any other place subjected to freezing temperature unless adequate provision is made to protect it from freezing by insulation or heat or both. Water service pipe shall be installed not less than 12 inches (305 mm) deep and not less than 6 inches (152 mm) below the frost line.

P2603.5.1 Sewer depth.

Reserved.

SECTION P2604
TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING
P2604.1 Trenching and bedding.

Where trenches are excavated such that the bottom of the trench forms the bed for the pipe, solid and continuous load-bearing support shall be provided between joints. Where over-excavated, the trench shall be backfilled to the proper grade with compacted earth, sand, fine gravel or similar granular material. Piping shall not be supported on rocks or blocks at any point. Rocky or unstable soil shall be over-excavated by two or more pipe diameters and brought to the proper grade with suitable compacted granular material.

P2604.2 Water service and building sewer in same trench.

Where the water service piping and building sewer piping is installed in same trench, the installation shall be in accordance with Section P2906.4.1.

P2604.3 Backfilling.

Backfill shall be free from discarded construction material and debris. Backfill shall be free from rocks, broken concrete and frozen chunks until the pipe is covered by not less than 12 inches (305 mm) of tamped earth. Backfill shall be placed evenly on both sides of the pipe and tamped to retain proper alignment. Loose earth shall be carefully placed in the trench in 6-inch (152 mm) layers and tamped in place.

P2604.4 Protection of footings.

Trenching installed parallel to footings and walls shall not extend into the bearing plane of a footing or wall. The upper boundary of the bearing plane is a line that extends downward, at an angle of 45 degrees from horizontal, from the outside bottom edge of the footing or wall.

SECTION P2605
SUPPORT
P2605.1 General.

Piping shall be supported in accordance with the following:

1.	Piping shall be supported to ensure alignment and prevent sagging, and allow movement associated with the expansion and contraction of the piping system.

2.	Piping in the ground shall be laid on a firm bed for its entire length, except where support is otherwise provided.

3.	Hangers and anchors shall be of sufficient strength to maintain their proportional share of the weight of pipe and contents and of sufficient width to prevent distortion to the pipe. Hangers and strapping shall be of approved material that will not promote galvanic action.

4.	Where horizontal pipes 4 inches (102 mm) and larger convey drainage or waste, and where a pipe fitting changes the flow direction greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad), rigid bracing or other rigid support arrangements shall be installed to resist movement of the upstream pipe in a direction opposite the pipe flow. A change of flow direction into a vertical pipe shall not require the upstream pipe to be braced.

5.	Piping shall be supported at distances not to exceed those indicated in Table P2605.1.

TABLE P2605.1

PIPING SUPPORT

PIPING MATERIAL	MAXIMUM HORIZONTAL
SPACING (feet)
	MAXIMUM VERTICAL
SPACING (feet)

ABS pipe	4	10b
Aluminum tubing	10	15
Cast-iron pipe	5a	15
Copper or copper alloy pipe	12	10
Copper or copper alloy tubing (11/4 inches in diameter and smaller)	6	10
Copper or copper alloy tubing (11/2 inches in diameter and larger)	10	10
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) pipe, 1 inch and smaller	2.67 (32 inches)	10b
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) pipe, 11/4 inch and larger	4	10b
Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pipe	2.67 (32 inches)	4b
CPVC pipe or tubing (1 inch in diameter and smaller)	3	10b
CPVC pipe or tubing (11/4 inches in diameter and larger)	4	10b
Lead pipe	Continuous	4
PB pipe or tubing	2.67 (32 inches)	4
Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) pipe, 1 inch and smaller	2.67 (32 inches)	10b
Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) pipe, 11/4 inch and larger	4	10b
Polypropylene (PP) pipe or tubing (1 inch and smaller)	2.67 (32 inches)	10b
Polypropylene (PP) pipe or tubing (11/4 inches and larger)	4	10b
PVC pipe	4	10b
Stainless steel drainage systems	10	10b
Steel pipe	12	15

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	The maximum horizontal spacing of cast-iron pipe hangers shall be increased to 10 feet where 10-foot lengths of pipe are installed.

b.	For sizes 2 inches and smaller, a guide shall be installed midway between required vertical supports. Such guides shall prevent pipe movement in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the pipe.

SECTION P2606
PENETRATIONS
P2606.1 Sealing of annular spaces.

The annular space between the outside of a pipe and the inside of a pipe sleeve or between the outside of a pipe and an opening in a building envelope wall, floor, or ceiling assembly penetrated by a pipe shall be sealed with caulking material or foam sealant or closed with a gasketing system. The caulking material, foam sealant or gasketing system shall be designed for the conditions at the penetration location and shall be compatible with the pipe, sleeve and building materials in contact with the sealing materials. Annular spaces created by pipes penetrating fire-resistance-rated assemblies or membranes of such assemblies shall be sealed or closed in accordance with the building portion of this code.

SECTION P2607
WATERPROOFING OF OPENINGS
P2607.1 Pipes penetrating roofs.

Where a pipe penetrates a roof, a flashing of lead, copper, galvanized steel or an approved elastomeric material shall be installed in manner that prevents water entry into the building. Counterflashing into the opening of pipe serving as a vent terminal shall not reduce the required internal cross-sectional area of the vent pipe to less than the internal cross-sectional area of one pipe size smaller.

P2607.2 Pipes penetrating exterior walls.

Where a pipe penetrates an exterior wall, a waterproof seal shall be made on the exterior of the wall by one of the following methods:

1.	A waterproof sealant applied at the joint between the wall and the pipe.

2.	A flashing of an approved elastomeric material.

SECTION P2608
WORKMANSHIP
P2608.1 General.

Valves, pipes and fittings shall be installed in correct relationship to the direction of the flow. Burred ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe.

SECTION P2609
MATERIALS EVALUATION AND LISTING
P2609.1 Identification.

Each length of pipe and each pipe fitting, trap, fixture, material and device utilized in a plumbing system shall bear the identification of the manufacturer and any markings required by the applicable referenced standards. Nipples created from the cutting and threading of approved pipe shall not be required to be identified.

Exception: Where the manufacturer identification cannot be marked on pipe fittings and pipe nipples because of the small size of such fittings, the identification shall be printed on the item packaging or on documentation provided with the item.

P2609.2 Installation of materials.

Materials used shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards under which the materials are accepted and approved. In the absence of such installation procedures, the manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed. Where the requirements of referenced standards or manufacturer’s instructions do not conform to the minimum provisions of this code, the provisions of this code shall apply.

P2609.3 Plastic pipe, fittings and components.

Plastic pipe, fittings and components shall be third-party certified as conforming to NSF 14.

P2609.4 Third-party certification.

Plumbing products and materials required by the code to be in compliance with a referenced standard shall be listed by a third-party certification agency as complying with the referenced standards. Products and materials shall be identified in accordance with Section P2609.1.

P2609.5 Water supply systems.

Water service pipes, water distribution pipes and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, faucets and appurtenances used to dispense water intended for human ingestion shall be evaluated and listed as conforming to the requirements of NSF 61.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-27]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 27
PLUMBING FIXTURES
SECTION P2701
FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND FIXTURE FITTINGS
P2701.1 Quality of fixtures.

Plumbing fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings shall have smooth impervious surfaces, shall be free from defects, shall not have concealed fouling surfaces, and shall conform to the standards indicated in Table P2701.1 and elsewhere in this code.

TABLE P2701.1

PLUMBING FIXTURES, FAUCETS AND FIXTURE FITTINGS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Air gap fittings for use with plumbing fixtures, appliances and appurtenances	ASME A112.1.3
Bathtub/whirlpool pressure-sealed doors	ASME A112.19.15
Diverters for faucets with hose spray, anti-syphon type, residential application	ASTM A212.18.1/CSA B125.1
Enameled cast-iron plumbing fixtures	ASME A112.19.1M/CSA B45.2
Floor drains	ASME A112.6.3
Framing-affixed supports for off-the-floor water closets with concealed tanks	ASME A112.6.2
Hose connection vacuum breaker	ASSE 1052
Hot water dispensers, household storage type, electrical	ASSE 1023
Household disposers	ASSE 1008
Hydraulic performance for water closets and urinals	ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1
Individual automatic compensating valves for individual fixture fittings	ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1
Individual shower control valves anti-scald	ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16
Macerating toilet systems and related components	ASME A112.3.4/CSA B45.9
Nonvitreous ceramic plumbing fixtures	ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1
Plastic bathtub units	CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124, ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1
Plastic lavatories	CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124
Plastic shower receptors and shower stall	CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124
Plastic sinks	CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124
Plastic water closet bowls and tanks	CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124
Plumbing fixture fittings	ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1
Plumbing fixture waste fittings	ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2, ASTM F409
Porcelain-enameled formed steel plumbing fixtures	ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2
Pressurized flushing devices for plumbing fixtures	ASSE 1037, CSA B125.3
Specification for copper sheet and strip for building construction	ASTM B370
Stainless steel plumbing fixtures	ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4
Suction fittings for use in whirlpool bathtub appliances	ASME A112.19.7 /CSA B45.10
Temperature-actuated, flow reduction valves to individual fixture fittings	ASSE 1062
Thermoplastic accessible and replaceable plastic tube and tubular fittings	ASTM F409
Trench drains	ASME A112.6.3
Trim for water closet bowls, tanks and urinals	ASME A112.19.5/CSA B45.15
Vacuum breaker wall hydrant-frost-resistant, automatic-draining type	ASSE 1019
Vitreous china plumbing fixtures	ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1
Wall-mounted and pedestal-mounted, adjustable and pivoting lavatory and sink
carrier systems
	ASME A112.19.12
Water closet flush tank fill valves	ASSE 1002, CSA B125.3
Whirlpool bathtub appliances	ASME A112.19.7 /CSA B45.10
SECTION P2702
FIXTURE ACCESSORIES
P2702.1 Plumbing fixtures.

Plumbing fixtures, other than water closets, shall be provided with approved strainers.

Exception: Hub drains receiving only clear water waste and standpipes shall not require strainers.

P2702.2 Waste fittings.

Waste fittings shall conform to ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2, ASTM F409 or shall be made from pipe and pipe fittings complying with any of the standards indicated in Tables P3002.1(1) and P3002.3.

P2702.3 Plastic tubular fittings.

Plastic tubular fittings shall conform to ASTM F409 as indicated in Table P2701.1.

P2702.4 Carriers for wall-hung water closets.

Carriers for wall-hung water closets shall conform to ASME A112.6.2.

SECTION P2703
TAIL PIECES
P2703.1 Minimum size.

Fixture tail pieces shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter for sinks, dishwashers, laundry tubs, bathtubs and similar fixtures, and not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) in diameter for bidets, lavatories and similar fixtures.

SECTION P2704
ACCESS TO SLIP-JOINT CONNECTIONS
P2704.1 Slip joints.

Slip-joint connections shall be installed only for tubular waste piping and only between the trap outlet of a fixture and the connection to the drainage piping. Slip-joint connections shall be made with an approved sealing gasket. Slip-joint connections shall be accessible. Such access shall provide an opening that is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in its smallest dimension.

SECTION P2705
INSTALLATION
P2705.1 General.

The installation of fixtures shall conform to the following:

1.	Floor-outlet or floor-mounted fixtures shall be secured to the drainage connection and to the floor, where so designed, by screws, bolts, washers, nuts and similar fasteners of copper, copper alloy or other corrosion-resistant material.

2.	Wall-hung fixtures shall be rigidly supported so that strain is not transmitted to the plumbing system.

3.	Where fixtures come in contact with walls and floors, the contact area shall be water tight.

4.	Plumbing fixtures shall be usable.

5.	Water closets, lavatories and bidets. A water closet, lavatory or bidet shall not be set closer than 15 inches (381 mm) from its center to any side wall, partition or vanity or closer than 30 inches (762 mm) center-to-center between adjacent fixtures. There shall be a clearance of not less than 21 inches (533 mm) in front of a water closet, lavatory or bidet to any wall, fixture or door.

6.	The location of piping, fixtures or equipment shall not interfere with the operation of windows or doors.

7.	In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), plumbing fixtures shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R322.1.6.

8.	Integral fixture-fitting mounting surfaces on manufactured plumbing fixtures or plumbing fixtures constructed on site, shall meet the design requirements of ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 or ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4.

SECTION P2706
WASTE RECEPTORS
P2706.1 General.

For other than hub drains that receive only clear-water waste and standpipes, a removable strainer or basket shall cover the waste outlet of waste receptors. Waste receptors shall not be installed in concealed spaces. Waste receptors shall not be installed in plenums, attics, crawl spaces or interstitial spaces above ceilings and below floors. Waste receptors shall be readily accessible.

P2706.1.1 Hub drains.

Hub drains shall be in the form of a hub or a pipe that extends not less than 1 inch (25 mm) above a water-impervious floor.

P2706.1.2 Standpipes.

Standpipes shall extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) and not greater than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the trap weir.

P2706.1.2.1 Laundry tray connection to standpipe.

Where a laundry tray waste line connects into a standpipe for an automatic clothes washer drain, the standpipe shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the standpipe trap weir and shall extend above the flood level rim of the laundry tray. The outlet of the laundry tray shall not be greater than 30 inches (762 mm) horizontally from the standpipe trap.

P2706.2 Prohibited waste receptors.

Plumbing fixtures that are used for washing or bathing shall not be used to receive the discharge of indirect waste piping.

Exceptions:

1.	A kitchen sink trap is acceptable for use as a receptor for a dishwasher.

2.	A laundry tray is acceptable for use as a receptor for a clothes washing machine.

SECTION P2707
DIRECTIONAL FITTINGS
P2707.1 Directional fitting required.

Approved directional-type branch fittings shall be installed in fixture tailpieces receiving the discharge from food-waste disposer units or dishwashers.

SECTION P2708
SHOWERS
P2708.1 General.

Shower compartments shall have not less than 900 square inches (0.6 m2) of interior cross-sectional area. Shower compartments shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in minimum dimension measured from the finished interior dimension of the shower compartment, exclusive of fixture valves, shower heads, soap dishes, and safety grab bars or rails. The minimum required area and dimension shall be measured from the finished interior dimension at a height equal to the top of the threshold and at a point tangent to its centerline and shall be continued to a height of not less than 70 inches (1778 mm) above the shower drain outlet. Hinged shower doors shall open outward. The wall area above built-in tubs having installed shower heads and in shower compartments shall be constructed in accordance with Section R702.4. Such walls shall form a water-tight joint with each other and with either the tub, receptor or shower floor.

Exceptions:

1.	Fold-down seats shall be permitted in the shower, provided the required 900-square-inch (0.6 m2) dimension is maintained when the seat is in the folded-up position.

2.	Shower compartments having not less than 25 inches (635 mm) in minimum dimension measured from the finished interior dimension of the compartment provided that the shower compartment has a cross-sectional area of not less than 1,300 square inches (0.838 m2).

P2708.1.1 Access.

The shower compartment access and egress opening shall have a clear and unobstructed finished width of not less than 22 inches (559 mm).

P2708.2 Shower drain.

Shower drains shall have an outlet size of not less than 11/2 inches [38 mm] in diameter.

P2708.2.1 Waste fittings.

Waste fittings shall conform toASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2.

P2708.3 Water supply riser.

Water supply risers from the shower valve to the shower head outlet, whether exposed or concealed, shall be attached to the structure using support devices designed for use with the specific piping material or fittings anchored with screws.

P2708.4 Shower control valves.

Individual shower and tub/shower combination valves shall be balanced-pressure, thermostatic or combination balanced-pressure/thermostatic valves that conform to the requirements of ASSE 1016/ASME 112.1016/CSA B125.16 or ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. Shower control valves shall be rated for the flow rate of the installed shower head. Such valves shall be installed at the point of use. Shower and tub/shower combination valves required by this section shall be equipped with a means to limit the maximum setting of the valve to 120°F (49°C), which shall be field adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions to provide water at a temperature not to exceed 120ºF (49°C). In-line thermostatic valves shall not be utilized for compliance with this section.

P2708.5 Hand showers.

Hand-held showers shall conform to ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. Hand-held showers shall provide backflow protection in accordance with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 or shall be protected against backflow by a device complying with ASME A112.18.3.

SECTION P2709
SHOWER RECEPTORS
P2709.1 Construction.

Where a shower receptor has a finished curb threshold, it shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) below the sides and back of the receptor. The curb shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and not more than 9 inches (229 mm) deep when measured from the top of the curb to the top of the drain. The finished floor shall slope uniformly toward the drain not less than 1/4 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) nor more than 1/2 unit vertical per 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope) and floor drains shall be flanged to provide a water-tight joint in the floor.

P2709.2 Lining required.

The adjoining walls and floor framing enclosing on-site built-up shower receptors shall be lined with one of the following materials:

1.	Sheet lead.

2.	Sheet copper.

3.	Plastic liner material that complies with ASTM D4068 or ASTM D4551.

4.	Hot mopping in accordance with Section P2709.2.3.

5.	Sheet-applied load-bearing, bonded waterproof membranes that comply with ANSI A118.10.

The lining material shall extend not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond or around the rough jambs and not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above finished thresholds. Sheet-applied load bearing, bonded waterproof membranes shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

Exceptions:

1.	Floor surfaces under shower heads provided for rinsing laid directly on the ground are not required to comply with this section.

2.	Where a sheet-applied, load-bearing, bonded, waterproof membrane is installed as the shower lining, the membrane shall not be required to be recessed.

3.	Shower compartments where the finished shower drain is depressed a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) below the surrounding finished floor on the first floor level and the shower recess is poured integrally with the adjoining floor.

P2709.2.1 PVC sheets.

Plasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sheet shall meet the requirements of ASTM D4551. Sheets shall be joined by solvent welding in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2709.2.2 Chlorinated polyethylene (CPE) sheets.

Nonplasticized chlorinated polyethylene sheet shall meet the requirements of ASTM D4068. The liner shall be joined in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2709.2.3 Hot-mopping.

Shower receptors lined by hot mopping shall be built-up with not less than three layers of standard grade Type 15 asphalt-impregnated roofing felt. The bottom layer shall be fitted to the formed subbase and each succeeding layer thoroughly hot-mopped to that below. Corners shall be carefully fitted and shall be made strong and water tight by folding or lapping, and each corner shall be reinforced with suitable webbing hot-mopped in place. Folds, laps and reinforcing webbing shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in all directions from the corner and webbing shall be of approved type and mesh, producing a tensile strength of not less than 50 pounds per inch (893 kg/m) in either direction.

P2709.2.4 Liquid-type, trowel-applied, load-bearing, bonded waterproof materials.

Liquid-type, trowel-applied, load-bearing, bonded waterproof materials shall meet the requirements of ANSI A118.10 and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2709.3 Installation.

Lining materials shall be sloped one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) to weep holes in the subdrain by means of a smooth, solidly formed subbase, shall be properly recessed and fastened to approved backing so as not to occupy the space required for the wall covering, and shall not be nailed or perforated at any point less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) above the finished threshold.

P2709.3.1 Materials.

Lead and copper linings shall be insulated from conducting substances other than the connecting drain by 15-pound (6.80 kg) asphalt felt or its equivalent. Sheet lead liners shall weigh not less than 4 pounds per square foot (19.5 kg/m2). Sheet copper liners shall weigh not less than 12 ounces per square foot (3.7 kg/m2). Joints in lead and copper pans or liners shall be burned or silver brazed, respectively. Joints in plastic liner materials shall be joined in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2709.4 Receptor drains.

An approved flanged drain shall be installed with shower subpans or linings. The flange shall be placed flush with the subbase and be equipped with a clamping ring or other device to make a water-tight connection between the lining and the drain. The flange shall have weep holes into the drain.

P2709.4.1 Waste fittings.

Flanged drains shall conform to ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2.

SECTION P2710
SHOWER WALLS
P2710.1 Bathtub and shower spaces.

Walls in shower compartments and walls above bathtubs that have a wall-mounted showerhead shall be finished in accordance with Section R307.2.

SECTION P2711
LAVATORIES
P2711.1 Approval.

Lavatories shall conform to ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124.

P2711.2 Cultured marble lavatories.

Cultured marble vanity tops with an integral lavatory shall conform to CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124.

P2711.3 Lavatory waste outlets.

Lavatories shall have waste outlets not less than 11/4 inch (32 mm) in diameter. A strainer, pop-up stopper, crossbar or other device shall be provided to restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet.

P2711.4 Movable lavatory systems.

Movable lavatory systems shall comply with ASME A112.19.12.

SECTION P2712
WATER CLOSETS
P2712.1 Approval.

Water closets shall conform to the water consumption requirements of Section P2903.2 and shall conform to ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124. Water closets shall conform to the hydraulic performance requirements of ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1. Water closet tanks shall conform to ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124. Water closets that have an invisible seal and unventilated space or walls that are not thoroughly washed at each discharge shall be prohibited. Water closets that allow backflow of the contents of the bowl into the flush tank shall be prohibited. Water closets equipped with a dual flushing device shall comply with ASME A112.19.14.

P2712.2 Flushing devices required.

Water closets shall be provided with a flush tank, flushometer tank or flushometer valve designed and installed to supply water in sufficient quantity and flow to flush the contents of the fixture, to cleanse the fixture and refill the fixture trap in accordance with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1.

P2712.3 Water supply for flushing devices.

An adequate quantity of water shall be provided to flush and clean the fixture served. The water supply to flushing devices equipped for manual flushing shall be controlled by a float valve or other automatic device designed to refill the tank after each discharge and to completely shut off the water flow to the tank when the tank is filled to operational capacity. Provision shall be made to automatically supply water to the fixture so as to refill the trap after each flushing.

P2712.4 Flush valves in flush tanks.

Flush valve seats in tanks for flushing water closets shall be not less than 1 inch (25 mm) above the flood-level rim of the bowl connected thereto, except an approved water closet and flush tank combination designed so that when the tank is flushed and the fixture is clogged or partially clogged, the flush valve will close tightly so that water will not spill continuously over the rim of the bowl or backflow from the bowl to the tank.

P2712.5 Overflows in flush tanks.

Flush tanks shall be provided with overflows discharging to the water closet connected thereto and such overflow shall be of sufficient size to prevent flooding the tank at the maximum rate at which the tanks are supplied with water according to the manufacturer’s design conditions.

P2712.6 Access.

Parts in a flush tank shall be accessible for repair and replacement.

P2712.7 Water closet seats.

Water closets shall be equipped with seats of smooth, nonabsorbent material and shall be properly sized for the water closet bowl type.

P2712.8 Flush tank lining.

Sheet copper used for flush tank linings shall have a weight of not less than 10 ounces per square foot (3 kg/m2).

P2712.9 Electro-hydraulic water closets.

Electro-hydraulic water closets shall conform to ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1.

SECTION P2713
BATHTUBS
P2713.1 Bathtub waste outlets and overflows.

Bathtubs shall be equipped with a waste outlet that is not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter. The waste outlet shall be equipped with a water-tight stopper. Where an overflow is installed, the overflow shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter.

P2713.2 Bathtub enclosures.

Doors within a bathtub enclosure shall conform to ASME A112.19.15.

P2713.3 Bathtub and whirlpool bathtub valves.

Bathtubs and whirlpool bathtub valves shall have or be supplied by a water-temperature-limiting device that conforms to ASSE 1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70, except where such valves are combination tub/shower valves in accordance with Section P2708.4. The water-temperature-limiting device required by this section shall be equipped with a means to limit the maximum setting of the device to 120ºF (49ºC), and, where adjustable, shall be field adjusted in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions to provide hot water at a temperature not to exceed 120ºF (49ºC). Access shall be provided to water-temperature-limiting devices that conform to ASSE 10705/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70.

Exception: Access is not required for nonadjustable water-temperature-limiting devices that conform to ASSE 1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70 and are integral with a fixture fitting, provided that the fixture fitting itself can be accessed for replacement.

SECTION P2714
SINKS
P2714.1 Sink waste outlets.

Sinks shall be provided with waste outlets not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter. A strainer, crossbar or other device shall be provided to restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet.

P2714.2 Movable sink systems.

Movable sink systems shall comply with ASME A112.19.12.

SECTION P2715
LAUNDRY TUBS
P2715.1 Laundry tub waste outlet.

Each compartment of a laundry tub shall be provided with a waste outlet not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter. A strainer or crossbar shall restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet.

SECTION P2716
FOOD-WASTE DISPOSER
P2716.1 Food-waste disposer waste outlets.

Food-waste disposers shall be connected to a drain of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter.

P2716.2 Water supply required.

A sink equipped with a food-waste disposer shall be provided with a faucet.

SECTION P2717
DISHWASHING MACHINES
P2717.1 Protection of water supply.

The water supply to a dishwasher shall be protected against backflow by an air gap complying with ASME A112.1.3 or A112.1.2 that is installed integrally within the machine or a backflow preventer in accordance with Section P2902.

P2717.2 Sink and dishwasher.

The combined discharge from a dishwasher and a one- or two-compartment sink, with or without a food-waste disposer, shall be served by a trap of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in outside diameter. The dishwasher discharge pipe or tubing shall rise to the underside of the counter and be fastened or otherwise held in that position before connecting to the head of the food-waste disposer or to a wye fitting in the sink tailpiece.

SECTION P2718
CLOTHES WASHING MACHINE
P2718.1 Waste connection.

The discharge from a clothes washing machine shall be through an air break.

SECTION P2719
FLOOR DRAINS
P2719.1 Floor drains.

Floor drains shall have waste outlets not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in diameter and a removable strainer. Floor drains shall be constructed so that the drain can be cleaned. Access shall be provided to the drain inlet. Floor drains shall not be located under or have their access restricted by permanently installed appliances.

SECTION P2720
WHIRLPOOL BATHTUBS
P2720.1 Access to pump.

Access shall be provided to circulation pumps in accordance with the fixture or pump manufacturer's installation instructions. Where the manufacturer’s instructions do not specify the location and minimum size of field-fabricated access openings, an opening of not less than 12-inches by 12-inches (305 mm by 305 mm) shall be installed for access to the circulation pump. Where pumps are located more than 2 feet (610 mm) from the access opening, an opening of not less than 18 inches by 18 inches (457 mm by 457 mm) shall be installed. A door or panel shall be permitted to close the opening. The access opening shall be unobstructed and be of the size necessary to permit the removal and replacement of the circulation pump.

P2720.2 Piping drainage.

The circulation pump shall be accessibly located above the crown weir of the trap. The pump drain line shall be properly graded to ensure minimum water retention in the volute after fixture use. The circulation piping shall be installed to be self-draining.

P2720.3 Leak testing.

Leak testing and pump operation shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2720.4 Manufacturer’s instructions.

The product shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION P2721
BIDET INSTALLATIONS
P2721.1 Water supply.

The bidet shall be equipped with either an air-gap-type or vacuum-breaker-type fixture supply fitting.

P2721.2 Bidet water temperature.

The discharge water temperature from a bidet fitting shall be limited to not greater than 110°F (43°C) by a water-temperature-limiting device conforming to ASSE1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70.

SECTION P2722
FIXTURE FITTING
P2722.1 General.

Fixture supply valves and faucets shall comply with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 as indicated in Table P2701.1. Faucets and fixture fittings that supply drinking water for human ingestion shall conform to the requirements of NSF 61, Section 9. Flexible water connectors shall conform to the requirements of Section P2906.7.

P2722.2 Hot water.

Fixture fittings supplied with both hot and cold water shall be installed and adjusted so that the left-hand side of the water temperature control represents the flow of hot water when facing the outlet.

Exception: Shower and tub/shower mixing valves conforming to ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16, where the water temperature control corresponds to the markings on the device.

P2722.3 Hose-connected outlets.

Faucets and fixture fittings with hose-connected outlets shall conform to ASME A112.18.3 or ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1.

P2722.4 Individual pressure-balancing in-line valves for individual fixture fittings.

Individual pressure-balancing in-line valves for individual fixture fittings shall comply with ASSE 1066. Such valves shall be installed in an accessible location and shall not be used as a substitute for the balanced pressure, thermostatic or combination shower valves required in Section P2708.4.

P2722.5 Water closet personal hygiene devices.

Personal hygiene devices integral to water closets or water closet seats shall conform to ASME A112.4.2.

SECTION P2723
MACERATING TOILET SYSTEMS
P2723.1 General.

Macerating toilet systems shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.

P2723.2 Drain.

The size of the drain from the macerating toilet system shall be not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) in diameter.

SECTION P2724
SPECIALTY TEMPERATURE CONTROL DEVICES
AND VALVES
P2724.1 Temperature-actuated mixing valves.

Temperature-actuated mixing valves, which are installed to reduce water temperatures to defined limits, shall comply with ASSE 1017. Such valves shall be installed at the hot water source.

P2724.2 Temperature-actuated, flow-reduction devices for individual fixtures.

Temperature-actuated, flow-reduction devices, where installed for individual fixture fittings, shall conform to ASSE 1062. Such valves shall not be used as a substitute for the balanced pressure, thermostatic or combination shower valves required for showers in Section P2708.4.

SECTION P2725
NONLIQUID SATURATED TREATMENT SYSTEMS
P2725.1 General.

Materials, design, construction and performance of nonliquid saturated treatment systems shall comply with NSF 41.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-28]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 28
WATER HEATERS
SECTION P2801
GENERAL
P2801.1 Required.

Hot water shall be supplied to plumbing fixtures and plumbing appliances intended for bathing, washing or culinary purposes.

P2801.2 Drain valves.

Drain valves for emptying shall be installed at the bottom of each tank-type water heater and hot water storage tank. The drain valve inlet shall be not less than 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) nominal iron pipe size and the outlet shall be provided with a male hose thread.

P2801.3 Installation.

Water heaters shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and Chapters 20 and 24.

P2801.4 Location.

Water heaters and storage tanks shall be installed in accordance with Section M1305 and shall be located and connected to provide access for observation, maintenance, servicing and replacement.

P2801.5 Prohibited locations.

Water heaters shall be located in accordance with Chapter 20.

P2801.6 Required pan.

Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water storage tank is installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will cause damage, the tank shall be installed in a pan constructed of one of the following:

1.	Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) in thickness.

2.	Plastic not less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) in thickness.

3.	Other approved materials.

A plastic pan beneath a gas-fired water heater shall be constructed of material having a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain.

The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) deep and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) diameter. Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials indicated in Table P2906.5. Where a pan drain was not previously installed, a pan drain shall not be required for a replacement water heater installation.

P2801.6.2 Pan drain termination.

The pan drain shall extend full-size and terminate over a suitably located indirect waste receptor or shall extend to the exterior of the building and terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) and not more than 24 inches (610 mm) above the adjacent ground surface.

P2801.7 Water heaters installed in garages.

Water heaters having an ignition source shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the garage floor.

Exception: Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed as flammable vapor ignition-resistant.

P2801.8

Reserved.

SECTION P2802
SOLAR WATER HEATING SYSTEMS
P2802.1 Water temperature control.

Where heated water is discharged from a solar thermal system to a hot water distribution system, a temperature-actuated mixing valve complying with ASSE 1017 shall be installed to temper the water to a temperature of not greater than 140°F (60°C). Solar thermal systems supplying hot water for both space heating and domestic uses shall comply with Section P2803.2. A temperature-indicating device shall be installed to indicate the temperature of the water discharged from the outlet of the mixing valve. The temperature-actuated mixing valve required by this section shall not be a substitute for water temperature limiting devices required by Chapter 27 for specific fixtures.

P2802.2 Isolation valves.

Isolation valves in accordance with P2903.9.2 shall be provided on the cold water feed to the water heater. Isolation valves and associated piping shall be provided to bypass solar storage tanks where the system contains multiple storage tanks.

SECTION P2803
WATER HEATERS USED FOR SPACE HEATING
P2803.1 Protection of potable water.

Piping and components connected to a water heater for space heating applications shall be suitable for use with potable water in accordance with Chapter 29. Water heaters that will be used to supply potable water shall not be connected to a heating system or components previously used with nonpotable-water heating appliances. Chemicals for boiler treatment shall not be introduced into the water heater.

P2803.2 Temperature control.

Where a combination water heater-space heating system requires water for space heating at temperatures exceeding 140°F (60°C), a temperature-actuated mixing valve complying with ASSE 1017 shall be installed to temper the water to a temperature of not greater than 140°F (60°C) for domestic uses.

SECTION P2804
RELIEF VALVES
P2804.1 Relief valves required.

Appliances and equipment used for heating water or storing hot water shall be protected by one of the following:

1.	A separate pressure-relief valve and a separate temperature-relief valve.

2.	A combination pressure-and-temperature relief valve.

P2804.2 Rating.

Relief valves shall have a minimum rated capacity for the equipment served and shall conform to ANSI Z21.22.

P2804.3 Pressure-relief valves.

Pressure-relief valves shall have a relief rating adequate to meet the pressure conditions for the appliances or equipment protected. In tanks, they shall be installed directly into a tank tapping or in a water line close to the tank. They shall be set to open at not less than 25 psi (172 kPa) above the system pressure and not greater than 150 psi (1034 kPa). The relief-valve setting shall not exceed the rated working pressure of the tank.

P2804.4 Temperature-relief valves.

Temperature-relief valves shall have a relief rating compatible with the temperature conditions of the appliances or equipment protected. The valves shall be installed such that the temperature-sensing element monitors the water within the top 6 inches (152 mm) of the tank. The valve shall be set to open at a temperature of not greater than 210°F (99°C).

P2804.5 Combination pressure-and-temperature relief valves.

Combination pressure and temperature-relief valves shall comply with the requirements for separate pressure- and temperature-relief valves.

P2804.6 Installation of relief valves.

A check or shutoff valve shall not be installed in any of the following locations:

1.	Between a relief valve and the termination point of the relief valve discharge pipe.

2.	Between a relief valve and a tank.

3.	Between a relief valve and heating appliances or equipment.

P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge pipe.

The discharge piping serving a pressure-relief valve, temperature-relief valve or combination valve shall:

1.	Not be directly connected to the drainage system.

2.	Discharge through an air gap located in the same room as the water heater.

3.	Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap.

4.	Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment.

5.	Discharge to the floor, to the pan serving the water heater or storage tank, to a waste receptor or to the outdoors.

6.	Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage.

7.	Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants.

8.	Not be trapped.

9.	Be installed to flow by gravity.

10.	Terminate not more than 6 inches (152 mm) and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above the floor or waste receptor flood level rim.

11.	Not have a threaded connection at the end of the piping.

12.	Not have valves or tee fittings.

13.	Be constructed of those materials indicated in Section P2906.5 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1.

14.	Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief-valve outlet, where the relief-valve discharge piping is installed with insert fittings. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place.

P2804.7 Vacuum-relief valve.

Bottom fed tank-type water heaters and bottom fed tanks connected to water heaters shall have a vacuum-relief valve installed that complies with ANSI Z21.22.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-29]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 29
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
SECTION P2901
GENERAL
P2901.1 Potable water required.

Potable water shall be supplied to plumbing fixtures and plumbing appliances except where treated rainwater, treated gray water or municipal reclaimed water is supplied to water closets, urinals and trap primers. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to require signage for water closets and urinals.

P2901.2 Identification of nonpotable water systems.

Where nonpotable water systems are installed, the piping conveying the nonpotable water shall be identified either by color marking, metal tags or tape in accordance with Sections P2901.2.1 through P2901.2.2.3.

P2901.2.1 Signage required.

Nonpotable water outlets such as hose connections, open-ended pipes and faucets shall be identified with signage that reads as follows: “Nonpotable water is utilized for [application name]. CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER. DO NOT DRINK.” The words shall be legibly and indelibly printed on a tag or sign constructed of corrosion-resistant water-proof material or shall be indelibly printed on the fixture. The letters of the words shall be not less than 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) in height and in colors in contrast to the background on which they are applied. In addition to the required wordage, the pictograph shown in Figure P2901.2.1 shall appear on the required signage.

FIGURE P2901.2.1

PICTOGRAPH—DO NOT DRINK

P2901.2.2 Distribution pipe labeling and marking.

Nonpotable distribution piping shall be purple in color and shall be embossed or integrally stamped or marked with the words: “CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER— DO NOT DRINK” or the piping shall be installed with a purple identification tape or wrap. Pipe identification shall include the contents of the piping system and an arrow indicating the direction of flow. Hazardous piping systems shall contain information addressing the nature of the hazard. Pipe identification shall be repeated at intervals not exceeding 25 feet (7620 mm) and at each point where the piping passes through a wall, floor or roof. Lettering shall be readily observable within the room or space where the piping is located.

P2901.2.2.1 Color.

The color of the pipe identification shall be discernable and consistent throughout the building. The color purple shall be used to identify reclaimed, rain and gray water distribution systems.

P2901.2.2.2 Lettering size.

The size of the background color field and lettering shall comply with Table P2901.2.2.2.

TABLE P2901.2.2.2

SIZE OF PIPE IDENTIFICATION

PIPE DIAMETER
(inches)
	LENGTH OF BACKGROUND COLOR FIELD
(inches)
	SIZE OF LETTERS
(inches)

3/4 to 11/4	8	0.5
11/2 to 2	8	0.75
21/2 to 6	12	1.25
8 to 10	2	2.5
over 10	32	3.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P2901.2.2.3 Identification tape.

Where used, identification tape shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) wide and have white or black lettering on a purple field stating “CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER—DO NOT DRINK.” Identification tape shall be installed on top of nonpotable rainwater distribution pipes and fastened not greater than every 10 feet (3048 mm) to each pipe length, and run continuously the entire length of the pipe.

SECTION P2902
PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY
P2902.1 General.

A potable water supply system shall be designed and installed as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply. Connections shall not be made to a potable water supply in a manner that could contaminate the water supply or provide a cross-connection between the supply and a source of contamination except where approved backflow prevention assemblies, backflow prevention devices or other means or methods are installed to protect the potable water supply. Cross-connections between an individual water supply and a potable public water supply shall be prohibited.

P2902.2 Plumbing fixtures.

The supply lines and fittings for every plumbing fixture shall be installed so as to prevent backflow. Plumbing fixture fittings shall provide backflow protection in accordance with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1.

P2902.3 Backflow protection.

A means of protection against backflow shall be provided in accordance with Sections P2902.3.1 through P2902.3.6. Backflow prevention applications shall conform to Table P2902.3, except as specifically stated in Sections P2902.4 through P2902.5.5.

TABLE P2902.3

APPLICATION FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTERS

DEVICE	DEGREE OF HAZARDa	APPLICATIONb	APPLICABLE
STANDARDS

Backflow Prevention Assemblies
Double check backflow prevention assembly and
double check fire protection backflow
prevention assembly	Low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 3/8″ – 16″
	ASSE 1015, AWWA C510,
CSA B64.5, CSA B64.5.1

Double-check detector fire protection backflow
prevention assemblies
	Low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 2″ – 16″
	ASSE 1048
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage only Sizes 1/2″ – 2″	ASSE 1020, CSA B64.1.2
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly and reduced pressure principle fire
protection backflow prevention assembly	High or low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 3/8″ – 16″
	ASSE 1013, AWWA C511,
CSA B64.4, CSA B64.4.1

Reduced pressure detector fire protection
backflow prevention assemblies
	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage or backpressure
(Fire sprinkler systems)
	ASSE 1047
Spill-resistant vacuum breaker	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage only Sizes 1/4″ – 2″	ASSE 1056, CSA B64.1.3
Backflow Preventer Plumbing Devices
Antisiphon-type fill valves for gravity water closet
flush tanks
	High hazard	Backsiphonage only	ASSE 1002, CSA B125.3
Backflow preventer with intermediate
atmospheric vents
	Low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 1/4" – 3/8″
	ASSE 1012, CSA B64.3
Backflow preventer with intermediate
atmospheric vents and pressure-reducing valve
	Low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 1/4" – 3/8″
	ASSE 1081
Dual-check-valve-type backflow preventers	Low hazard	Backpressure or backsiphonage
Sizes 1/4″ – 1″
	ASSE 1024, CSA B64.6
Hose-connection backflow preventer	High or low hazard	Low head backpressure, rated
working pressure backpressure or
backsiphonage Sizes 1/2″ – 1″	ASSE 1052, CSA B64.2.1.1
Hose-connection vacuum breaker	High or low hazard	Low head backpressure or
backsiphonage Sizes 1/2″, 3/4″, 1″
	ASSE 1011, CSA B64.2,
B64.2.1

Laboratory faucet backflow preventer	High or low hazard	Low head backpressure and
backsiphonage
	ASSE 1035, CSA B64.7
Pipe-applied atmospheric-type vacuum breaker	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage only Sizes 1/4″ – 4″	ASSE 1001, CSA B64.1.1
Vacuum breaker wall hydrants, frost-resistant,
automatic-draining type
	High or low hazard	Low head backpressure or
backsiphonage Sizes 3/4″ – 1″
	ASSE 1019, CSA B64.2.2
Other Means Or Methods
Air gap	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage only	ASME A112.1.2
Air gap fittings for use with plumbing fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances
	High or low hazard	Backsiphonage or backpressure	ASME A112.1.3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Low hazard—See Pollution (Section R202). High hazard—See Contamination (Section R202).

b.	See Backpressure (Section R202). See Backpressure, Low Head (Section R202). See Backsiphonage (Section R202).

P2902.3.1 Air gaps.

Air gaps shall comply with ASME A112.1.2 and air gap fittings shall comply with ASME A112.1.3. An air gap shall be measured vertically from the lowest end of a water outlet to the flood level rim of the fixture or receptor into which the water outlets discharges to the floor. The required air gap shall be not less than twice the diameter of the effective opening of the outlet and not less than the values specified in Table P2902.3.1.

TABLE P2902.3.1

MINIMUM AIR GAPS

FIXTURE	MINIMUM AIR GAP
Away from a walla
(inches)
	Close to a wall
(inches)

Effective openings greater than 1 inch	Two times the diameter of the
effective opening
	Three times the diameter of the
effective opening

Lavatories and other fixtures with effective opening not
greater than 1/2 inch in diameter
	1	1.5
Over-rim bath fillers and other fixtures with effective
openings not greater than 1 inch in diameter
	2	3
Sink, laundry trays, gooseneck back faucets and other
fixtures with effective openings not greater than 3/4 inch in diameter
	1.5	2.5

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Applicable where walls or obstructions are spaced from the nearest inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single wall, or a distance greater than four times the diameter of the effective opening for two intersecting walls.

P2902.3.2 Atmospheric-type vacuum breakers.

Atmospheric-type vacuum breakers shall conform to ASSE 1001 or CSA B64.1.1. Hose-connection vacuum breakers shall conform to ASSE 1011, ASSE 1019, ASSE 1035, ASSE 1052, CSA B64.2, CSA B64.2.1, CSA B64.2.1.1, CSA B64.2.2 or CSA B64.7. Both types of vacuum breakers shall be installed with the outlet continuously open to the atmosphere. The critical level of the atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be set at not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the highest elevation of downstream piping and the flood level rim of the fixture or device.

P2902.3.3 Backflow preventer with intermediate atmospheric vent.

Backflow preventers with intermediate atmospheric vents shall conform to ASSE 1012 , ASSE 1081 or CSA B64.3. These devices shall be permitted to be installed where subject to continuous pressure conditions. These devices shall be prohibited as a means of protection where any hazardous chemical additives are introduced downstream of the device. The relief opening shall discharge by air gap and shall be prevented from being submerged.

P2902.3.4 Pressure vacuum breaker assemblies.

Pressure vacuum breaker assemblies shall conform to ASSE 1020 or CSA B64.1.2. Spill-resistant vacuum breaker assemblies shall comply with ASSE 1056. These assemblies are designed for installation under continuous pressure conditions where the critical level is installed at the required height. The critical level of a pressure vacuum breaker and a spill-resistant vacuum breaker assembly shall be set at not less than 12 inches (304 mm) above the highest elevation of downstream piping and the flood level rim of the fixture or device. Pressure vacuum breaker assemblies shall not be installed in locations where spillage could cause damage to the structure.

P2902.3.5 Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies.

Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies and reduced pressure principle fire protection backflow prevention assemblies shall conform to ASSE 1013, AWWA C511, CSA B64.4 or CSA B64.4.1. Reduced pressure detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies shall conform to ASSE 1047. These devices shall be permitted to be installed where subject to continuous pressure conditions. The relief opening shall discharge by air gap and shall be prevented from being submerged.

P2902.3.6 Double check backflow prevention assemblies.

Double check backflow prevention assemblies shall conform to ASSE 1015, CSA B64.5, CSA B64.5.1 or AWWA C510. Double check detector fire protection backflow prevention assemblies shall conform to ASSE 1048. These assemblies shall be capable of operating under continuous pressure conditions.

P2902.3.7 Dual check backflow preventer.

Dual check backflow preventers shall conform with ASSE 1024 or CSA B64.6.

P2902.4 Protection of potable water outlets.

Potable water openings and outlets shall be protected by an air gap, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, an atmospheric vent, an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker assembly or a hose connection backflow preventer.

P2902.4.1 Fill valves.

Flush tanks shall be equipped with an antisiphon fill valve conforming to ASSE 1002 or CSA B125.3. The critical level of the fill valve shall be located not less than 1 inch (25 mm) above the top of the flush tank overflow pipe.

P2902.4.2 Deck-mounted and integral vacuum breakers.

Approved deck-mounted or equipment-mounted vacuum breakers and faucets with integral atmospheric vacuum breakers or spill–resistant vacuum breaker assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the requirements for labeling. The critical level of the breakers and assemblies shall be located at not less than 1 inch (25 mm) above the flood level rim.

P2902.4.3 Hose connection.

Sillcocks, hose bibbs, wall hydrants and other openings with a hose connection shall be protected by an atmospheric-type or pressure-type vacuum breaker, a pressure vacuum breaker assembly or a permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.

Exceptions:

1.	This section shall not apply to water heater and boiler drain valves that are provided with hose connection threads and that are intended only for tank or vessel draining.

2.	This section shall not apply to water supply valves intended for connection of clothes washing machines where backflow prevention is otherwise provided or is integral with the machine.

P2902.5 Protection of potable water connections.

Connections to the potable water shall conform to Sections P2902.5.1 through P2902.5.5.

P2902.5.1 Connections to boilers.

Where chemicals will not be introduced into a boiler, the potable water supply to the boiler shall be protected from the boiler by a backflow preventer with an intermediate atmospheric vent complying with ASSE 1012, ASSE 1081 or CSA B64.3. Where chemicals will be introduced into a boiler, the potable water supply to the boiler shall be protected from the boiler by an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly complying with ASSE 1013, CSA B64.4 or AWWA C511.

P2902.5.2 Heat exchangers.

Heat exchangers using an essentially toxic transfer fluid shall be separated from the potable water by double-wall construction. An air gap open to the atmosphere shall be provided between the two walls. Single-wall construction heat exchangers shall be used only where an essentially nontoxic transfer fluid is utilized.

P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems.

The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric vacuum breaker, a pressure vacuum breaker assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Valves shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

P2902.5.4 Connections to automatic fire sprinkler systems.

The potable water supply to automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be protected against backflow by a double check backflow prevention assembly, a double check fire protection backflow prevention assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a reduced pressure principle fire protection backflow prevention assembly.

Exception: Where systems are installed as a portion of the water distribution system in accordance with the requirements of this code and are not provided with a fire department connection, backflow protection for the water supply system shall not be required.

P2902.5.4.1 Additives or nonpotable source.

Where systems contain chemical additives or antifreeze, or where systems are connected to a nonpotable secondary water supply, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a reduced pressure principle fire protection backflow prevention assembly. Where chemical additives or antifreeze is added to only a portion of an automatic fire sprinkler or standpipe system, the reduced pressure principle fire protection backflow preventer shall be permitted to be located so as to isolate that portion of the system.

P2902.5.5 Solar thermal systems.

Where a solar thermal system heats potable water to supply a potable hot water distribution or any other type of heating system, the solar thermal system shall be in accordance with Section P2902.5.5.1, P2902.5.5.2 or P2902.5.5.3 as applicable.

P2902.5.5.1 Indirect systems.

Water supplies of any type shall not be connected to the solar heating loop of an indirect solar thermal hot water heating system. This requirement shall not prohibit the presence of inlets or outlets on the solar heating loop for the purposes of servicing the fluid in the solar heating loop.

P2902.5.5.2 Direct systems for potable water distribution systems.

Where a solar thermal system directly heats potable water for a potable water distribution system, the pipe, fittings, valves and other components that are in contact with the potable water in the system shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 29.

P2902.5.5.3 Direct systems for other than potable water distribution systems.

Where a solar thermal system directly heats water for a system other than a potable water distribution system, a potable water supply connected to such system shall be protected by a backflow preventer with an intermediate atmospheric vent complying with ASSE 1012. Where a solar thermal system directly heats chemically treated water for a system other than a potable water distribution system, a potable water supply connected to such system shall be protected by a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly complying with ASSE 1013.

P2902.6 Location of backflow preventers.

Access shall be provided to backflow preventers as specified by the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

P2902.6.1 Outdoor enclosures for backflow prevention devices.

Outdoor enclosures for backflow prevention devices shall comply with ASSE 1060.

P2902.6.2 Protection of backflow preventers.

Backflow preventers shall not be located in areas subject to freezing except where they can be removed by means of unions, or are protected by heat, insulation or both.

P2902.6.3 Relief port piping.

The termination of the piping from the relief port or air gap fitting of the backflow preventer shall discharge to an approved indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors where it will not cause damage or create a nuisance. The indirect waste receptor and drainage piping shall be sized to drain the maximum discharge flow rate from the relief port as published by the backflow preventer manufacturer.

SECTION P2903
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
P2903.1 Water supply system design criteria.

The water service and water distribution systems shall be designed and sized for peak demand, using values shown in Table P2903.1.

TABLE P2903.1

FLOW RATE AND PRESSURES FOR DESIGNING PIPING SYSTEMS

FIXTURE SUPPLY
OUTLET SERVING
	FLOW RATE (gpm)	FLOW PRESSURE (psi)
Bathtub, balanced-pressure, thermostatic or combination
balanced-pressure/thermostatic mixing valve
	4	20
Bidet, thermostatic mixing valve	2	20
Dishwasher	2.75	8
Laundry tray	4	8
Lavatory	0.8	8
Shower, balanced-pressure, thermostatic or combination
balanced-pressure/thermostatic mixing valve
	2.5a	20
Sillcock, hose bibb	5	8
Sink	1.75	8
Water closet, flushometer tank	1.6	20
Water closet, tank, close coupled	3	20
Water closet, tank, one-piece	6	20

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

a.	Where the shower mixing valve manufacturer indicates a lower flow rating for the mixing valve, the lower value shall be applied.

P2903.2 Maximum flow and water consumption.

The maximum water consumption flow rates and quantities for plumbing fixtures and fixture fittings shall be in accordance with Table P2903.2.

TABLE P2903.2

MAXIMUM FLOW RATES AND CONSUMPTION FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGSb

PLUMBING FIXTURE
OR FIXTURE FITTING
	MAXIMUM FLOW RATE
OR QUANTITY

Lavatory faucet	2.2 gpm at 60 psi
Shower heada	2.5 gpm at 80 psi
Sink faucet	2.2 gpm at 60 psi
Water closet	1.6 gallons per flushing cycle

For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	A handheld shower spray shall be considered a shower head.

b.	Consumption tolerances shall be determined from referenced standards.

P2903.3 Minimum pressure.

Where the water pressure supplied by the public water main or an individual water supply system is insufficient to provide for the minimum pressures and quantities for the plumbing fixtures in the building, the pressure shall be increased by means of an elevated water tank, a hydropneumatic pressure booster system or a water pressure booster pump.

P2903.3.1 Maximum pressure.

The static water pressure shall be not greater than 80 psi (551 kPa). Where the main pressure exceeds 80 psi (551 kPa), an approved pressure-reducing valve conforming to ASSE 1003 or CSA B356 shall be installed on the domestic water branch main or riser at the connection to the water service pipe.

P2903.3.2 Pumps handling drinking water.

Pumps intended to supply drinking water shall conform to NSF 61.

P2903.4 Thermal expansion control.

A means for controlling increased pressure caused by thermal expansion shall be installed where required in accordance with Sections P2903.4.1 and P2903.4.2.

P2903.4.1 Pressure-reducing valve.

For water service system sizes up to and including 2 inches (51 mm), a device for controlling pressure shall be installed where, because of thermal expansion, the pressure on the downstream side of a pressure-reducing valve exceeds the pressure-reducing valve setting.

P2903.4.2 Backflow prevention device or check valve.

Where a backflow prevention device, check valve or other device is installed on a water supply system using storage water heating equipment such that thermal expansion causes an increase in pressure, a device for controlling pressure shall be installed.

P2903.5 Water hammer.

The flow velocity of the water distribution system shall be controlled to reduce the possibility of water hammer. A water-hammer arrestor shall be installed where quick-closing valves are utilized. Water-hammer arrestors shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Water-hammer arrestors shall conform to ASSE 1010.

P2903.6 Determining water supply fixture units.

Supply loads in the building water distribution system shall be determined by total load on the pipe being sized, in terms of water supply fixture units (w.s.f.u.), as shown in Table P2903.6, and gallon per minute (gpm) flow rates [see Table P2903.6(1)]. For fixtures not listed, choose a w.s.f.u. value of a fixture with similar flow characteristics.

TABLE P2903.6

WATER-SUPPLY FIXTURE-UNIT VALUES FOR VARIOUS PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE GROUPS

TYPE OF FIXTURES OR GROUP OF FIXTURES	WATER-SUPPLY FIXTURE-UNIT VALUE (w.s.f.u.)
Hot	Cold	Combined
Bathtub (with/without overhead shower head)	1.0	1.0	1.4
Clothes washer	1.0	1.0	1.4
Dishwasher	1.4	—	1.4
Full-bath group with bathtub (with/without shower head) or shower stall	1.5	2.7	3.6
Half-bath group (water closet and lavatory)	0.5	2.5	2.6
Hose bibb (sillcock)a	—	2.5	2.5
Kitchen group (dishwasher and sink with or without food-waste disposer)	1.9	1.0	2.5
Kitchen sink	1.0	1.0	1.4
Laundry group (clothes washer standpipe and laundry tub)	1.8	1.8	2.5
Laundry tub	1.0	1.0	1.4
Lavatory	0.5	0.5	0.7
Shower stall	1.0	1.0	1.4
Water closet (tank type)	—	2.2	2.2

For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

a.	The fixture unit value 2.5 assumes a flow demand of 2.5 gpm, such as for an individual lawn sprinkler device. If a hose bibb or sill cock will be required to furnish a greater flow, the equivalent fixture-unit value may be obtained from this table or Table P2903.6(1).

TABLE P2903.6(1)

CONVERSIONS FROM WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNIT TO GALLON PER MINUTE FLOW RATES

SUPPLY SYSTEMS PREDOMINANTLY FOR FLUSH TANKS	SUPPLY SYSTEMS PREDOMINANTLY FOR FLUSHOMETER VALVES
Load	Demand	Load	Demand
(Water supply fixture units)	(Gallons per minute)	(Cubic feet per
minute)
	(Water supply fixture
units)
	(Gallons per minute)	(Cubic feet per minute)
1	3.0	0.04104	—	—	—
2	5.0	0.0684	—	—	—
3	6.5	0.86892	—	—	—
4	8.0	1.06944	—	—	—
5	9.4	1.256592	5	15.0	2.0052
6	10.7	1.430376	6	17.4	2.326032
7	11.8	1.577424	7	19.8	2.646364
8	12.8	1.711104	8	22.2	2.967696
9	13.7	1.831416	9	24.6	3.288528
10	14.6	1.951728	10	27.0	3.60936
11	15.4	2.058672	11	27.8	3.716304
12	16.0	2.13888	12	28.6	3.823248
13	16.5	2.20572	13	29.4	3.930192
14	17.0	2.27256	14	30.2	4.037136
15	17.5	2.3394	15	31.0	4.14408
16	18.0	2.90624	16	31.8	4.241024
17	18.4	2.459712	17	32.6	4.357968
18	18.8	2.513184	18	33.4	4.464912
19	19.2	2.566656	19	34.2	4.571856
20	19.6	2.620128	20	35.0	4.6788
25	21.5	2.87412	25	38.0	5.07984
30	23.3	3.114744	30	42.0	5.61356
35	24.9	3.328632	35	44.0	5.88192
40	26.3	3.515784	40	46.0	6.14928
45	27.7	3.702936	45	48.0	6.41664
50	29.1	3.890088	50	50.0	6.684

For SI: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.4719 L/s.

P2903.7 Size of water-service mains, branch mains and risers.

The size of the water service pipe shall be not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) diameter. The size of water service mains, branch mains and risers shall be determined from the water supply demand [gpm (L/m)], available water pressure [psi (kPa)] and friction loss caused by the water meter and developed length of pipe [feet (m)], including equivalent length of fittings. The size of each water distribution system shall be determined according to design methods conforming to acceptable engineering practice, such as those methods in Appendix P and shall be approved by the code official.

P2903.8 Gridded and parallel water distribution systems.

Hot water and cold water manifolds installed with parallel-connected individual distribution lines and cold water manifolds installed with gridded distribution lines to each fixture or fixture fitting shall be designed in accordance with Sections P2903.8.1 through P2903.8.5. Gridded systems for hot water distribution systems shall be prohibited.

P2903.8.1 Sizing of manifolds.

Manifolds shall be sized in accordance with Table P2903.8.1. Total gallons per minute is the demand for all outlets.

TABLE P2903.8.1

MANIFOLD SIZING

PLASTIC	METALLIC
Nominal Size ID
(inches)
	Maximuma
gpm
	Nominal Size ID
(inches)
	Maximuma
gpm

3/4	17	3/4	11
1	29	1	20
11/4	46	11/4	31
11/2	66	11/2	44

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 foot per second = 0.3048 m/s.

Note: See Table P2903.6(1) for w.s.f.u and Table 2903.6(1) for gallon-per-minute (gpm) flow rates.

a.	Based on velocity limitation: plastic-12 fps; metal-8 fps.

P2903.8.2 Minimum size.

Where the developed length of the distribution line is 60 feet (18 288 mm) or less, and the available pressure at the meter is not less than 40 pounds per square inch (276 kPa), the size of individual distribution lines shall be not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) diameter. Certain fixtures such as one-piece water closets and whirlpool bathtubs shall require a larger size where specified by the manufacturer. If a water heater is fed from the end of a cold water manifold, the manifold shall be one size larger than the water heater feed.

P2903.8.3 Support and protection.

Plastic piping bundles shall be secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and supported in accordance with Section P2605. Bundles that have a change in direction equal to or greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) shall be protected from chafing at the point of contact with framing members by sleeving or wrapping.

P2903.8.4 Valving.

Fixture valves, when installed, shall be located either at the fixture or at the manifold. Valves installed at the manifold shall be labeled indicating the fixture served.

P2903.8.5 Hose bibb bleed.

A readily accessible air bleed shall be installed in hose bibb supplies at the manifold or at the hose bibb exit point.

P2903.9 Valves.

Valves shall be installed in accordance with Sections P2903.9.1 through P2903.9.5.

P2903.9.1 Service valve.

Each dwelling unit shall be provided with an accessible main shutoff valve near the entrance of the water service. The valve shall be of a full-open type having nominal restriction to flow, with provision for drainage such as a bleed orifice or installation of a separate drain valve. Additionally, the water service shall be valved at the curb or lot line in accordance with local requirements.

P2903.9.2 Water heater valve.

A readily accessible full-open valve shall be installed in the cold-water supply pipe to each water heater at or near the water heater.

P2903.9.3 Fixture valves and access.

Shutoff valves shall be required on each fixture supply pipe to each plumbing appliance and to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers. Valves serving individual plumbing fixtures, plumbing appliances, risers and branches shall be accessible.

P2903.9.4 Valve requirements.

Valves shall be compatible with the type of piping material installed in the system. Valves shall conform to one of the standards listed in Table P2903.9.4 or shall be approved. Valves intended to supply drinking water shall meet the requirements of NSF 61.

TABLE P2903.9.4

VALVES

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic	ASME A112.4.14, ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1,
ASTM F1970, CSA B125.3, MSS SP-122

Copper or copper alloy	ASME A112.4.14, ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1,
ASME B16.34, CSA B125.3, MSS SP-67, MSS SP-80, MSS SP-110,
MSS SP-139
Gray and ductile iron	ASTM A126, AWWA C500, AWWA C504, AWWA C507,
MSS SP-42, MSS SP-67, MSS SP-70, MSS SP-71, MSS SP-72,
MSS SP-78
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic	ASME A112.4.14, ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1, CSA B125.3,
NSF 359

Polypropylene (PP) plastic	ASME A112.4.14, ASTM F2389
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic	ASME A112.4.14, ASTM F1970, MSS SP-122
P2903.9.5 Valves and outlets prohibited below grade.

Potable water outlets and combination stop-and-waste valves shall not be installed underground or below grade. Freezeproof yard hydrants that drain the riser into the ground are considered to be stop-and-waste valves.

Exception: Installation of freezeproof yard hydrants that drain the riser into the ground shall be permitted if the potable water supply to such hydrants is protected upstream of the hydrants in accordance with Section P2902 and the hydrants are permanently identified as nonpotable outlets by approved signage that reads as follows: “Caution, Nonpotable Water. Do Not Drink.”

P2903.10 Hose bibb.

Hose bibbs subject to freezing, including the “frostproof” type, shall be equipped with an accessible stop-and-waste-type valve inside the building so that they can be controlled and drained during cold periods.

Exception: Frostproof hose bibbs installed such that the stem extends through the building insulation into an open heated or semiconditioned space need not be separately valved (see Figure P2903.10).

FIGURE P2903.10

TYPICAL FROSTPROOF HOSE BIBB INSTALLATION NOT REQUIRING SEPARATE VALUE

P2903.11 Drain water heat recovery units.

Drain water heat recovery units shall be in accordance with Section R403.5.4 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

SECTION P2904
DWELLING UNIT FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
P2904.1 General.

The design and installation of residential fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA 13D. Partial residential sprinkler systems shall be permitted to be installed only in buildings not required to be equipped with a residential sprinkler system. Section P2904 shall apply to stand-alone and multipurpose wet-pipe sprinkler systems that do not include the use of antifreeze. A multipurpose fire sprinkler system shall provide domestic water to both fire sprinklers and plumbing fixtures. A stand-alone sprinkler system shall be separate and independent from the water distribution system. A backflow preventer shall not be required to separate a stand-alone sprinkler system from the water distribution system.

P2904.1.1 Required sprinkler locations.

Sprinklers shall be installed to protect all areas of a dwelling unit.

Exceptions:

1.	Attics, crawl spaces and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that do not contain fuel-fired appliances do not require sprinklers. In attics, crawl spaces and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that contain fuel-fired equipment, a sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment; however, sprinklers shall not be required in the remainder of the space.

2.	Clothes closets, linen closets and pantries not exceeding 24 square feet (2.2 m2) in area, with the smallest dimension not greater than 3 feet (915 mm) and having wall and ceiling surfaces of gypsum board.

3.	Bathrooms not more than 55 square feet (5.1 m2) in area.

4.	Garages; carports; exterior porches; unheated entry areas, such as mud rooms, that are adjacent to an exterior door; and similar areas.

P2904.2 Sprinklers.

Sprinklers shall be new listed residential sprinklers and shall be installed in accordance with the sprinkler manufacturer’s instructions.

P2904.2.1 Temperature rating and separation from heat sources.

Except as provided for in Section P2904.2.2, sprinklers shall have a temperature rating of not less than 135°F (57°C) and not more than 225°F (107°C). Sprinklers shall be separated from heat sources as required by the sprinkler manufacturer’s installation instructions.

P2904.2.2 Intermediate temperature sprinklers.

Sprinklers shall have an intermediate temperature rating not less than 175°F (79°C) and not more than 225°F (107°C) where installed in the following locations:

1.	Directly under skylights, where the sprinkler is exposed to direct sunlight.

2.	In attics.

3.	In concealed spaces located directly beneath a roof.

4.	Within the distance to a heat source as specified in Table P2904.2.2.

TABLE P2904.2.2

LOCATIONS WHERE INTERMEDIATE TEMPERATURE SPRINKLERS ARE REQUIRED

HEAT SOURCE	RANGE OF DISTANCE FROM HEAT SOURCE WITHIN WHICH
INTERMEDIATE TEMPERATURE SPRINKLERS ARE REQUIREDa, b (inches)

Fireplace, side of open or recessed fireplace	12 to 36
Fireplace, front of recessed fireplace	36 to 60
Coal and wood burning stove	12 to 42
Kitchen range top	9 to 18
Oven	9 to 18
Vent connector or chimney connector	9 to 18
Heating duct, not insulated	9 to 18
Hot water pipe, not insulated	6 to 12
Side of ceiling or wall warm air register	12 to 24
Front of wall mounted warm air register	18 to 36
Water heater, furnace or boiler	3 to 6
Luminaire up to 250 watts	3 to 6
Luminaire 250 watts up to 499 watts	6 to 12

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Sprinklers shall not be located at distances less than the minimum table distance unless the sprinkler listing allows a lesser distance.

b.	Distances shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest edge of the heat source to the nearest edge of the sprinkler.

P2904.2.3 Freezing areas.

Piping shall be protected from freezing as required by Section P2603.5 or by using one ofthe following:

1.	A dry pipe automatic sprinkler system that is listedfor residential occupancy applications.

2.	Dry-side-wall or dry-pendent sprinklers extendingfrom a nonfreezing area into a freezing area.

P2904.2.4 Sprinkler coverage.

Sprinkler coverage requirements and sprinkler obstruction requirements shall be in accordance with Sections P2904.2.4.1 and P2904.2.4.2.

P2904.2.4.1 Coverage area limit.

The area of coverage of a single sprinkler shall not exceed 400 square feet (37 m2) and shall be based on the sprinkler listing and the sprinkler manufacturer’s installation instructions.

P2904.2.4.2 Obstructions to coverage.

Sprinkler discharge shall not be blocked by obstructions unless additional sprinklers are installed to protect the obstructed area. Additional sprinklers shall not be required where the sprinkler separation from obstructions complies with either the minimum distance indicated in Figure P2904.2.4.2 or the minimum distances specified in the sprinkler manufacturer’s instructions where the manufacturer’s instructions permit a lesser distance.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE P2904.2.4.2

MINIMUM ALLOWABLE DISTANCE BETWEEN SPRINKLER AND OBSTRUCTION

P2904.2.4.2.1 Additional requirements for pendent sprinklers.

Pendent sprinklers within 3 feet (915 mm) of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling luminaire or similar object shall be considered to be obstructed, and additional sprinklers shall be installed.

P2904.2.4.2.2 Additional requirements for sidewall sprinklers.

Sidewall sprinklers within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the center of a ceiling fan, surface-mounted ceiling luminaire or similar object shall be considered to be obstructed, and additional sprinklers shall be installed.

P2904.2.5 Sprinkler installation on systems assembled with solvent cement.

The solvent cementing of threaded adapter fittings shall be completed and threaded adapters for sprinklers shall be verified as being clear of excess cement prior to the installation of sprinklers on systems assembled with solvent cement.

P2904.2.6 Sprinkler modifications prohibited.

Painting, caulking or modifying of sprinklers shall be prohibited. Sprinklers that have been painted, caulked, modified or damaged shall be replaced with new sprinklers.

P2904.3 Sprinkler piping system.

Sprinkler piping shall be supported in accordance with requirements for cold water distribution piping. Sprinkler piping shall comply with the requirements for cold water distribution piping. For multipurpose piping systems, the sprinkler piping shall connect to and be a part of the cold water distribution piping system.

Exception: For plastic piping, it shall be permissible to follow the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

P2904.3.1 Nonmetallic pipe and tubing.

Nonmetallic pipe and tubing, such as CPVC, PEX, and PE-RT shall be listed for use in residential fire sprinkler systems.

P2904.3.1.1 Nonmetallic pipe protection.

Nonmetallic pipe and tubing systems shall be protected from exposure to the living space by a layer of not less than 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) gypsum wallboard, 1/2-inch-thick (13 mm) plywood, or other material having a 15-minute fire rating.

Exceptions:

1.	Pipe protection shall not be required in areas that do not require protection with sprinklers as specified in Section P2904.1.1.

2.	Pipe protection shall not be required where exposed piping is permitted by the pipe listing.

P2904.3.2 Shutoff valves prohibited.

With the exception of shutoff valves for the entire water distribution system, or a single master control valve for the automatic sprinkler system that is locked in the open position, valves shall not be installed in any location where the valve would isolate piping serving one or more sprinklers.

P2904.3.3 Single dwelling limit.

Piping beyond the service valve located at the beginning of the water distribution system shall not serve more than one dwelling.

P2904.3.4 Drain.

A means to drain the sprinkler system shall be provided on the system side of the water distribution shutoff valve.

P2904.4 Determining system design flow.

The flow for sizing the sprinkler piping system shall be based on Sections P2904.4.1 through P2904.4.2.

P2904.4.1 Determining required flow rate for each sprinkler.

The minimum required flow for each sprinkler shall be determined using the sprinkler manufacturer’s published data for the specific sprinkler model based on all of the following:

1.	The area of coverage.

2.	The ceiling configuration, in accordance with Sections P2904.4.1.1 through P2904.4.1.3.

3.	The temperature rating.

4.	Any additional conditions specified by the sprinklermanufacturer.

P2904.4.1.1 Ceiling configurations.

Manufacturer’s published flow rates for sprinklers tested under an 8- foot (2.4 m) high ceiling, in accordance with the sprinkler listing, shall be used for the following ceiling configurations, provided that the ceiling surface does not have significant irregularities, lumps or indentations and is continuous in a single plane.

1.	Ceilings that are horizontal or that have a slope not exceeding 8 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (67 percent), without beams, provided that the ceiling height, measured to the highest point, does not exceed 24 feet (7.3 m) above the floor. Where the slope exceeds 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17 percent), the highest sprinkler installed along the sloped portion of a ceiling shall be positioned above all communicating openings connecting the sloped ceiling compartment with an adjacent space.

2.	Ceilings that are horizontal or that have a slope not exceeding 8 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (67 percent), with beams, provided that the ceiling height, measured to the highest point, does not exceed 24 feet (7.3 m) above the floor. Beams shall not exceed 14 inches (350 mm) in depth, and pendent sprinklers shall be installed under the beams as described at the end of this section. The compartment containing the beamed ceiling shall not exceed 600 square feet (56 m2) in area. Where the slope does not exceed 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17 percent), the highest sprinkler in the compartment shall be above all communicating openings connecting the compartment with an adjacent space. Where the slope exceeds 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17 percent) the highest sprinkler installed along the sloped portion of a ceiling shall be positioned above all communicating openings connecting the sloped ceiling compartment with an adjacent space.

3.	Ceilings that have a slope exceeding 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17 percent) but not exceeding 8 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (67 percent), with beams of any depth, provided that the ceiling height, measured to the highest point, does not exceed 24 feet (7.3 m) above the floor. Sidewall or pendent sprinklers shall be installed in each pocket formed by beams. The compartment containing the sloped, beamed ceiling shall not exceed 600 square feet (56 m2) in area.

Pendent, recessed pendent, and flush-type pendent sprinklers installed directly under a beam having a maximum depth of 14 inches (356 mm) shall have the sprinkler deflector located not less than 1 inch (25 mm) or more than 2 inches (51 mm) below the bottom of the beam. Pendent sprinklers installed adjacent to the bottom of a beam having a maximum depth of 14 inches (356 mm) shall be positioned such that the vertical centerline of the sprinkler is no more than 2 inches (51 mm) from the edge of the beam, with the sprinkler deflector located not less than 1 inch (25 mm) or more than 2 inches (51 mm) below the bottom of the beam. Pendent sprinklers shall also be permitted to be installed less than 1 inch (25 mm) below the bottom of a beam where in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions for installation of flush sprinklers.

P2904.4.1.2 Ceiling configurations with specialsprinkler listings.

For ceiling configurations not specified in Section 2904.4.1.1, the manufacturer’s published flow rate for sprinklers that have been listed for protection of such configurations shall be used.

P2904.4.1.3 Other ceiling configurations.

For ceiling configurations not addressed by Section P2904.4.1.1 or P2904.4.1.2, the flow rate shall be subject to approval by the code official.

P2904.4.2 System design flow rate.

The design flow rate for the system shall be based on the following:

1.	The design flow rate for a room having only one sprinkler shall be the flow rate required for that sprinkler, as determined by Section P2904.4.1.

2.	The design flow rate for a room having two or more sprinklers and a ceiling configuration specified inSection P2904.4.1.1 shall be determined by identifying the sprinkler in that room with the highest required flow rate, based on Section P2904.4.1, and multiplying that flow rate by 2.

3.	The design flow rate for a room having two or moresprinklers and a ceiling configuration covered by Section P2904.4.1.2 shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

4.	The design flow rate for a room having two or more sprinklers and a ceiling configuration covered by Section P2904.4.1.3 shall be subject to approval by the code official.

5.	The design flow rate for the sprinkler system shall be the flow required by the room with the largest flow rate, based on Items 1 through 4.

6.	For the purpose of this section, it shall be permissible to reduce the design flow rate for a room by subdividing the space into two or more rooms, where each room is evaluated separately with respect to the required design flow rate. Each room shall be bounded by walls and a ceiling. Openings in walls shall have a lintel not less than 8 inches (203 mm) in depth and each lintel shall form a solid barrier between the ceiling and the top of the opening.

P2904.5 Water supply.

The water supply shall provide not less than the required design flow rate for sprinklers in accordance with Section P2904.4.2 at a pressure not less than that used to comply with Section P2904.6.

P2904.5.1 Water supply from individual sources.

Where a dwelling unit water supply is from a tank system, a private well system or a combination of these, the available water supply shall be based on the minimum pressure control setting for the pump.

P2904.5.2 Required capacity.

The water supply shall have the capacity to provide the required design flow rate for sprinklers for a period of time as follows:

1.	Seven minutes for dwelling units one story in height and less than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) in area.

2.	Ten minutes for dwelling units two or more stories in height or equal to or greater than 2,000 square feet (186 m2) in area.

Where a well system, a water supply tank system or a combination thereof is used, any combination of well capacity and tank storage shall be permitted to meet the capacity requirement.

P2904.6 Pipe sizing.

The piping to sprinklers shall be sized for the flow required by Section P2904.4.2. The flow required to supply the plumbing fixtures shall not be required to be added to the sprinkler design flow.

P2904.6.1 Method of sizing pipe.

Piping supplying sprinklers shall be sized using the prescriptive method in Section P2904.6.2 or by hydraulic calculation in accordance with NFPA 13D. The minimum pipe size from the water supply source to any sprinkler shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm) nominal. Threaded adapter fittings at the point where sprinklers are attached to the piping shall be not less than 1/2 inch (13 mm) nominal.

P2904.6.2 Prescriptive pipe sizing method.

Pipe shall be sized by determining the available pressure to offset friction loss in piping and identifying a piping material, diameter and length using the equation in Section P2904.6.2.1 and the procedure in Section P2904.6.2.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(1)

WATER SERVICE PRESSURE LOSS (PLsvc)a, b

FLOW RATEc
(gpm)
	3/4-INCH WATER SERVICE PRESSURE LOSS
(psi)
	1-INCH WATER SERVICE PRESSURE LOSS
(psi)
	11/4 -INCH WATER SERVICE PRESSURE
LOSS (psi)

Length of water service pipe (feet)	Length of water service pipe (feet)	Length of water service pipe (feet)
40 or
less
	41 to 75	76 to 100	101 to 150	40 or
less
	41 to 75	76 to 100	101 to 150	40 or
less
	41 to 75	76 to 100	101 to 150
8	5.1	8.7	11.8	17.4	1.5	2.5	3.4	5.1	0.6	1.0	1.3	1.9
10	7.7	13.1	17.8	26.3	2.3	3.8	5.2	7.7	0.8	1.4	2.0	2.9
12	10.8	18.4	24.9	NP	3.2	5.4	7.3	10.7	1.2	2.0	2.7	4.0
14	14.4	24.5	NP	NP	4.2	7.1	9.6	14.3	1.6	2.7	3.6	5.4
16	18.4	NP	NP	NP	5.4	9.1	12.4	18.3	2.0	3.4	4.7	6.9
18	22.9	NP	NP	NP	6.7	11.4	15.4	22.7	2.5	4.3	5.8	8.6
20	27.8	NP	NP	NP	8.1	13.8	18.7	27.6	3.1	5.2	7.0	10.4
22	NP	NP	NP	NP	9.7	16.5	22.3	NP	3.7	6.2	8.4	12.4
24	NP	NP	NP	NP	11.4	19.3	26.2	NP	4.3	7.3	9.9	14.6
26	NP	NP	NP	NP	13.2	22.4	NP	NP	5.0	8.5	11.4	16.9
28	NP	NP	NP	NP	15.1	25.7	NP	NP	5.7	9.7	13.1	19.4
30	NP	NP	NP	NP	17.2	NP	NP	NP	6.5	11.0	14.9	22.0
32	NP	NP	NP	NP	19.4	NP	NP	NP	7.3	12.4	16.8	24.8
34	NP	NP	NP	NP	21.7	NP	NP	NP	8.2	13.9	18.8	NP
36	NP	NP	NP	NP	24.1	NP	NP	NP	9.1	15.4	20.9	NP

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.063 L/s, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NP = Not permitted. Pressure loss exceeds reasonable limits.

a.	Values are applicable for underground piping materials listed in Table P2906.4 and are based on an SDR of 11 and a Hazen Williams C Factor of 150.

b.	Values include the following length allowances for fittings: 25% length increase for actual lengths up to 100 feet and 15% length increase for actual lengths over 100 feet.

c.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2. Add 5 gpm to the flow rate required by Section P2904.4.2 where the water-service pipe supplies more than one dwelling.

TABLE P2904.6.2(2)

MINIMUM WATER METER PRESSURE LOSS (PLm)a

FLOW RATE
(gallons per minute, gpm)b
	5/8-INCH METER PRESSURE LOSS
(pounds per square inch, psi)
	3/4-INCH METER PRESSURE LESS
(pounds per square inch, psi)
	1-INCH METER PRESSURE LOSS
(pounds per square inch, psi)

8	3	3	1
10	3	3	1
12	4	3	1
14	6	5	1
16	7	6	1
18	9	7	2
20	11	9	2
23	14	11	3
26	18	14	3
31	26	22	4
39	38	35	6
52	NP	NP	10

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.063 L/s.

NP—Not permitted unless the actual water meter pressure loss is known.

a.	Table P2904.6.2(2) establishes conservative values for water meter pressure loss or installations where the water meter loss is unknown. Where the actual water meter pressure loss is published and available from the meter manufacturer, Pm shall be the published pressure loss for the selected meter.

b.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2. Add 5 gpm to the flow rate required by Section P2904.4.2 where the water-service pipe supplies more than one dwelling.

TABLE P2904.6.2(3)

ELEVATION LOSS (PLe)

ELEVATION (feet)	PRESSURE LOSS (psi)
5	2.2
10	4.4
15	6.5
20	8.7
25	10.9
30	13
35	15.2
40	17.4

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

TABLE P2904.6.2(4)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 3/4-INCH TYPE M COPPER WATER TUBING

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	3/4	217	289	361	434	506	578	650	723	795	867
9	3/4	174	232	291	349	407	465	523	581	639	697
10	3/4	143	191	239	287	335	383	430	478	526	574
11	3/4	120	160	200	241	281	321	361	401	441	481
12	3/4	102	137	171	205	239	273	307	341	375	410
13	3/4	88	118	147	177	206	235	265	294	324	353
14	3/4	77	103	128	154	180	205	231	257	282	308
15	3/4	68	90	113	136	158	181	203	226	248	271
16	3/4	60	80	100	120	140	160	180	200	220	241
17	3/4	54	72	90	108	125	143	161	179	197	215
18	3/4	48	64	81	97	113	129	145	161	177	193
19	3/4	44	58	73	88	102	117	131	146	160	175
20	3/4	40	53	66	80	93	106	119	133	146	159
21	3/4	36	48	61	73	85	97	109	121	133	145
22	3/4	33	44	56	67	78	89	100	111	122	133
23	3/4	31	41	51	61	72	82	92	102	113	123
24	3/4	28	38	47	57	66	76	85	95	104	114
25	3/4	26	35	44	53	61	70	79	88	97	105
26	3/4	24	33	41	49	57	65	73	82	90	98
27	3/4	23	30	38	46	53	61	69	76	84	91
28	3/4	21	28	36	43	50	57	64	71	78	85
29	3/4	20	27	33	40	47	53	60	67	73	80
30	3/4	19	25	31	38	44	50	56	63	69	75
31	3/4	18	24	29	35	41	47	53	59	65	71
32	3/4	17	22	28	33	39	44	50	56	61	67
33	3/4	16	21	26	32	37	42	47	53	58	63
34	3/4	NP	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
35	3/4	NP	19	24	28	33	38	42	47	52	57
36	3/4	NP	18	22	27	31	36	40	45	49	54
37	3/4	NP	17	21	26	30	34	38	43	47	51
38	3/4	NP	16	20	24	28	32	36	40	45	49
39	3/4	NP	15	19	23	27	31	35	39	42	46
40	3/4	NP	NP	18	22	26	29	33	37	40	44

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

NP—Not permitted.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(5)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 1-INCH TYPE M COPPER WATER TUBING

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	1	806	1075	1343	1612	1881	2149	2418	2687	2955	3224
9	1	648	864	1080	1296	1512	1728	1945	2161	2377	2593
10	1	533	711	889	1067	1245	1422	1600	1778	1956	2134
11	1	447	586	745	894	1043	1192	1341	1491	1640	1789
12	1	381	508	634	761	888	1015	1142	1269	1396	1523
13	1	328	438	547	657	766	875	985	1094	1204	1313
14	1	286	382	477	572	668	763	859	954	1049	1145
15	1	252	336	420	504	588	672	756	840	924	1008
16	1	224	298	373	447	522	596	671	745	820	894
17	1	200	266	333	400	466	533	600	666	733	799
18	1	180	240	300	360	420	479	539	599	659	719
19	1	163	217	271	325	380	434	488	542	597	651
20	1	148	197	247	296	345	395	444	493	543	592
21	1	135	180	225	270	315	360	406	451	496	541
22	1	124	165	207	248	289	331	372	413	455	496
23	1	114	152	190	228	267	305	343	381	419	457
24	1	106	141	176	211	246	282	317	352	387	422
25	1	98	131	163	196	228	261	294	326	359	392
26	1	91	121	152	182	212	243	273	304	334	364
27	1	85	113	142	170	198	226	255	283	311	340
28	1	79	106	132	159	185	212	238	265	291	318
29	1	74	99	124	149	174	198	223	248	273	298
30	1	70	93	116	140	163	186	210	233	256	280
31	1	66	88	110	132	153	175	197	219	241	263
32	1	62	83	103	124	145	165	186	207	227	248
33	1	59	78	98	117	137	156	176	195	215	234
34	1	55	74	92	111	129	148	166	185	203	222
35	1	53	70	88	105	123	140	158	175	193	210
36	1	50	66	83	100	116	133	150	166	183	199
37	1	47	63	79	95	111	126	142	158	174	190
38	1	45	60	75	90	105	120	135	150	165	181
39	1	43	57	72	86	100	115	129	143	158	172
40	1	41	55	68	82	96	109	123	137	150	164

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(6)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 3/4-INCH CPVC PIPE

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	3/4	348	465	581	697	813	929	1045	1161	1278	1394
9	3/4	280	374	467	560	654	747	841	934	1027	1121
10	3/4	231	307	384	461	538	615	692	769	845	922
11	3/4	193	258	322	387	451	515	580	644	709	773
12	3/4	165	219	274	329	384	439	494	549	603	658
13	3/4	142	189	237	284	331	378	426	473	520	568
14	3/4	124	165	206	247	289	330	371	412	454	495
15	3/4	109	145	182	218	254	290	327	363	399	436
16	3/4	97	129	161	193	226	258	290	322	354	387
17	3/4	86	115	144	173	202	230	259	288	317	346
18	3/4	78	104	130	155	181	207	233	259	285	311
19	3/4	70	94	117	141	164	188	211	234	258	281
20	3/4	64	85	107	128	149	171	192	213	235	256
21	3/4	58	78	97	117	136	156	175	195	214	234
22	3/4	54	71	89	107	125	143	161	179	197	214
23	3/4	49	66	82	99	115	132	148	165	181	198
24	3/4	46	61	76	91	107	122	137	152	167	183
25	3/4	42	56	71	85	99	113	127	141	155	169
26	3/4	39	52	66	79	92	105	118	131	144	157
27	3/4	37	49	61	73	86	98	110	122	135	147
28	3/4	34	46	57	69	80	92	103	114	126	137
29	3/4	32	43	54	64	75	86	96	107	118	129
30	3/4	30	40	50	60	70	81	91	101	111	121
31	3/4	28	38	47	57	66	76	85	95	104	114
32	3/4	27	36	45	54	63	71	80	89	98	107
33	3/4	25	34	42	51	59	68	76	84	93	101
34	3/4	24	32	40	48	56	64	72	80	88	96
35	3/4	23	30	38	45	53	61	68	76	83	91
36	3/4	22	29	36	43	50	57	65	72	79	86
37	3/4	20	27	34	41	48	55	61	68	75	82
38	3/4	20	26	33	39	46	52	59	65	72	78
39	3/4	19	25	31	37	43	50	56	62	68	74
40	3/4	18	24	30	35	41	47	53	59	65	71

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(7)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 1-INCH CPVC PIPE

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	1	1049	1398	1748	2098	2447	2797	3146	3496	3845	4195
9	1	843	1125	1406	1687	1968	2249	2530	2811	3093	3374
10	1	694	925	1157	1388	1619	1851	2082	2314	2545	2776
11	1	582	776	970	1164	1358	1552	1746	1940	2133	2327
12	1	495	660	826	991	1156	1321	1486	1651	1816	1981
13	1	427	570	712	854	997	1139	1281	1424	1566	1709
14	1	372	497	621	745	869	993	1117	1241	1366	1490
15	1	328	437	546	656	765	874	983	1093	1202	1311
16	1	291	388	485	582	679	776	873	970	1067	1164
17	1	260	347	433	520	607	693	780	867	954	1040
18	1	234	312	390	468	546	624	702	780	858	936
19	1	212	282	353	423	494	565	635	706	776	847
20	1	193	257	321	385	449	513	578	642	706	770
21	1	176	235	293	352	410	469	528	586	645	704
22	1	161	215	269	323	377	430	484	538	592	646
23	1	149	198	248	297	347	396	446	496	545	595
24	1	137	183	229	275	321	366	412	458	504	550
25	1	127	170	212	255	297	340	382	425	467	510
26	1	118	158	197	237	276	316	355	395	434	474
27	1	111	147	184	221	258	295	332	368	405	442
28	1	103	138	172	207	241	275	310	344	379	413
29	1	97	129	161	194	226	258	290	323	355	387
30	1	91	121	152	182	212	242	273	303	333	364
31	1	86	114	143	171	200	228	257	285	314	342
32	1	81	108	134	161	188	215	242	269	296	323
33	1	76	102	127	152	178	203	229	254	280	305
34	1	72	96	120	144	168	192	216	240	265	289
35	1	68	91	114	137	160	182	205	228	251	273
36	1	65	87	108	130	151	173	195	216	238	260
37	1	62	82	103	123	144	165	185	206	226	247
38	1	59	78	98	117	137	157	176	196	215	235
39	1	56	75	93	112	131	149	168	187	205	224
40	1	53	71	89	107	125	142	160	178	196	214

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(8)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 3/4-INCH PEX AND PE-RT TUBING

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	3/4	93	123	154	185	216	247	278	309	339	370
9	3/4	74	99	124	149	174	199	223	248	273	298
10	3/4	61	82	102	123	143	163	184	204	225	245
11	3/4	51	68	86	103	120	137	154	171	188	205
12	3/4	44	58	73	87	102	117	131	146	160	175
13	3/4	38	50	63	75	88	101	113	126	138	151
14	3/4	33	44	55	66	77	88	99	110	121	132
15	3/4	29	39	48	58	68	77	87	96	106	116
16	3/4	26	34	43	51	60	68	77	86	94	103
17	3/4	23	31	38	46	54	61	69	77	84	92
18	3/4	21	28	34	41	48	55	62	69	76	83
19	3/4	19	25	31	37	44	50	56	62	69	75
20	3/4	17	23	28	34	40	45	51	57	62	68
21	3/4	16	21	26	31	36	41	47	52	57	62
22	3/4	NP	19	24	28	33	38	43	47	52	57
23	3/4	NP	17	22	26	31	35	39	44	48	52
24	3/4	NP	16	20	24	28	32	36	40	44	49
25	3/4	NP	NP	19	22	26	30	34	37	41	45
26	3/4	NP	NP	17	21	24	28	31	35	38	42
27	3/4	NP	NP	16	20	23	26	29	33	36	39
28	3/4	NP	NP	15	18	21	24	27	30	33	36
29	3/4	NP	NP	NP	17	20	23	26	28	31	34
30	3/4	NP	NP	NP	16	19	21	24	27	29	32
31	3/4	NP	NP	NP	15	18	20	23	25	28	30
32	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	17	19	21	24	26	28
33	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	18	20	22	25	27
34	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	17	19	21	23	25
35	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	18	20	22	24
36	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	15	17	19	21	23
37	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	18	20	22
38	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	17	19	21
39	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	18	20
40	3/4	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	NP	16	17	19

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

NP— Not permitted.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

TABLE P2904.6.2(9)

ALLOWABLE PIPE LENGTH FOR 1-INCH PEX AND PE-RT TUBING

SPRINKLER
FLOW RATEa
(gpm)	WATER
DISTRIBUTION
SIZE (inch)	AVAILABLE PRESSURE—Pt (psi)
15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50	55	60
Allowable length of pipe from service valve to farthest sprinkler (feet)
8	1	314	418	523	628	732	837	941	1046	1151	1255
9	1	252	336	421	505	589	673	757	841	925	1009
10	1	208	277	346	415	485	554	623	692	761	831
11	1	174	232	290	348	406	464	522	580	638	696
12	1	148	198	247	296	346	395	445	494	543	593
13	1	128	170	213	256	298	341	383	426	469	511
14	1	111	149	186	223	260	297	334	371	409	446
15	1	98	131	163	196	229	262	294	327	360	392
16	1	87	116	145	174	203	232	261	290	319	348
17	1	78	104	130	156	182	208	233	259	285	311
18	1	70	93	117	140	163	187	210	233	257	280
19	1	63	84	106	127	148	169	190	211	232	253
20	1	58	77	96	115	134	154	173	192	211	230
21	1	53	70	88	105	123	140	158	175	193	211
22	1	48	64	80	97	113	129	145	161	177	193
23	1	44	59	74	89	104	119	133	148	163	178
24	1	41	55	69	82	96	110	123	137	151	164
25	1	38	51	64	76	89	102	114	127	140	152
26	1	35	47	59	71	83	95	106	118	130	142
27	1	33	44	55	66	77	88	99	110	121	132
28	1	31	41	52	62	72	82	93	103	113	124
29	1	29	39	48	58	68	77	87	97	106	116
30	1	27	36	45	54	63	73	82	91	100	109
31	1	26	34	43	51	60	68	77	85	94	102
32	1	24	32	40	48	56	64	72	80	89	97
33	1	23	30	38	46	53	61	68	76	84	91
34	1	22	29	36	43	50	58	65	72	79	86
35	1	20	27	34	41	48	55	61	68	75	82
36	1	19	26	32	39	45	52	58	65	71	78
37	1	18	25	31	37	43	49	55	62	68	74
38	1	18	23	29	35	41	47	53	59	64	70
39	1	17	22	28	33	39	45	50	56	61	67
40	1	16	21	27	32	37	43	48	53	59	64

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.963 L/s.

a.	Flow rate from Section P2904.4.2.

P2904.6.2.1 Available pressure equation.

The pressure available to offset friction loss in the interior piping system (Pt) shall be determined in accordance with the Equation 29-1.

(Equation 29-1)

where:

Pt = Pressure used in applying Tables P2904.6.2(4) through P2904.6.2(9).

Psup = Pressure available from the water supply source.

PLsvc = Pressure loss in the water-service pipe.

PLm = Pressure loss in the water meter.

PLd = Pressure loss from devices other than the water meter.

PLe = Pressure loss associated with changes in elevation.

Psp = Maximum pressure required by a sprinkler.

P2904.6.2.2 Calculation procedure.

Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure:

Step 1—Determine Psup

Obtain the static supply pressure that will be available from the water main from the water purveyor, or for an individual source, the available supply pressure shall be in accordance with Section P2904.5.1.

Step 2—Determine PLsvc

Use Table P2904.6.2(1) to determine the pressure loss in the water service pipe based on the selected size of the water service.

Step 3—Determine PLm

Use Table P2904.6.2(2) to determine the pressure loss from the water meter, based on the selected water meter size.

Step 4—Determine PLd

Determine the pressure loss from devices other than the water meter installed in the piping system supplying sprinklers, such as pressure-reducing valves, backflow preventers, water softeners or water filters. Device pressure losses shall be based on the device manufacturer’s specifications. The flow rate used to determine pressure loss shall be the rate from Section P2904.4.2, except that 5 gpm (0.3 L/s) shall be added where the device is installed in a water-service pipe that supplies more than one dwelling. As an alternative to deducting pressure loss for a device, an automatic bypass valve shall be installed to divert flow around the device when a sprinkler activates.

Step 5—Determine PLe

Use Table P2904.6.2(3) to determine the pressure loss associated with changes in elevation. The elevation used in applying the table shall be the difference between the elevation where the water source pressure was measured and the elevation of the highest sprinkler.

Step 6—Determine Psp

Determine the maximum pressure required by any individual sprinkler based on the flow rate from Section P2904.4.1. The required pressure is provided in the sprinkler manufacturer’s published data for the specific sprinkler model based on the selected flow rate.

Step 7—Calculate Pt

Using Equation 29-1, calculate the pressure available to offset friction loss in water-distribution piping between the service valve and the sprinklers.

Step 8—Determine the maximum allowable pipe length

Use Tables P2904.6.2(4) through P2904.6.2(9) to select a material and size for water distribution piping. The piping material and size shall be acceptable if the developed length of pipe between the service valve and the most remote sprinkler does not exceed the maximum allowable length specified by the applicable table. Interpolation of Pt between the tabular values shall be permitted.

The maximum allowable length of piping in Tables P2904.6.2(4) through P2904.6.2(9) incorporates an adjustment for pipe fittings. Additional consideration of friction losses associated with pipe fittings shall not be required.

P2904.7 Instructions and signs.

An owner’s manual for the fire sprinkler system shall be provided to the owner. A sign or valve tag shall be installed at the main shutoff valve to the water distribution system stating the following: “Warning, the water system for this home supplies fire sprinklers that require certain flows and pressures to fight a fire. Devices that restrict the flow or decrease the pressure or automatically shut off the water to the fire sprinkler system, such as water softeners, filtration systems and automatic shutoff valves, shall not be added to this system without a review of the fire sprinkler system by a fire protection specialist. Do not remove this sign.”

P2904.8 Inspections.

The water distribution system shall be inspected in accordance with Sections P2904.8.1 and P2904.8.2.

P2904.8.1 Preconcealment inspection.

The following items shall be verified prior to the concealment of any sprinkler system piping:

1.	Sprinklers are installed in all areas as required by Section P2904.1.1.

2.	Where sprinkler water spray patterns are obstructed by construction features, luminaires or ceiling fans, additional sprinklers are installed as required by Section P2904.2.4.2.

3.	Sprinklers are the correct temperature rating and are installed at or beyond the required separation distances from heat sources as required by Sections P2904.2.1 and P2904.2.2.

4.	The pipe size equals or exceeds the size used in applying Tables P2904.6.2(4) through P2904.6.2(9) or, if the piping system was hydraulically calculated in accordance with Section P2904.6.1, the size used in the hydraulic calculation.

5.	The pipe length does not exceed the length permitted by Tables P2904.6.2(4) through P2904.6.2(9) or, if the piping system was hydraulically calculated in accordance with Section P2904.6.1, pipe lengths and fittings do not exceed those used in the hydraulic calculation.

6.	Nonmetallic piping that conveys water to sprinklers is listed for use with fire sprinklers.

7.	Piping is supported in accordance with the pipe manufacturer’s and sprinkler manufacturer’s installation instructions.

8.	The piping system is tested in accordance with Section P2503.7.

P2904.8.2 Final inspection.

The following items shall be verified upon completion of the system:

1.	Sprinkler are not painted, damaged or otherwise hindered from operation.

2.	Where a pump is required to provide water to the system, the pump starts automatically upon system water demand.

3.	Pressure-reducing valves, water softeners, water filters or other impairments to water flow that were not part of the original design have not been installed.

4.	The sign or valve tag required by Section P2904.7 is installed and the owner’s manual for the system is present.

SECTION P2905
HEATED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
P2905.1 Heated water circulation systems and heat trace systems.

Circulation systems and heat trace systems that are installed to bring heated water in close proximity to one or more fixtures shall meet the requirements of Section R403.5.1 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

P2905.2 Demand recirculation systems.

Demand recirculation water systems shall be in accordance with Section R403.5.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

P2905.3 Hot water supply to fixtures.

The developed length of hot water piping, from the source of hot water to the fixtures that require hot water, shall not exceed 100 feet. Water heaters and recirculating system piping shall be considered to be sources of hot water.

SECTION P2906
MATERIALS, JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS
P2906.1 Soil and groundwater.

The installation of water service pipe, water distribution pipe, fittings, valves, appurtenances and gaskets shall be prohibited in soil and groundwater that is contaminated with solvents, fuels, organic compounds or other detrimental materials that cause permeation, corrosion, degradation or structural failure of the water service or water distribution piping material.

P2906.1.1 Investigation required.

Where detrimental conditions are suspected by or brought to the attention of the building official, a chemical analysis of the soil and groundwater conditions shall be required to ascertain the acceptability of the water service material for the specific installation.

P2906.1.2 Detrimental condition.

Where a detrimental condition exists, approved alternate materials or alternate routing shall be required.

P2906.2 Lead content.

The lead content in pipe and fittings used in the water supply system shall be not greater than 8 percent.

P2906.2.1 Lead content of drinking water pipe and fittings.

Pipe, pipe fittings, joints, valves, faucets and fixture fittings utilized to supply water for drinking or cooking purposes shall comply with NSF 372 and shall have a weighted average lead content of 0.25 percent lead or less.

P2906.3 Polyethylene plastic piping installation.

Polyethylene pipe shall be cut square using a cutter designed for plastic pipe. Except where joined by heat fusion, pipe ends shall be chamfered to remove sharp edges. Pipe that has been kinked shall not be installed. For bends, the installed radius of pipe curvature shall be greater than 30 pipe diameters or the coil radius where bending with the coil. Coiled pipe shall not be bent beyond straight. Bends within 10 pipe diameters of any fitting or valve shall be prohibited. Joints between polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with Section P2906.3.1 or P2906.3.2.

P2906.3.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melting temperature and joined. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM D2657.

P2906.3.2 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2906.4 Water service pipe.

Water service pipe shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards indicated in Table P2906.4. Water service pipe or tubing, installed underground and outside of the structure, shall have a working pressure rating of not less than 160 pounds per square inch at 73°F (1103 kPa at 23°C). Where the water pressure exceeds 160 pounds per square inch (1103 kPa), piping material shall have a rated working pressure equal to or greater than the highest available pressure. Water service piping materials not third-party certified for water distribution shall terminate at or before the full open valve located at the entrance to the structure. Ductile iron water service piping shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104/A21.4.

TABLE P2906.4

WATER SERVICE PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe	ASTM D1527; ASTM D2282
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic pipe	ASTM D2846; ASTM F441; ASTM F442; CSA B137.6
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride/aluminum/chlorinated polyvinyl chloride
(CPVC/AL/CPVC) plastic pipe
	ASTM F2855
Copper or copper-alloy pipe	ASTM B42; ASTM B43; ASTM B302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K, WK, L, WL, M or WM)	ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM B251; ASTM B447
Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene
(PEX-AL-PEX) pipe
	ASTM F1281; ASTM F2262; CSA B137.10
Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/high-density polyethylene
(PEX-AL-HDPE) pipe
	ASTM F1986
Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing	ASTM F876; CSA B137.5
Ductile iron water pipe	AWWA C115/A21.15; AWWA C151/A21.51
Galvanized steel pipe	ASTM A53
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) pipe	ASTM F1282; CSA B137.9
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe	ASTM D2104; ASTM D 2239; AWWA C901; CSA B137.1
Polyethylene (PE) plastic tubing	ASTM D2737; AWWA C901; CSA B137.1
Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) plastic tubing	ASTM F2769; CSA B137.18
Polypropylene (PP) plastic tubing	ASTM F2389; CSA B137.11
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe	ASTM D1785; ASTM D2241; ASTM D2672; CSA B137.3
Stainless steel (Type 304/304L) pipe	ASTM A312; ASTM A778
Stainless steel (Type 316/316L) pipe	ASTM A312; ASTM A778
P2906.4.1 Separation of water service and building sewer.

Trenching, pipe installation and backfilling shall be in accordance with Section P2604. Where water service piping is located in the same trench with the building sewer, such sewer shall be constructed of materials listed in Table P3002.1(2). Where the building sewer piping is not constructed of materials indicated in Table P3002.1(2), the water service pipe and the building sewer shall be horizontally separated by not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) of undisturbed or compacted earth. The required separation distance shall not apply where a water service pipe crosses a sewer pipe, provided the water service is sleeved to a point not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) horizontally from the sewer pipe centerline on both sides of such crossing. The sleeve shall be of pipe materials indicated in Table P2906.4, P3002.1(2) or P3002.2. The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the water service pipe that is located within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the sewer is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the highest point of the top of the building sewer.

P2906.5 Water-distribution pipe.

Water-distribution piping within dwelling units shall conform to NSF 61 and shall conform to one of the standards indicated in Table P2906.5. Water-distribution pipe and tubing shall have a pressure rating of not less than 100 psi at 180°F (689 kPa at 82°C).

TABLE P2906.5

WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic pipe and tubing	ASTM D2846; ASTM F441; ASTM F442;
CSA B137.6

Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride/aluminum/chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC/AL/
CPVC) plastic pipe
	ASTM F2855
Copper or copper-alloy pipe	ASTM B42; ASTM B43; ASTM B302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K, WK, L, WL, M or WM)	ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM B251;
ASTM B447

Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing	ASTM F876; CSA B137.5
Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pipe	ASTM F1281; ASTM F2262; CSA B137.10
Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/high-density polyethylene (PEX-AL-HDPE) pipe	ASTM F1986
Galvanized steel pipe	ASTM A53
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) composite pipe	ASTM F1282
Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) plastic tubing	ASTM F2769; CSA B137.18
Polypropylene (PP) plastic pipe or tubing	ASTM F2389; CSA B137.11
Stainless steel (Type 304/304L) pipe	ASTM A312; ASTM A778
P2906.6 Fittings.

Pipe fittings shall be approved for installation with the piping material installed and shall comply with the applicable standards indicated in Table P2906.6. Pipe fittings used in water supply systems shall comply with NSF 61.

TABLE P2906.6

PIPE FITTINGS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic	ASTM D2468
Cast-iron	ASME B16.4
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic	ASSE 1061; ASTM D2846; ASTM F437; ASTM F438;
ASTM F439; CSA B137.6

Copper or copper alloy	ASSE 1061; ASME B16.15; ASME B16.18; ASME B16.22;
ASME B16.26; ASME B16.51; ASTM F3226

Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/high-density polyethylene
(PEX-AL-HDPE)
	ASTM F1986
Fittings for cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing	ASSE 1061; ASTM F877; ASTM F1807; ASTM F1960;
ASTM F2080; ASTM F2098; ASTM F2159; ASTM F2434;
ASTM F2735; CSA B137.5
Gray iron and ductile iron	AWWA C110/A21.10; AWWA C153/A21.53
Malleable iron	ASME B16.3
Insert fittings for Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE)
and cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene
(PEX-AL-PEX)	ASTM F1974; ASTM F1281; ASTM F1282; CSA B137.9;
CSA B137.10

Polyethylene (PE) plastic	ASTM D 2609; CSA B137.1
Fittings for polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) plastic tubing	ASSE 1061; ASTM D2683; ASTM D3261; ASTM F1055;
ASTM F1807; ASTM F2098; ASTM F 2159; ASTM F2735;
ASTM F2769; CSA B137.18
Polypropylene (PP) plastic pipe or tubing	ASTM F2389; CSA B137.11
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic	ASTM D2464; ASTM D2466; ASTM D2467; CSA B137.2;
CSA B137.3

Stainless steel (Type 304/304L) pipe	ASTM A312; ASTM A778
Stainless steel (Type 316/316L) pipe	ASTM A312; ASTM A778
Steel	ASME B16.9; ASME B16.11; ASME B16.28
P2906.6.1 Saddle tap fittings.

The use of saddle tap fittings and combination saddle tap and valve fittings shall be prohibited.

P2906.7 Flexible water connectors.

Flexible water connectors, exposed to continuous pressure, shall conform to ASME A112.18.6/CSA B125.6. Access shall be provided to flexible water connectors.

P2906.8 Joint and connection tightness.

Joints and connections in the plumbing system shall be gas tight and water tight for the intended use or required test pressure.

P2906.9 Plastic pipe joints.

Joints in plastic piping shall be made with approved fittings by solvent cementing, heat fusion, corrosion-resistant metal clamps with insert fittings or compression connections. Flared joints for polyethylene pipe shall be permitted in accordance with Section P2906.3.

P2906.9.1 Solvent cementing.

Solvent-cemented joints shall comply with Sections P2906.9.1.1 through P2906.9.1.4.

P2906.9.1.1 ABS plastic pipe.

Solvent cement for ABS plastic pipe conforming to ASTM D2235 shall be applied to all joint surfaces.

P2906.9.1.2 CPVC plastic pipe.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Joints shall be made in accordance with the pipe, fitting or solvent cement manufacturer’s installation instructions. Where such instructions require a primer to be used, an approved primer shall be applied, and a solvent cement, orange in color and conforming to ASTM F493, shall be applied to joint surfaces. Where such instructions allow for a one-step solvent cement, yellow or red in color and conforming to ASTM F493, to be used, the joint surfaces shall not require application of a primer before the solvent cement is applied. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet, and in accordance with ASTM D2846 or ASTM F493. Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.

P2906.9.1.3 CPVC/AL/CPVC pipe.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture, and an approved primer shall be applied. Solvent cement, orange in color and conforming to ASTM F493, shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet, and in accordance with ASTM D2846 or ASTM F493. Solvent-cement joints shall be installed above or below ground.

Exception: A primer shall not be required where all of the following conditions apply:

1.	The solvent cement used is third-party certified as conforming to ASTM F493.

2.	The solvent cement used is yellow in color.

3.	The solvent cement is used only for joining 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) through 1-inch (25 mm) diameter CPVC/AL/CPVC pipe and CPVC fittings.

4.	The CPVC fittings are manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2846.

P2906.9.1.4 PVC plastic pipe.

A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F656 shall be applied to PVC solvent-cemented joints. Solvent cement for PVC plastic pipe conforming to ASTM D2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces.

P2906.10 Cross-linked polyethylene plastic (PEX).

Joints between cross-linked polyethylene plastic tubing or fittings shall comply with Section P2906.10.1 or Section P2906.10.2.

P2906.10.1 Flared joints.

Flared pipe ends shall be made by a tool designed for that operation.

P2906.10.2 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Fittings for cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic tubing shall comply with the applicable standards indicated in Table P2906.6 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. PEX tubing shall be factory marked with the applicable standards for the fittings that the PEX manufacturer specifies for use with the tubing.

P2906.11 Polypropylene (PP) plastic.

Joints between polypropylene plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with Section P2906.11.1 or P2906.11.2.

P2906.11.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Heat fusion joints for polypropylene pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polypropylene fittings, buttfusion polypropylene fittings or electrofusion polypropylene fittings. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM F2389.

P2906.11.2 Mechanical and compression sleeve joints.

Mechanical and compression sleeve joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2906.12 Cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/crosslinked polyethylene.

Joints between polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) and cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/cross-linked polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pipe and fittings shall comply with Section P2906.12.1.

P2906.12.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Fittings for PE-AL-PE and PEX-AL-PEX as described in ASTM F1974, ASTM F1281, ASTM F1282, CSA B137.9 and CSA B137.10 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2906.13 Stainless steel.

Joints between stainless steel pipe and fittings shall comply with Section P2906.13.1 or P2906.13.2.

P2906.13.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2906.13.2 Welded joints.

Joint surfaces shall be cleaned. The joint shall be welded autogenously or with an approved filler metal in accordance with ASTM A312.

P2906.14 Threaded pipe joints.

Threaded joints shall conform to American National Taper Pipe Thread specifications. Pipe ends shall be deburred and chips removed. Pipe joint compound shall be used only on male threads.

P2906.15 Soldered and brazed joints.

Soldered joints in copper and copper alloy tubing shall be made with fittings approved for water piping and shall conform to ASTM B828. Surfaces to be soldered shall be cleaned bright. Fluxes for soldering shall be in accordance with ASTM B813. Brazing fluxes shall be in accordance with AWS A5.31M/A5.31. Solders and fluxes used in potable water-supply systems shall have a lead content of not greater than 0.2 percent. Solder and flux joining pipe or fittings intended to supply drinking water shall conform to NSF 61.

P2906.16 Flared joints.

Flared joints in water tubing shall be made with approved fittings. The tubing shall be reamed and then expanded with a flaring tool.

P2906.17 Above-ground joints.

Joints within the building between copper pipe or CPVC tubing, in any combination with compatible outside diameters, shall be permitted to be made with the use of approved push-in mechanical fittings of a pressure-lock design.

P2906.18 Joints between different materials.

Joints between different piping materials shall be made in accordance with Section P2906.18.1, P2906.18.2 or P2906.18.3, or with a mechanical joint of the compression or mechanical sealing type having an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM D1869 or ASTM F477. Joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P2906.18.1 Copper or copper-alloy tubing to galvanized steel pipe.

Joints between copper or copper-alloy tubing and galvanized steel pipe shall be made with a copper alloy fitting or dielectric fitting. The copper tubing shall be joined to the fitting in an approved manner, and the fitting shall be screwed to the threaded pipe.

P2906.18.2 Joint between PVC water service and CPVC water distribution.

Where a PVC water service pipe connects to a CPVC pipe at the beginning of a water distribution system, the transition shall be by a mechanical fitting, an approved adapter fitting, a transition fitting or a single solvent-cemented transition joint. A single, solvent cement transition joint shall be in compliance with ASTM F493 and the pipe, fitting and solvent cement manufacturers’ instructions. Solvent cement joint surfaces shall be clean, free from moisture and prepared with an approved primer. Solvent cement conforming to ASTM F493 shall be applied to the joint surfaces and the joint assembled while the cement is wet.

P2906.18.3 Plastic pipe or tubing to other piping material.

Joints between different types of plastic pipe or between plastic pipe and other piping material shall be made with an approved adapter fitting.

P2906.18.4 Stainless steel.

Joints between stainless steel and different piping materials shall be made with a mechanical joint of the compression or mechanical-sealing type or a dielectric fitting.

P2906.19 Press-connect joints.

Press-connect joints shall conform to one of the standards indicated in Table P2906.6. Press-type mechanical joints in copper tubing shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Cut tube ends shall be reamed to the full inside diameter of the tube end. Joint surfaces shall be cleaned. The tube shall be fully inserted into the press connect fitting. Press-connect joints shall be pressed with a tool certified by the manufacturer.

P2906.20 Polyethylene of raised temperature plastic.

Joints between polyethylene of raised temperature plastic tubing and fittings shall be in accordance with Sections P2906.20.1, P2906.20.2 and P2906.20.3.

P2906.20.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Fittings for polyethylene of raised temperature plastic tubing shall comply with the applicable standards listed in Table P2906.6 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Polyethylene of raised temperature plastic tubing shall be factory marked with the applicable standards for the fittings that the manufacturer of the tubing specifies for use with the tubing.

P2906.20.2 Heat-fusion joints.

Joints shall be of the socket-fusion, saddle-fusion or butt-fusion type, and shall be joined in accordance with ASTM D2657. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures and joined. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2683 or ASTM D3261.

P2906.20.3 Electrofusion joints.

Joints shall be of the electrofusion type. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free of moisture and scoured to expose virgin resin. Joint surfaces shall be heated to melt temperatures for a period of time specified by the manufacturer and joined. The joint shall remain undisturbed until cool. Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with ASTM F1055.

P2906.21 Push-fit fittings.

Push-fit fittings shall be used only on copper-tube-size outside diameter dimensioned CPVC, PEX, PE-RT and copper tubing. Push-fit fittings shall conform to ASSE 1061 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.

SECTION P2907
CHANGES IN DIRECTION
P2907.1 Bends.

Changes in direction in copper tubing shall be permitted to be made with bends having a radius of not less than four diameters of the tube, provided that such bends are made by use of forming equipment that does not deform or create loss in cross-sectional area of the tube.

SECTION P2908
SUPPORT
P2908.1 General.

Pipe and tubing support shall conform to Section P2605.

SECTION P2909
DRINKING WATER TREATMENT UNITS
P2909.1 Design.

Drinking water treatment units shall meet the requirements of NSF42, NSF 44, NSF 53, NSF 62 or CSA B483.1.

P2909.2 Reverse osmosis drinking water treatment units.

Point-of-use reverse osmosis drinking water treatment units, designed for residential use, shall meet the requirements of NSF 58 or CSA B483.1. Waste or discharge from reverse osmosis drinking water treatment units shall enter the drainage system through an air gap or an air gap device that meets the requirements of NSF 58.

P2909.3 Connection tubing.

The tubing to and from drinking water treatment units shall be of a size and material as recommended by the manufacturer. The tubing shall comply with NSF 14, NSF 42, NSF 44, NSF 53, NSF 58 or NSF 61.

SECTION P2910
NONPOTABLE WATER SYSTEMS
P2910.1 Scope.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, design, construction and installation of systems for the collection, storage, treatment and distribution of nonpotable water. The use and application of nonpotable water shall comply with laws, rules and ordinances applicable in the jurisdiction.

P2910.2 Water quality.

Nonpotable water for each end use application shall meet the minimum water quality requirements as established for the intended application by the laws, rules and ordinances applicable in the jurisdiction. Where nonpotable water from different sources is combined in a system, the system shall comply with the most stringent requirements of this code applicable to such sources.

P2910.2.1 Residual disinfectants.

Where chlorine is used for disinfection, the nonpotable water shall contain not more than 4 ppm (4 mg/L) of chloramines or free chlorine. Where ozone is used for disinfection, the nonpotable water shall not contain gas bubbles having elevated levels of ozone at the point of use.

Exception: Reclaimed water sources shall not be required to comply with the requirements of this section.

P2910.2.2 Filtration required.

Nonpotable water utilized for water closet and urinal flushing applications shall be filtered by a 100 micron or finer filter.

Exception: Reclaimed water sources shall not be required to comply with the requirements of this section.

P2910.3 Signage required.

Nonpotable water outlets such as hose connections, open-ended pipes and faucets shall be identified at the point of use for each outlet with signage that reads as follows: “Nonpotable water is utilized for [application name]. CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER. DO NOT DRINK.” The words shall be legibly and indelibly printed on a tag or sign constructed of corrosion-resistant, waterproof material or shall be indelibly printed on the fixture. The letters of the words shall be not less than 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) in height and in colors contrasting the background on which they are applied. In addition to the required wordage, the pictograph shown in Figure P2910.3 shall appear on the signage required by this section.

FIGURE P2910.3

PICTOGRAPH—DO NOT DRINK

P2910.4 Permits.

Permits shall be required for the construction, installation, alteration and repair of nonpotable water systems. Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams and other such data pertaining to the nonpotable water system shall be submitted with each permit application.

P2910.5 Potable water connections.

Where a potable system is connected to a nonpotable water system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with Section P2902.

P2910.6 Approved components and materials.

Piping, plumbing components and materials used in collection and conveyance systems shall be manufactured of material approved for the intended application and compatible with any disinfection and treatment systems used.

P2910.7 Insect and vermin control.

The system shall be protected to prevent the entrance of insects and vermin into storage tanks and piping systems. Screen materials shall be compatible with contacting system components and shall not accelerate the corrosion of system components.

P2910.8 Freeze protection.

Where sustained freezing temperatures occur, provisions shall be made to keep storage tanks and the related piping from freezing.

P2910.9 Nonpotable water storage tanks.

Nonpotable water storage tanks shall comply with Sections P2910.9.1 through P2910.9.11.

P2910.9.1 Sizing.

The holding capacity of the storage tank shall be sized in accordance with the anticipated demand.

P2910.9.2 Location.

Storage tanks shall be installed above or below grade. Above-grade storage tanks shall be protected from direct sunlight and shall be constructed using opaque, UV-resistant materials such as, but not limited to, heavily tinted plastic, lined metal, concrete and wood; or painted to prevent algae growth; or shall have specially constructed sun barriers including, but not limited to, installation in garages, crawlspaces or sheds. Storage tanks and their manholes shall not be located directly under any soil piping, waste piping or any source of contamination.

P2910.9.3 Materials.

Where collected on site, water shall be collected in an approved tank constructed of durable, nonabsorbent and corrosion-resistant materials. The storage tank shall be constructed of materials compatible with any disinfection systems used to treat water upstream of the tank and with any systems used to maintain water quality within the tank. Wooden storage tanks that are not equipped with a makeup water source shall be provided with a flexible liner.

P2910.9.4 Foundation and supports.

Storage tanks shall be supported on a firm base capable of withstanding the weight of the storage tank when filled to capacity. Storage tanks shall be supported in accordance with this code.

P2910.9.4.1 Ballast.

Where the soil can become saturated, an underground storage tank shall be ballasted or otherwise secured to prevent the tank from floating out of the ground when empty. The combined weight of the tank and hold-down ballast shall meet or exceed the buoyancy force of the tank. Where the installation requires a foundation, the foundation shall be flat and shall be designed to support the storage tank weight when full, consistent with the bearing capability of adjacent soil.

P2910.9.4.2 Structural support.

Where installed below grade, storage tank installations shall be designed to withstand earth and surface structural loads without damage and with minimal deformation when empty or filled with water.

P2910.9.5 Makeup water.

Where an uninterrupted nonpotable water supply is required for the intended application, potable or reclaimed water shall be provided as a source of makeup water for the storage tank. The makeup water supply shall be protected against backflow by means of an air gap not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the overflow or an approved backflow device in accordance with Section P2902. A full-open valve located on the makeup water supply line to the storage tank shall be provided. Inlets to the storage tank shall be controlled by fill valves or other automatic supply valves installed to prevent the tank from overflowing and to prevent the water level from dropping below a predetermined point. Where makeup water is provided, the water level shall be prohibited from dropping below the source water inlet or the intake of any attached pump.

P2910.9.5.1 Inlet control valve alarm.

Makeup water systems shall be fitted with a warning mechanism that alerts the user to a failure of the inlet control valve to close correctly. The alarm shall activate before the water within the storage tank begins to discharge into the overflow system.

P2910.9.6 Overflow.

The storage tank shall be equipped with an overflow pipe having a diameter not less than that shown in Table P2910.9.6. The overflow outlet shall discharge at a point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof or roof drain; floor or floor drain; or over an open water-supplied fixture. The overflow outlet shall be covered with a corrosion-resistant screen of not less than 16 by 20 mesh per inch (630 by 787 mesh per m) and by 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) hardware cloth or shall terminate in a horizontal angle seat check valve. Drainage from overflow pipes shall be directed to prevent freezing on roof walks. The overflow drain shall not be equipped with a shutoff valve. Not less than one cleanout shall be provided on each overflow pipe in accordance with Section P3005.2.

TABLE P2910.9.6

SIZE OF DRAIN PIPES FOR WATER TANKS

TANK CAPACITY
(gallons)
	DRAIN PIPE
(inches)

Up to 750	1
751 to 1500	11/2
1501 to 3000	2
3001 to 5000	21/2
5001 to 7500	3
Over 7500	4

For SI: 1 gallon = 3.875 liters, 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P2910.9.7 Access.

Not less than one access opening shall be provided to allow inspection and cleaning of the tank interior. Access openings shall have an approved locking device or other approved method of securing access. Below-grade storage tanks, located outside of the building, shall be provided with a manhole either not less than 24 inches (610 mm) square or with an inside diameter not less than 24 inches (610 mm). Manholes shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above ground or shall be designed to prevent water infiltration. Finished grade shall be sloped away from the manhole to divert surface water. Manhole covers shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access. Service ports in manhole covers shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) in diameter and shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the finished grade level. The service port shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access.

Exception: Storage tanks under 800 gallons (3028 L) in volume installed below grade shall not be required to be equipped with a manhole, but shall have a service port not less than 8 inches (203 mm) in diameter.

P2910.9.8 Venting.

Storage tanks shall be provided with a vent sized in accordance with Chapter 31 and based on the aggregate diameter of all tank influent pipes. The reservoir vent shall not be connected to sanitary drainage system vents. Vents shall be protected from contamination by means of an approved cap or a U-bend installed with the opening directed downward. Vent outlets shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above grade, or as necessary to prevent surface water from entering the storage tank. Vent openings shall be protected against the entrance of vermin and insects in accordance with the requirements of Section P2902.7.

P2910.9.9 Drain.

A drain shall be located at the lowest point of the storage tank. The tank drain pipe shall discharge as required for overflow pipes and shall not be smaller in size than specified in Table P2910.9.6. Not less than one cleanout shall be provided on each drain pipe in accordance with Section P3005.2.

P2910.10 Marking and signage.

Each nonpotable water storage tank shall be labeled with its rated capacity. The contents of storage tanks shall be identified with the words “CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER—DO NOT DRINK.” Where an opening is provided that could allow the entry of personnel, the opening shall be marked with the words, “DANGER—CONFINED SPACE.” Markings shall be indelibly printed on the tank, or on a tag or sign constructed of corrosion-resistant waterproof material that is mounted on the tank. The letters of the words shall be not less than 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) in height and shall be of a color in contrast with the background on which they are applied.

P2910.11 Storage tank tests.

Storage tanks shall be tested in accordance with the following:

1.	Storage tanks shall be filled with water to the overflow line prior to and during inspection. Seams and joints shall be left exposed and the tank shall remain water tight without leakage for a period of 24 hours.

2.	After 24 hours, supplemental water shall be introduced for a period of 15 minutes to verify proper drainage of the overflow system and leaks do not exist.

3.	Following a successful test of the overflow, the water level in the tank shall be reduced to a level that is 2 inches (51 mm) below the makeup water trigger point by using the tank drain. The tank drain shall be observed for proper operation. The makeup water system shall be observed for proper operation, and successful automatic shutoff of the system at the refill threshold shall be verified. Water shall not be drained from the overflow at any time during the refill test.

P2910.12 System abandonment.

If the owner of an on-site nonpotable water reuse system or rainwater collection and conveyance system elects to cease use of or fails to properly maintain such system, the system shall be abandoned and shall comply with the following:

1.	System piping connecting to a utility-provided water system shall be removed or disabled.

2.	The distribution piping system shall be replaced with an approved potable water supply piping system. Where an existing potable water pipe system is already in place, the fixtures shall be connected to the existing system.

3.	The storage tank shall be secured from accidental access by sealing or locking tank inlets and access points, or filled with sand or equivalent.

P2910.13 Separation requirements for nonpotable water piping.

Nonpotable water collection and distribution piping and reclaimed water piping shall be separated from the building sewer and potable water piping underground by 5 feet (1524 mm) of undisturbed or compacted earth. Nonpotable water collection and distribution piping shall not be located in, under or above cesspools, septic tanks, septic tank drainage fields or seepage pits. Buried nonpotable water piping shall comply with the requirements of Section P2604.

Exceptions:

1.	The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the nonpotable water pipe within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the sewer is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the top of the highest point of the sewer and the pipe materials conforms to Table P3002.2.

2.	The required separation distance shall not apply where the bottom of the potable water service pipe within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the nonpotable water pipe is not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the top of the highest point of the nonpotable water pipe and the pipe materials comply with the requirements of Table P2906.5.

3.	The required separation distance shall not apply where a nonpotable water pipe is located in the same trench with a building sewer that is constructed of materials that comply with the requirements of Table P3002.2.

4.	The required separation distance shall not apply where a nonpotable water pipe crosses a sewer pipe provided that the nonpotable water pipe is sleeved to not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) horizontally from the sewer pipe centerline on both sides of such crossing, with pipe materials that comply with Table P3002.2.

5.	The required separation distance shall not apply where a potable water service pipe crosses a nonpotable water pipe, provided that the potable water service pipe is sleeved for a distance of not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) horizontally from the centerline of the nonpotable pipe on both sides of such crossing, with pipe materials that comply with Table P3002.2.

6.	The required separation distance shall not apply to irrigation piping located outside of a building and downstream of the backflow preventer where nonpotable water is used for outdoor applications.

P2910.14 Outdoor outlet access.

Sillcocks, hose bibs, wall hydrants, yard hydrants and other outdoor outlets supplied by nonpotable water shall be located in a locked vault or shall be operable only by means of a removable key.

SECTION P2911
ON-SITE NONPOTABLE WATER REUSE SYSTEMS
P2911.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the construction, installation, alteration and repair of on-site nonpotable water reuse systems for the collection, storage, treatment and distribution of on-site sources of nonpotable water as permitted by the jurisdiction.

P2911.2 Sources.

On-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall collect waste discharge only from the following sources: bathtubs, showers, lavatories, clothes washers and laundry trays. Water from other approved nonpotable sources including swimming pool backwash operations, air conditioner condensate, rainwater, foundation drain water, fluid cooler discharge water and fire pump test water shall be permitted to be collected for reuse by on-site nonpotable water reuse systems, as approved by the building official and as appropriate for the intended application.

P2911.2.1 Prohibited sources.

Reverse osmosis system reject water, water softener backwash water, kitchen sink wastewater, dishwasher wastewater and wastewater containing urine or fecal matter shall not be collected for reuse within an on-site nonpotable water reuse system.

P2911.3 Traps.

Traps serving fixtures and devices discharging waste water to on-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall comply with the Section P3201.2.

P2911.4 Collection pipe.

On-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall utilize drainage piping approved for use within plumbing drainage systems to collect and convey untreated water for reuse. Vent piping approved for use within plumbing venting systems shall be utilized for vents within the gray-water system. Collection and vent piping materials shall comply with Section P3002.

P2911.4.1 Installation.

Collection piping conveying untreated water for reuse shall be installed in accordance with Section P3005.

P2911.4.2 Joints.

Collection piping conveying untreated water for reuse shall utilize joints approved for use with the distribution piping and appropriate for the intended applications as specified in Section P3002.

P2911.4.3 Size.

Collection piping conveying untreated water for reuse shall be sized in accordance with drainage sizing requirements specified in Section P3005.4.

P2911.4.4 Marking.

Additional marking of collection piping conveying untreated water for reuse shall not be required beyond that required for sanitary drainage, waste and vent piping by Chapter 30.

P2911.5 Filtration.

Untreated water collected for reuse shall be filtered as required for the intended end use. Filters shall be accessible for inspection and maintenance. Filters shall utilize a pressure gauge or other approved method to provide indication when a filter requires servicing or replacement. Filters shall be installed with shutoff valves immediately upstream and downstream to allow for isolation during maintenance.

P2911.6 Disinfection.

Nonpotable water collected on site for reuse shall be disinfected, treated or both to provide the quality of water needed for the intended end-use application. Where the intended end-use application does not have requirements for the quality of water, disinfection and treatment of water collected on site for reuse shall not be required. Nonpotable water collected on site containing untreated gray water shall be retained in collection reservoirs for not more than 24 hours.

P2911.6.1 Gray water used for fixture flushing.

Gray water used for flushing water closets and urinals shall be disinfected and treated by an on-site water reuse treatment system complying with NSF 350.

P2911.7 Storage tanks.

Storage tanks utilized in on-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall comply with Section P2910.9 and Sections P2911.7.1 through P2911.7.3.

P2911.7.1 Location.

Storage tanks shall be located with a minimum horizontal distance between various elements as indicated in Table P2911.7.1.

TABLE P2911.7.1

LOCATION OF NONPOTABLE WATER REUSE STORAGE TANKS

ELEMENT	MINIMUM HORIZONTAL DISTANCE
FROM STORAGE TANK
(feet)
Critical root zone (CRZ)
of protected trees
	2
Lot line adjoining private lots	5
Seepage pits	5
Septic tanks	5
Water wells	50
Streams and lakes	50
Water service	5
Public water main	10

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

P2911.7.2 Inlets.

Storage tank inlets shall be designed to introduce water into the tank with minimum turbulence, and shall be located and designed to avoid agitating the contents of the storage tank.

P2911.7.3 Outlets.

Outlets shall be located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the bottom of the storage tank, and shall not skim water from the surface.

P2911.8 Valves.

Valves shall be supplied on on-site nonpotable water reuse systems in accordance with Sections P2911.8.1 and P2911.8.2.

P2911.8.1 Bypass valve.

One three-way diverter valve certified to NSF 50 or other approved device shall be installed on collection piping upstream of each storage tank, or drainfield, as applicable, to divert untreated on-site reuse sources to the sanitary sewer to allow servicing and inspection of the system. Bypass valves shall be installed downstream of fixture traps and vent connections. Bypass valves shall be labeled to indicate the direction of flow, connection and storage tank or drainfield connection. Bypass valves shall be installed in accessible locations. Two shutoff valves shall not be installed to serve as a bypass valve.

P2911.8.2 Backwater valve.

Backwater valves shall be installed on each overflow and tank drain pipe. Backwater valves shall be in accordance with Section P3008.

P2911.9 Pumping and control system.

Mechanical equipment including pumps, valves and filters shall be accessible and removable in order to perform repair, maintenance and cleaning. The minimum flow rate and flow pressure delivered by the pumping system shall be appropriate for the application and in accordance with Section P2903.

P2911.10 Water-pressure-reducing valve or regulator.

Where the water pressure supplied by the pumping system exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa) static, a pressure-reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the nonpotable water distribution system piping to 80 psi (552 kPa) static or less. Pressure-reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section P2903.3.1.

P2911.11 Distribution pipe.

Distribution piping utilized in on-site nonpotable water reuse systems shall comply with Sections P2911.11.1 through P2911.11.3.

Exception: Irrigation piping located outside of the building and downstream of a backflow preventer.

P2910.11.1 Materials, joints and connections.

Distribution piping shall conform to the standards and requirements specified in Section P2906 for nonpotable water.

P2911.11.2 Design.

On-site nonpotable water reuse distribution piping systems shall be designed and sized in accordance with Section P2903 for the intended application.

P2911.11.3 Marking.

On-site nonpotable water distribution piping labeling and marking shall comply with Section P2901.2.

P2911.12 Tests and inspections.

Tests and inspections shall be performed in accordance with Sections P2911.12.1 through P2911.12.6.

P2911.12.1 Collection pipe and vent test.

Drain, waste and vent piping used for on-site water reuse systems shall be tested in accordance with Section P2503.

P2911.12.2 Storage tank test.

Storage tanks shall be tested in accordance with Section P2910.11.

P2911.12.3 Water supply system test.

The testing of makeup water supply piping and distribution piping shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.7.

P2911.12.4 Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies.

The testing of backflow preventers and backwater valves shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.8.

P2911.12.5 Inspection of vermin and insect protection.

Inlets and vents to the system shall be inspected to verify that each is protected to prevent the entrance of insects and vermin into the storage tank and piping systems in accordance with Section P2910.7.

P2911.12.6 Water quality test.

The quality of the water for the intended application shall be verified at the point of use in accordance with the requirements of the jurisdiction.

P2911.13 Operation and maintenance manuals.

Operation and maintenance materials shall be supplied with nonpotable on-site water reuse systems in accordance with Sections P2911.13.1 through P2911.13.4.

P2911.13.1 Manual.

A detailed operations and maintenance manual shall be supplied in hard-copy form for each system.

P2911.13.2 Schematics.

The manual shall include a detailed system schematic, the location of system components and a list of system components that includes the manufacturers and model numbers of the components.

P2911.13.3 Maintenance procedures.

The manual shall provide a schedule and procedures for system components requiring periodic maintenance. Consumable parts including filters shall be noted along with part numbers.

P2911.13.4 Operations procedures.

The manual shall include system startup and shutdown procedures. The manual shall include detailed operating procedures for the system.

SECTION P2912
NONPOTABLE RAINWATER COLLECTION
AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
P2912.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the construction, installation, alteration, and repair of rainwater collection and conveyance systems for the collection, storage, treatment and distribution of rainwater for nonpotable applications. For nonpotable rainwater systems, the provisions of CSA B805/ICC 805 shall be an alternative for regulating the materials, design, construction and installation of systems for rainwater collection, storage, treatment and distribution of nonpotable water. The use and application of nonpotable water shall comply with laws, rules and ordinances applicable in the jurisdiction.

P2912.1.1 Alternate compliance path.

Systems for nonpotable uses that comply with CSA B805/ICC 805 aredeemed to comply with Section P2912.

P2912.2 Collection surface.

Rainwater shall be collected only from above-ground impervious roofing surfaces constructed from approved materials. Collection of water from vehicular parking or pedestrian walkway surfaces shall be prohibited except where the water is used exclusively for landscape irrigation. Overflow and bleed-off pipes from roof-mounted appliances including, but not limited to, evaporative coolers, water heaters and solar water heaters shall not discharge onto rainwater collection surfaces.

P2912.3 Debris excluders.

Downspouts and leaders shall be connected to a roof washer and shall be equipped with a debris excluder or equivalent device to prevent the contamination of collected rainwater with leaves, sticks, pine needles and similar material. Debris excluders and equivalent devices shall be self-cleaning.

P2912.4 Roof washer.

An amount of rainwater shall be diverted at the beginning of each rain event, and not allowed to enter the storage tank, to wash accumulated debris from the collection surface. The amount of rainfall to be diverted shall be field adjustable as necessary to minimize storage tank water contamination. The roof washer shall not rely on manually operated valves or devices, and shall operate automatically. Diverted rainwater shall not be drained to the roof surface, and shall be discharged in a manner consistent with the storm water runoff requirements of the jurisdiction. Roof washers shall be accessible for maintenance and service.

P2912.5 Roof gutters and downspouts.

Gutters and downspouts shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with the collection surface and the rainwater quality for the desired end use. Joints shall be watertight.

P2912.5.1 Slope.

Roof gutters, leaders and rainwater collection piping shall slope continuously toward collection inlets and shall be free of leaks. Gutters and downspouts shall have a slope of not less than 1/8 inch per foot (10.4 mm/m) along their entire length. Gutters and downspouts shall be installed so that water does not pool at any point.

P2912.5.2 Cleanouts.

Cleanouts shall be provided in the water conveyance system to allow access to filters, flushes, pipes and downspouts.

P2912.6 Drainage.

Water drained from the roof washer or debris excluder shall not be drained to the sanitary sewer. Such water shall be diverted from the storage tank and shall discharge to a location that will not cause erosion or damage to property. Roof washers and debris excluders shall be provided with an automatic means of self-draining between rain events and shall not drain onto roof surfaces.

P2912.7 Collection pipe.

Rainwater collection and conveyance systems shall utilize drainage piping approved for use within plumbing drainage systems to collect and convey captured rainwater. Vent piping approved for use within plumbing venting systems shall be utilized for vents within the rainwater system. Collection and vent piping materials shall comply with Section P3002.

P2912.7.1 Installation.

Collection piping conveying captured rainwater shall be installed in accordance with Section P3005.3.

P2912.7.2 Joints.

Collection piping conveying captured rainwater shall utilize joints approved for use with the distribution piping and appropriate for the intended applications as specified in Section P3003.

P2912.7.3 Size.

Collection piping conveying captured rainwater shall be sized in accordance with drainage-sizing requirements specified in Section P3005.4.

P2912.7.4 Marking.

Additional marking of collection piping conveying captured rainwater for reuse shall not be required beyond that required for sanitary drainage, waste, and vent piping by Chapter 30.

P2912.8 Filtration.

Collected rainwater shall be filtered as required for the intended end use. Filters shall be accessible for inspection and maintenance. Filters shall utilize a pressure gauge or other approved method to provide indication when a filter requires servicing or replacement. Filters shall be installed with shutoff valves installed immediately upstream and downstream to allow for isolation during maintenance.

P2912.9 Disinfection.

Where the intended application for rainwater requires disinfection or other treatment or both, it shall be disinfected as needed to ensure that the required water quality is delivered at the point of use.

P2912.10 Storage tanks.

Storage tanks utilized in nonpotable rainwater collection and conveyance systems shall comply with Section P2910.9 and Sections P2912.10.1 through P2912.10.3.

P2912.10.1 Location.

Storage tanks shall be located with a minimum horizontal distance between various elements as indicated in Table P2912.10.1.

TABLE P2912.10.1

LOCATION OF RAINWATER STORAGE TANKS

ELEMENT	MINIMUM HORIZONTAL DISTANCE
FROM STORAGE TANK
(feet)
Critical root zone (CRZ) of protected trees	2
Lot line adjoining private lots	5
Seepage pits	5
Septic tanks	5

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

P2912.10.2 Inlets.

Storage tank inlets shall be designed to introduce collected rainwater into the tank with minimum turbulence, and shall be located and designed to avoid agitating the contents of the storage tank.

P2912.10.3 Outlets.

Outlets shall be located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the bottom of the storage tank and shall not skim water from the surface.

P2912.11 Valves.

Valves shall be supplied on rainwater collection and conveyance systems in accordance with Sections P2912.11.1 and P2912.11.2.

P2912.11.1 Influent diversion.

A means shall be provided to divert storage tank influent to allow for maintenance and repair of the storage tank system.

P2912.11.2 Backwater valve.

Backwater valves shall be installed on each overflow and tank drain pipe. Backwater valves shall be in accordance with Section P3008.

P2912.12 Pumping and control system.

Mechanical equipment including pumps, valves and filters shall be easily accessible and removable in order to perform repair, maintenance and cleaning. The minimum flow rate and flow pressure delivered by the pumping system shall appropriate for the application and in accordance with Section P2903.

P2912.13 Water-pressure-reducing valve or regulator.

Where the water pressure supplied by the pumping system exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa) static, a pressure-reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the rainwater distribution system piping to 80 psi (552 kPa) static or less. Pressure-reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section P2903.3.1.

P2912.14 Distribution pipe.

Distribution piping utilized in rainwater collection and conveyance systems shall comply with Sections P2912.14.1 through P2912.14.3.

Exception: Irrigation piping located outside of the building and downstream of a backflow preventer.

P2912.14.1 Materials, joints and connections.

Distribution piping shall conform to the standards and requirements specified in Section P2906 for nonpotable water.

P2912.14.2 Design.

Distribution piping systems shall be designed and sized in accordance with the Section P2903 for the intended application.

P2912.14.3 Labeling and marking.

Nonpotable rainwater distribution piping labeling and marking shall comply with Section P2901.2.

P2912.15 Tests and inspections.

Tests and inspections shall be performed in accordance with Sections P2912.15.1 through P2912.15.8.

P2912.15.1 Roof gutter inspection and test.

Roof gutters shall be inspected to verify that the installation and slope is in accordance with Section P2912.5.1. Gutters shall be tested by pouring not less than one gallon of water (3.8 L) into the end of the gutter opposite the collection point. The gutter being tested shall not leak and shall not retain standing water.

P2912.15.2 Roofwasher test.

Roofwashers shall be tested by introducing water into the gutters. Proper diversion of the first quantity of water in accordance with the requirements of Section P2912.4 shall be verified.

P2912.15.3 Collection pipe and vent test.

Drain, waste and vent piping used for rainwater collection and conveyance systems shall be tested in accordance with Section P2503.

P2912.15.4 Storage tank test.

Storage tanks shall be tested in accordance with the Section P2910.11.

P2912.15.5 Water supply system test.

The testing of makeup water supply piping and distribution piping shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.7.

P2912.15.6 Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies.

The testing of backflow preventers and backwater valves shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.8.

P2912.15.7 Inspection of vermin and insect protection.

Inlets and vents to the system shall be inspected to verify that each is protected to prevent the entrance of insects and vermin into the storage tank and piping systems in accordance with Section P2910.7.

P2912.15.8 Water quality test.

The quality of the water for the intended application shall be verified at the point of use in accordance with the requirements of the jurisdiction.

P2912.16 Operation and maintenance manuals.

Operation and maintenance manuals shall be supplied with rainwater collection and conveyance systems in accordance with Sections P2912.16.1 through P2912.16.4.

P2912.16.1 Manual.

A detailed operations and maintenance manual shall be supplied in hard-copy form for each system.

P2912.16.2 Schematics.

The manual shall include a detailed system schematic, the location of system components and a list of system components that includes the manufacturers and model numbers of the components.

P2912.16.3 Maintenance procedures.

The manual shall provide a maintenance schedule and procedures for system components requiring periodic maintenance. Consumable parts, including filters, shall be noted along with part numbers.

P2912.16.4 Operations procedures.

The manual shall include system startup and shutdown procedures, and detailed operating procedures.

SECTION P2913
RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEMS
P2913.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the construction, installation, alteration and repair of systems supplying nonpotable reclaimed water.

P2913.2 Water-pressure-reducing valve or regulator.

Where the reclaimed water pressure supplied to the building exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa) static, a pressure-reducing valve shall be installed to reduce the pressure in the reclaimed water distribution system piping to 80 psi (552 kPa) static or less. Pressure-reducing valves shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section P2903.3.1.

P2913.3 Reclaimed water systems.

The design of the reclaimed water systems shall conform to accepted engineering practice.

P2913.3.1 Distribution pipe.

Distribution piping shall comply with Sections P2913.3.1.1 through P2913.3.1.3.

Exception: Irrigation piping located outside of the building and downstream of a backflow preventer.

P2913.3.1.1 Materials, joints and connections.

Distribution piping conveying reclaimed water shall conform to standards and requirements specified in Section P2905 for nonpotable water.

P2913.3.1.2 Design.

Distribution piping systems shall be designed and sized in accordance with Section P2903 for the intended application.

P2913.3.1.3 Labeling and marking.

Nonpotable rainwater distribution piping labeling and marking shall comply with Section P2901.2.

P2913.4 Tests and inspections.

Tests and inspections shall be performed in accordance with Sections P2913.4.1 and P2913.4.2.

P2913.4.1 Water supply system test.

The testing of makeup water supply piping and reclaimed water distribution piping shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.7.

P2913.4.2 Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies.

The testing of backflow preventers shall be conducted in accordance with Section P2503.8.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-3]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING PLANNING
SECTION R301
DESIGN CRITERIA
R301.1 Application.

Buildings and structures, and parts thereof, shall be constructed to safely support all loads, including dead loads, live loads, roof loads, flood loads and wind loads as prescribed by this code. The construction of buildings and structures in accordance with the provisions of this code shall result in a system that provides a complete load path that meets the requirements for the transfer of loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Buildings and structures constructed as prescribed by this code are deemed to comply with the requirements of this section.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with Sections R302 to R328, inclusive and the provisions of Chapter 44, Sections R301.2.5 and R406. In addition, buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas established in Table R301.2(1) shall comply with Sections R301.2.4, R301.2.5 and R322.

R301.1.1 Alternative provisions.

As an alternative to the requirements in Section R301.1, the following standards are permitted subject to the limitations of this code and the limitations therein. Where engineered design is used in conjunction with these standards, the design shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Building.

1.	AF&PAWood Frame Construction Manual (WFCM).

2.	AISI Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (AISI S230).

3.	ICCStandard on the Design and Construction of Log Structures (ICC 400).

R301.1.2 Construction systems.

The requirements of this code are based on platform and balloon-frame construction for light-frame buildings. The requirements for concrete and masonry buildings are based on a balloon framing system. Other framing systems must have equivalent detailing to ensure force transfer, continuity and compatible deformations.

R301.1.3 Engineered design.

Where a building of otherwise conventional construction contains structural elements exceeding the limits of Section R301 or otherwise not conforming to this code, these elements shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The extent of such design need only demonstrate compliance of nonconventional elements with other applicable provisions and shall be compatible with the performance of the conventional framed system. Engineered design in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building is permitted for buildings and structures, and parts thereof, included in the scope of this code.

R301.2 Climatic and geographic design criteria.

Buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code as limited by the provisions of this section. Additional criteria shall be set forth in Table R301.2(1).

Figure R301.2(2) Seismic Design Categories—Site Class D. Reserved.

Figure R301.2(4)A Ultimate Design Wind Speed. Reserved.

Figure R301.2(4)B Regions Where Wind Design Is Required. Reserved.

Figure R301.2(5) Ground Snow Loads, Pg, for the United States (lb/ft2). Reserved.

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND
SNOW
LOAD	WIND DESIGN	SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORYf	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM	WINTER
DESIGN
TEMPe	ICE BARRIER
UNDERLAYMENT
REQUIREDh	FLOOD
HAZARDSg
	AIR
FREEZING
INDEXi	MEAN
ANNUAL
TEMPj
Speedd
(mph)
	Topographic
effectsk
	Special
wind
regionl
	Wind-
borne
debris
zonem
	Weatheringa	Frost
line
depthb	Termitec
NA	See Fig. R301.2(4)	NA	Negligible	NA	Very Heavy		NA		NA	NA

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index, “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe” for concrete as determined from Figure R301.2(3). The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73, C90, C129, C145, C216 or C652.

b.	Reserved.

c.	Termite infestation per Figure R301.2(6) is “very heavy.”

d.	Wind speed shall be from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.	The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.	Reserved.

g.	The applicable governing body shall, by local floodplain management ordinance, specify (a) the date of the jurisdiction’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of the currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended.

h.	Reserved.

i.	Reserved.

j.	Reserved.

k.	Reserved.

l.	Reserved.

m.	Reserved.

TABLE R301.2(2)

COMPONENT AND CLADDING LOADS FOR A BUILDING WITH A MEAN ROOF HEIGHT OF 30 FEET LOCATED IN EXPOSURE B (ASD) (psf)a, b, c, d, e, f, g

	Zone	Effective
Wind
Area	90	95	100	105	110	115	120	130	140	150	160	170	180
POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG	POS	NEG
Gable Roof < 7 degrees	1'	10	3.6	-8.0	4.0	-8.9	4.4	-9.9	4.8	-10.9	5.3	-12.0	5.8	-13.1	6.3	-14.2	7.4	-16.7	8.6	-19.4	9.9	-22.2	11.2	-25.3	12.7	-28.5	14.2	-32.0
1'	20	3.3	-8.0	3.7	-8.9	4.1	-9.9	4.5	-10.9	5.0	-12.0	5.4	-13.1	5.9	-14.2	7.0	-16.7	8.1	-19.4	9.3	-22.2	10.5	-25.3	11.9	-28.5	13.3	-32.0
1'	50	3.0	-8.0	3.4	-8.9	3.8	-9.9	4.1	-10.9	4.5	-12.0	5.0	-13.1	5.4	-14.2	6.3	-16.7	7.4	-19.4	8.4	-22.2	9.6	-25.3	10.8	-28.5	12.2	-32.0
1'	100	2.8	-8.0	3.1	-8.9	3.5	-9.9	3.8	-10.9	4.2	-12.0	4.6	-13.1	5.0	-14.2	5.9	-16.7	6.8	-19.4	7.8	-22.2	8.9	-25.3	10.0	-28.5	11.3	-32.0
1	10	3.6	-13.9	4.0	-15.5	4.4	-17.2	4.8	-19.0	5.3	-20.8	5.8	-22.7	6.3	-24.8	7.4	-29.1	8.6	-33.7	9.9	-38.7	11.2	-44.0	12.7	-49.7	14.2	-55.7
1	20	3.3	-13.0	3.7	-14.5	4.1	-16.1	4.5	-17.7	5.0	-19.4	5.4	-21.2	5.9	-23.1	7.0	-27.1	8.1	-31.5	9.3	-36.1	10.5	-41.1	11.9	-46.4	13.3	-52.0
1	50	3.0	-11.8	3.4	-13.1	3.8	-14.6	4.1	-16.1	4.5	-17.6	5.0	-19.3	5.4	-21.0	6.3	-24.6	7.4	-28.5	8.4	-32.8	9.6	-37.3	10.8	-42.1	12.2	-47.2
1	100	2.8	-10.9	3.1	-12.1	3.5	-13.4	3.8	-14.8	4.2	-16.2	4.6	-17.8	5.0	-19.3	5.9	-22.7	6.8	-26.3	7.8	-30.2	8.9	-34.4	10.0	-38.8	11.3	-43.5
2	10	3.6	-18.4	4.0	-20.5	4.4	-22.7	4.8	-25.0	5.3	-27.4	5.8	-30.0	6.3	-32.7	7.4	-38.3	8.6	-44.5	9.9	-51.0	11.2	-58.1	12.7	-65.6	14.2	-73.5
2	20	3.3	-17.2	3.7	-19.2	4.1	-21.2	4.5	-23.4	5.0	-25.7	5.4	-28.1	5.9	-30.6	7.0	-35.9	8.1	-41.6	9.3	-47.8	10.5	-54.3	11.9	-61.3	13.3	-68.8
2	50	3.0	-15.6	3.4	-17.4	3.8	-19.3	4.1	-21.3	4.5	-23.4	5.0	-25.5	5.4	-27.8	6.3	-32.6	7.4	-37.8	8.4	-43.4	9.6	-49.4	10.8	-55.8	12.2	-62.5
2	100	2.8	-14.4	3.1	-16.1	3.5	-17.8	3.8	-19.7	4.2	-21.6	4.6	-23.6	5.0	-25.7	5.9	-30.1	6.8	-35.0	7.8	-40.1	8.9	-45.7	10.0	-51.6	11.3	-57.8
3	10	3.6	-25.0	4.0	-27.9	4.4	-30.9	4.8	-34.1	5.3	-37.4	5.8	-40.9	6.3	-44.5	7.4	-52.2	8.6	-60.6	9.9	-69.6	11.2	-79.1	12.7	-89.4	14.2	-100.2
3	20	3.3	-22.7	3.7	-25.3	4.1	-28.0	4.5	-30.9	5.0	-33.9	5.4	-37.0	5.9	-40.3	7.0	-47.3	8.1	-54.9	9.3	-63.0	10.5	-71.7	11.9	-80.9	13.3	-90.7
3	50	3.0	-19.6	3.4	-21.8	3.8	-24.1	4.1	-26.6	4.5	-29.2	5.0	-31.9	5.4	-34.8	6.3	-40.8	7.4	-47.3	8.4	-54.3	9.6	-61.8	10.8	-69.8	12.2	-78.2
3	100	2.8	-17.2	3.1	-19.2	3.5	-21.2	3.8	-23.4	4.2	-25.7	4.6	-28.1	5.0	-30.6	5.9	-35.9	6.8	-41.6	7.8	-47.8	8.9	-54.3	10.0	-61.3	11.3	-68.8
Gable Roof > 7 to 20 degrees	1	10	5.8	-16.2	6.4	-18.0	7.1	-19.9	7.9	-22.0	8.6	-24.1	9.4	-26.4	10.3	-28.7	12.1	-33.7	14.0	-39.1	16.1	-44.9	18.3	-51.0	20.6	-57.6	23.1	-64.6
1	20	5.3	-13.9	5.9	-15.5	6.5	-17.1	7.2	-18.9	7.9	-20.7	8.6	-22.7	9.4	-24.7	11.0	-29.0	12.7	-33.6	14.6	-38.6	16.6	-43.9	18.8	-49.5	21.1	-55.5
1	50	4.6	-10.9	5.1	-12.1	5.7	-13.4	6.2	-14.8	6.8	-16.3	7.5	-17.8	8.2	-19.4	9.6	-22.7	11.1	-26.4	12.7	-30.3	14.5	-34.4	16.4	-38.9	18.3	-43.6
1	100	4.1	-8.6	4.5	-9.6	5.0	-10.7	5.5	-11.7	6.1	-12.9	6.6	-14.1	7.2	-15.3	8.5	-18.0	9.8	-20.9	11.3	-24.0	12.9	-27.3	14.5	-30.8	16.3	-34.5
2	10	5.8	-21.3	6.4	-23.8	7.1	-26.3	7.9	-29.0	8.6	-31.9	9.4	-34.8	10.3	-37.9	12.1	-44.5	14.0	-51.6	16.1	-59.3	18.3	-67.4	20.6	-76.1	23.1	-85.4
2	20	5.3	-18.4	5.9	-20.5	6.5	-22.7	7.2	-25.1	7.9	-27.5	8.6	-30.1	9.4	-32.8	11.0	-38.4	12.7	-44.6	14.6	-51.2	16.6	-58.2	18.8	-65.7	21.1	-73.7
2	50	4.6	-14.6	5.1	-16.2	5.7	-18.0	6.2	-19.8	6.8	-21.8	7.5	-23.8	8.2	-25.9	9.6	-30.4	11.1	-35.3	12.7	-40.5	14.5	-46.1	16.4	-52.0	18.3	-58.3
2	100	4.1	-11.7	4.5	-13.0	5.0	-14.4	5.5	-15.9	6.1	-17.4	6.6	-19.0	7.2	-20.7	8.5	-24.3	9.8	-28.2	11.3	-32.4	12.9	-36.8	14.5	-41.6	16.3	-46.6
3	10	5.8	-28.0	6.4	-31.2	7.1	-34.6	7.9	-38.1	8.6	-41.8	9.4	-45.7	10.3	-49.8	12.1	-58.4	14.0	-67.8	16.1	-77.8	18.3	-88.5	20.6	-99.9	23.1	-112.0
3	20	5.3	-24.0	5.9	-26.7	6.5	-29.6	7.2	-32.7	7.9	-35.8	8.6	-39.2	9.4	-42.7	11.0	-50.1	12.7	-58.1	14.6	-66.6	16.6	-75.8	18.8	-85.6	21.1	-96.0
3	50	4.6	-18.7	5.1	-20.8	5.7	-23.1	6.2	-25.4	6.8	-27.9	7.5	-30.5	8.2	-33.2	9.6	-39.0	11.1	-45.2	12.7	-51.9	14.5	-59.1	16.4	-66.7	18.3	-74.7
3	100	4.1	-14.7	4.5	-16.3	5.0	-18.1	5.5	-20.0	6.1	-21.9	6.6	-24.0	7.2	-26.1	8.5	-30.6	9.8	-35.5	11.3	-40.8	12.9	-46.4	14.5	-52.3	16.3	-58.7
Gable Roof > 20 to 27 degrees	1	10	5.8	-12.4	6.4	-13.9	7.1	-15.4	7.9	-16.9	8.6	-18.6	9.4	-20.3	10.3	-22.1	12.1	-26.0	14.0	-30.1	16.1	-34.6	18.3	-39.3	20.6	-44.4	23.1	-49.8
1	20	5.3	-11.2	5.9	-12.5	6.5	-13.9	7.2	-15.3	7.9	-16.8	8.6	-18.4	9.4	-20.0	11.0	-23.5	12.7	-27.2	14.6	-31.2	16.6	-35.5	18.8	-40.1	21.1	-45.0
1	50	4.6	-9.7	5.1	-10.8	5.7	-11.9	6.2	-13.1	6.8	-14.4	7.5	-15.8	8.2	-17.2	9.6	-20.2	11.1	-23.4	12.7	-26.8	14.5	-30.5	16.4	-34.5	18.3	-38.6
1	100	4.1	-8.5	4.5	-9.4	5.0	-10.4	5.5	-11.5	6.1	-12.6	6.6	-13.8	7.2	-15.0	8.5	-17.7	9.8	-20.5	11.3	-23.5	12.9	-26.7	14.5	-30.2	16.3	-33.8
2	10	5.8	-19.9	6.4	-22.1	7.1	-24.5	7.9	-27.0	8.6	-29.7	9.4	-32.4	10.3	-35.3	12.1	-41.4	14.0	-48.0	16.1	-55.2	18.3	-62.8	20.6	-70.8	23.1	-79.4
2	20	5.3	-17.0	5.9	-18.9	6.5	-20.9	7.2	-23.1	7.9	-25.3	8.6	-27.7	9.4	-30.1	11.0	-35.4	12.7	-41.0	14.6	-47.1	16.6	-53.6	18.8	-60.5	21.1	-67.8
2	50	4.6	-13.1	5.1	-14.6	5.7	-16.2	6.2	-17.9	6.8	-19.6	7.5	-21.4	8.2	-23.3	9.6	-27.4	11.1	-31.8	12.7	-36.5	14.5	-41.5	16.4	-46.8	18.3	-52.5
2	100	4.1	-10.2	4.5	-11.4	5.0	-12.6	5.5	-13.9	6.1	-15.3	6.6	-16.7	7.2	-18.2	8.5	-21.3	9.8	-24.7	11.3	-28.4	12.9	-32.3	14.5	-36.5	16.3	-40.9
3	10	5.8	-23.6	6.4	-26.3	7.1	-29.1	7.9	-32.1	8.6	-35.2	9.4	-38.5	10.3	-41.9	12.1	-49.2	14.0	-57.0	16.1	-65.4	18.3	-74.5	20.6	-84.1	23.1	-94.2
3	20	5.3	-20.0	5.9	-22.3	6.5	-24.7	7.2	-27.2	7.9	-29.9	8.6	-32.6	9.4	-35.5	11.0	-41.7	12.7	-48.4	14.6	-55.5	16.6	-63.2	18.8	-71.3	21.1	-80.0
3	50	4.6	-15.3	5.1	-17.0	5.7	-18.9	6.2	-20.8	6.8	-22.8	7.5	-24.9	8.2	-27.2	9.6	-31.9	11.1	-37.0	12.7	-42.4	14.5	-48.3	16.4	-54.5	18.3	-61.1
3	100	4.1	-11.7	4.5	-13.0	5.0	-14.5	5.5	-15.9	6.1	-17.5	6.6	-19.1	7.2	-20.8	8.5	-24.4	9.8	-28.3	11.3	-32.5	12.9	-37.0	14.5	-41.8	16.3	-46.8
Gable Roof > 27 to 45 degrees	1	10	8.0	-14.7	8.9	-16.3	9.9	-18.1	10.9	-20.0	12.0	-21.9	13.1	-24.0	14.2	-26.1	16.7	-30.6	19.4	-35.5	22.2	-40.8	25.3	-46.4	28.5	-52.3	32.0	-58.7
1	20	7.3	-12.4	8.2	-13.9	9.0	-15.4	10.0	-16.9	10.9	-18.6	11.9	-20.3	13.0	-22.1	15.3	-26.0	17.7	-30.1	20.3	-34.6	23.1	-39.3	26.1	-44.4	29.3	-49.8
1	50	6.4	-9.5	7.1	-10.6	7.9	-11.7	8.7	-12.9	9.6	-14.2	10.5	-15.5	11.4	-16.9	13.4	-19.8	15.5	-23.0	17.8	-26.4	20.3	-30.0	22.9	-33.9	25.6	-38.0
1	100	5.7	-7.3	6.4	-8.1	7.1	-9.0	7.8	-9.9	8.6	-10.8	9.3	-11.9	10.2	-12.9	11.9	-15.1	13.9	-17.6	15.9	-20.2	18.1	-22.9	20.4	-25.9	22.9	-29.0
2	10	8.0	-16.2	8.9	-18.0	9.9	-19.9	10.9	-22.0	12.0	-24.1	13.1	-26.4	14.2	-28.7	16.7	-33.7	19.4	-39.1	22.2	-44.9	25.3	-51.0	28.5	-57.6	32.0	-64.6
2	20	7.3	-14.4	8.2	-16.1	9.0	-17.8	10.0	-19.7	10.9	-21.6	11.9	-23.6	13.0	-25.7	15.3	-30.1	17.7	-34.9	20.3	-40.1	23.1	-45.6	26.1	-51.5	29.3	-57.7
2	50	6.4	-12.2	7.1	-13.6	7.9	-15.0	8.7	-16.6	9.6	-18.2	10.5	-19.9	11.4	-21.6	13.4	-25.4	15.5	-29.5	17.8	-33.8	20.3	-38.5	22.9	-43.4	25.6	-48.7
2	100	5.7	-10.5	6.4	-11.7	7.1	-12.9	7.8	-14.2	8.6	-15.6	9.3	-17.1	10.2	-18.6	11.9	-21.8	13.9	-25.3	15.9	-29.0	18.1	-33.0	20.4	-37.3	22.9	-41.8
3	10	8.0	-19.9	8.9	-22.1	9.9	-24.5	10.9	-27.0	12.0	-29.7	13.1	-32.4	14.2	-35.3	16.7	-41.4	19.4	-48.0	22.2	-55.2	25.3	-62.8	28.5	-70.8	32.0	-79.4
3	20	7.3	-17.3	8.2	-19.3	9.0	-21.3	10.0	-23.5	10.9	-25.8	11.9	-28.2	13.0	-30.7	15.3	-36.1	0.0	-41.8	20.3	-48.0	23.1	-54.6	26.1	-61.7	29.3	-69.1
3	50	6.4	-13.9	7.1	-15.5	7.9	-17.1	8.7	-18.9	9.6	-20.7	10.5	-22.7	11.4	-24.7	13.4	-29.0	15.5	-33.6	17.8	-38.6	20.3	-43.9	22.9	-49.5	25.6	-55.5
3	100	5.7	-11.3	6.4	-12.6	7.1	-14.0	7.8	-15.4	8.6	-16.9	9.3	-18.5	10.2	-20.1	11.9	-23.6	13.9	-27.4	15.9	-31.4	18.1	-35.8	20.4	-40.4	22.9	-45.3
Hip Roof > 7 to 20 degrees	1	10	6.5	-14.7	7.3	-16.3	8.0	-18.1	8.9	-20.0	9.7	-21.9	10.6	-24.0	11.6	-26.1	13.6	-30.6	15.8	-35.5	18.1	-40.8	20.6	-46.4	23.3	-52.3	26.1	-58.7
1	20	5.6	-13.0	6.3	-14.4	6.9	-16.0	7.7	-17.6	8.4	-19.4	9.2	-21.2	10.0	-23.0	11.7	-27.0	13.6	-31.3	15.6	-36.0	17.8	-40.9	20.1	-46.2	22.5	-51.8
1	50	4.4	-10.7	5.0	-11.9	5.5	-13.2	6.1	-14.5	6.6	-16.0	7.3	-17.5	7.9	-19.0	9.3	-22.3	10.8	-25.9	12.4	-29.7	14.1	-33.8	15.9	-38.1	17.8	-42.8
1	100	3.6	-9.0	4.0	-10.0	4.4	-11.1	4.8	-12.2	5.3	-13.4	5.8	-14.7	6.3	-16.0	7.4	-18.7	8.6	-21.7	9.9	-24.9	11.2	-28.4	12.7	-32.0	14.2	-35.9
2	10	6.5	-19.1	7.3	-21.3	8.0	-23.6	8.9	-26.0	9.7	-28.6	10.6	-31.2	11.6	-34.0	13.6	-39.9	15.8	-46.3	18.1	-53.1	20.6	-60.4	23.3	-68.2	26.1	-76.5
2	20	5.6	-17.2	6.3	-19.2	6.9	-21.3	7.7	-23.5	8.4	-25.7	9.2	-28.1	10.0	-30.6	11.7	-35.9	13.6	-41.7	15.6	-47.9	17.8	-54.5	20.1	-61.5	22.5	-68.9
2	50	4.4	-14.7	5.0	-16.4	5.5	-18.2	6.1	-20.1	6.6	-22.0	7.3	-24.1	7.9	-26.2	9.3	-30.7	10.8	-35.7	12.4	-40.9	14.1	-46.6	15.9	-52.6	17.8	-58.9
2	100	3.6	-12.9	4.0	-14.3	4.4	-15.9	4.8	-17.5	5.3	-19.2	5.8	-21.0	6.3	-22.8	7.4	-26.8	8.6	-31.1	9.9	-35.7	11.2	-40.6	12.7	-45.9	14.2	-51.4
3	10	6.5	-20.6	7.3	-22.9	8.0	-25.4	8.9	-28.0	9.7	-30.8	10.6	-33.6	11.6	-36.6	13.6	-43.0	15.8	-49.8	18.1	-57.2	20.6	-65.1	23.3	-73.5	26.1	-82.4
3	20	5.6	-18.5	6.3	-20.7	6.9	-22.9	7.7	-25.2	8.4	-27.7	9.2	-30.3	10.0	-33.0	11.7	-38.7	13.6	-44.9	15.6	-51.5	17.8	-58.6	20.1	-66.2	22.5	-74.2
3	50	4.4	-15.8	5.0	-17.6	5.5	-19.5	6.1	-21.5	6.6	-23.6	7.3	-25.8	7.9	-28.1	9.3	-33.0	10.8	-38.3	12.4	-43.9	14.1	-50.0	15.9	-56.5	17.8	-63.3
3	100	3.6	-13.8	4.0	-15.3	4.4	-17.0	4.8	-18.7	5.3	-20.6	5.8	-22.5	6.3	-24.5	7.4	-28.7	8.6	-33.3	9.9	-38.2	11.2	-43.5	12.7	-49.1	14.2	-55.1
Hip Roof > 20 to 27 degrees	1	10	6.5	-11.7	7.3	-13.0	8.0	-14.5	8.9	-15.9	9.7	-17.5	10.6	-19.1	11.6	-20.8	13.6	-24.4	15.8	-28.3	18.1	-32.5	20.6	-37.0	23.3	-41.8	26.1	-46.8
1	20	5.6	-10.4	6.3	-11.6	6.9	-12.8	7.7	-14.1	8.4	-15.5	9.2	-16.9	10.0	-18.4	11.7	-21.6	13.6	-25.1	15.6	-28.8	17.8	-32.8	20.1	-37.0	22.5	-41.5
1	50	4.4	-8.6	5.0	-9.6	5.5	-10.6	6.1	-11.7	6.6	-12.8	7.3	-14.0	7.9	-15.3	9.3	-17.9	10.8	-20.8	12.4	-23.9	14.1	-27.2	15.9	-30.7	17.8	-34.4
1	100	3.6	-7.3	4.0	-8.1	4.4	-9.0	4.8	-9.9	5.3	-10.8	5.8	-11.9	6.3	-12.9	7.4	-15.1	8.6	-17.6	9.9	-20.2	11.2	-22.9	12.7	-25.9	14.2	-29.0
2	10	6.5	-16.2	7.3	-18.0	8.0	-19.9	8.9	-22.0	9.7	-24.1	10.6	-26.4	11.6	-28.7	13.6	-33.7	15.8	-39.1	18.1	-44.9	20.6	-51.0	23.3	-57.6	26.1	-64.6
2	20	5.6	-13.9	6.3	-15.5	6.9	-17.2	7.7	-18.9	8.4	-20.8	9.2	-22.7	10.0	-24.7	11.7	-29.0	13.6	-33.7	15.6	-38.7	17.8	-44.0	20.1	-49.7	22.5	-55.7
2	50	4.4	-11.0	5.0	-12.2	5.5	-13.5	6.1	-14.9	6.6	-16.4	7.3	-17.9	7.9	-19.5	9.3	-22.9	10.8	-26.6	12.4	-30.5	14.1	-34.7	15.9	-39.2	17.8	-43.9
2	100	3.6	-8.7	4.0	-9.7	4.4	-10.8	4.8	-11.9	5.3	-13.1	5.8	-14.3	6.3	-15.5	7.4	-18.2	8.6	-21.2	9.9	-24.3	11.2	-27.6	12.7	-31.2	14.2	-35.0
3	10	6.5	-16.2	7.3	-18.0	8.0	-19.9	8.9	-22.0	9.7	-24.1	10.6	-26.4	11.6	-28.7	13.6	-33.7	15.8	-39.1	18.1	-44.9	20.6	-51.0	23.3	-57.6	26.1	-64.6
3	20	5.6	-13.9	6.3	-15.5	6.9	-17.2	7.7	-18.9	8.4	-20.8	9.2	-22.7	10.0	-24.7	11.7	-29.0	13.6	-33.7	15.6	-38.7	17.8	-44.0	20.1	-49.7	22.5	-55.7
3	50	4.4	-11.0	5.0	-12.2	5.5	-13.5	6.1	-14.9	6.6	-16.4	7.3	-17.9	7.9	-19.5	9.3	-22.9	10.8	-26.6	12.4	-30.5	14.1	-34.7	15.9	-39.2	17.8	-43.9
3	100	3.6	-8.7	4.0	-9.7	4.4	-10.8	4.8	-11.9	5.3	-13.1	5.8	-14.3	6.3	-15.5	7.4	-18.2	8.6	-21.2	9.9	-24.3	11.2	-27.6	12.7	-31.2	14.2	-35.0
Hip Roof = 45 degrees	1	10	6.5	-12.4	7.3	-13.9	8.0	-15.4	8.9	-16.9	9.7	-18.6	10.6	-20.3	11.6	-22.1	13.6	-26.0	15.8	-30.1	18.1	-34.6	20.6	-39.3	23.3	-44.4	26.1	-49.8
1	20	5.6	-10.7	6.3	-11.9	6.9	-13.2	7.7	-14.5	8.4	-15.9	9.2	-17.4	10.0	-19.0	11.7	-22.2	13.6	-25.8	15.6	-29.6	17.8	-33.7	20.1	-38.0	22.5	-42.7
1	50	4.4	-8.3	5.0	-9.3	5.5	-10.3	6.1	-11.3	6.6	-12.4	7.3	-13.6	7.9	-14.8	9.3	-17.3	10.8	-20.1	12.4	-23.1	14.1	-26.2	15.9	-29.6	17.8	-33.2
1	100	3.6	-6.5	4.0	-7.3	4.4	-8.0	4.8	-8.9	5.3	-9.7	5.8	-10.6	6.3	-11.6	7.4	-13.6	8.6	-15.8	9.9	-18.1	11.2	-20.6	12.7	-23.3	14.2	-26.1
2	10	6.5	-14.7	7.3	-16.3	8.0	-18.1	8.9	-20.0	9.7	-21.9	10.6	-24.0	11.6	-26.1	13.6	-30.6	15.8	-35.5	18.1	-40.8	20.6	-46.4	23.3	-52.3	26.1	-58.7
2	20	5.6	-12.4	6.3	-13.9	6.9	-15.4	7.7	-16.9	8.4	-18.6	9.2	-20.3	10.0	-22.1	11.7	-26.0	13.6	-30.1	15.6	-34.6	17.8	-39.3	20.1	-44.4	22.5	-49.8
2	50	4.4	-9.5	5.0	-10.6	5.5	-11.7	6.1	-12.9	6.6	-14.2	7.3	-15.5	7.9	-16.9	9.3	-19.8	10.8	-23.0	12.4	-26.4	14.1	-30.0	15.9	-33.9	17.8	-38.0
2	100	3.6	-7.3	4.0	-8.1	4.4	-9.0	4.8	-9.9	5.3	-10.8	5.8	-11.9	6.3	-12.9	7.4	-15.1	8.6	-17.6	9.9	-20.2	11.2	-22.9	12.7	-25.9	14.2	-29.0
3	10	6.5	-19.1	7.3	-21.3	8.0	-23.6	8.9	-26.0	9.7	-28.6	10.6	-31.2	11.6	-34.0	13.6	-39.9	15.8	-46.3	18.1	-53.1	20.6	-60.4	23.3	-68.2	26.1	-76.5
3	20	5.6	-16.0	6.3	-17.8	6.9	-19.7	7.7	-21.8	8.4	-23.9	9.2	-26.1	10.0	-28.4	11.7	-33.4	13.6	-38.7	15.6	-44.4	17.8	-50.5	20.1	-57.1	22.5	-64.0
3	50	4.4	-11.9	5.0	-13.2	5.5	-14.6	6.1	-16.1	6.6	-17.7	7.3	-19.4	7.9	-21.1	9.3	-24.8	10.8	-28.7	12.4	-33.0	14.1	-37.5	15.9	-42.3	17.8	-47.5
3	100	3.6	-8.7	4.0	-9.7	4.4	-10.8	4.8	-11.9	5.3	-13.1	5.8	-14.3	6.3	-15.5	7.4	-18.2	8.6	-21.2	9.9	-24.3	11.2	-27.6	12.7	-31.2	14.2	-35.0
Walls	4	10	8.7	-9.5	9.7	-10.6	10.8	-11.7	11.9	-12.9	13.1	-14.2	14.3	-15.5	15.5	-16.9	18.2	-19.8	21.2	-22.9	24.3	-26.3	27.6	-30.0	31.2	-33.8	35.0	-37.9
4	20	8.3	-9.1	9.3	-10.1	10.3	-11.2	11.4	-12.4	12.5	-13.6	13.6	-14.8	14.8	-16.2	17.4	-19.0	20.2	-22.0	23.2	-25.2	26.4	-28.7	29.8	-32.4	33.4	-36.4
4	50	7.8	-8.6	8.7	-9.5	9.7	-10.6	10.7	-11.7	11.7	-12.8	12.8	-14.0	13.9	-15.2	16.3	-17.9	18.9	-20.7	21.7	-23.8	24.7	-27.1	27.9	-30.6	31.3	-34.3
4	100	7.4	-8.2	8.3	-9.1	9.2	-10.1	10.1	-11.1	11.1	-12.2	12.1	-13.3	13.2	-14.5	15.5	-17.1	18.0	-19.8	20.7	-22.7	23.5	-25.8	26.5	-29.2	29.7	-32.7
5	10	8.7	-11.7	9.7	-13.0	10.8	-14.5	11.9	-15.9	13.1	-17.5	14.3	-19.1	15.5	-20.8	18.2	-24.4	21.2	-28.3	24.3	-32.5	27.6	-37.0	31.2	-41.8	35.0	-46.8
5	20	8.3	-10.9	9.3	-12.2	10.3	-13.5	11.4	-14.9	12.5	-16.3	13.6	-17.8	14.8	-19.4	17.4	-22.8	20.2	-26.4	23.2	-30.3	26.4	-34.5	29.8	-39.0	33.4	-43.7
5	50	7.8	-9.9	8.7	-11.0	9.7	-12.2	10.7	-13.4	11.7	-14.8	12.8	-16.1	13.9	-17.6	16.3	-20.6	18.9	-23.9	21.7	-27.4	24.7	-31.2	27.9	-35.2	31.3	-39.5
5	100	7.4	-9.1	8.3	-10.1	9.2	-11.2	10.1	-12.4	11.1	-13.6	12.1	-14.8	13.2	-16.2	15.5	-19.0	18.0	-22.0	20.7	-25.2	23.5	-28.7	26.5	-32.4	29.7	-36.4

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

a.	The effective wind area shall be equal to the span length multiplied by an effective width. This width shall be permitted to be not less than one-third the span length. For cladding fasteners, the effective wind area shall not be greater than the area that is tributary to an individual fastener.

b.	For effective wind areas between those given, the load shall be interpolated or the load associated with the lower effective wind area shall be used.

c.	Table values shall be adjusted for height and exposure by multiplying by the adjustment coefficient in Table R301.2(3).

d.	See Figure R301.2(7) for location of zones.

e.	Plus and minus signs signify pressures acting toward and away from the building surfaces.

f.	Positive and negative design wind pressures shall not be less than 10 psf.

g.	Roof overhang loads shall be determined by summing the applicable roof zone pressure with the adjacent wall zone pressure.

h.	Table values have been multiplied by 0.6 to convert component and cladding pressures to ASD.

TABLE R301.2(3)

HEIGHT AND EXPOSURE ADJUSTMENT COEFFICIENTS FOR TABLE R301.2(2)

MEAN ROOF HEIGHT
(ft)
	EXPOSURE CATEGORY
B	C	D
15	0.82	1.21	1.47
20	0.89	1.29	1.55
25	0.94	1.35	1.61
30	1.00	1.40	1.66
35	1.05	1.45	1.70
40	1.06	1.49	1.74
45	1.10	1.53	1.78
50	1.13	1.56	1.81
55	1.16	1.59	1.84
60	1.19	1.62	1.87

TABLE R301.2(4)

NOMINAL (ASD) GARAGE DOOR WIND LOADS FOR A BUILDING WITH A MEAN ROOF HEIGHT OF 30 FEET LOCATED IN EXPOSURE B (PSF) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

Door Size	ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEED (Vult) DETERMINED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION R301.2.1 (MPH–3 SECOND GUST)
Width
(ft)
	Height
(ft)
	100 mph	110 mph	120 mph	130 mph	140 mph	150 mph	160 mph	170 mph	180 mph	190 mph	200 mph
9	7	+10.0	-10.9	+11.4	-12.9	+13.7	-15.5	+16.1	-18.2	+18.5	-20.9	+21.3	-24.1	+24.3	-27.5	+27.6	-31.2	+30.6	-34.6	+34.2	-38.6	+38.0	-43.0
16	7	+10.0	-10.3	+10.9	-12.2	+13.1	-14.6	+15.5	-17.2	+17.7	-19.7	+20.4	-22.7	+23.3	-26.0	+26.4	-29.4	+29.3	-32.6	+32.7	-36.5	+36.4	-40.6
	78 mph	85 mph	93 mph	101 mph	108 mph	116 mph	124 mph	132 mph	139 mph	147 mph	155 mph
Nominal Design Wind Speed (Vasd) converted from Vult per Section R301.2.1.3

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/h, 1 psf = 47.88 N/m2.

1.	For door sizes or wind speeds between those given above the load may be interpolated, otherwise use the load associated with the lower door size.

2.	Table values shall be adjusted for height and exposure by multiplying by the adjustment coefficient in Table R301.2(3). Minimum positive wind load shall be 10 psf and minimum negative wind load shall be 10 psf.

3.	Plus and minus signs signify pressures acting toward and away from the building surfaces.

4.	Negative pressures assume door has 2 feet of width in building’s end zone.

5.	Table values include the 0.6 load reduction factor.

For SI: °C = [(°F)-32]/1.8.

FIGURE R301.2(1)

ISOLINES OF THE 971/2 -PERCENT WINTER (DECEMBER, JANUARY AND FEBRUARY) DESIGN TEMPERATURES (°F)

a.	Alaska and Hawaii are classified as severe and negligible, respectively.

b.	Lines defining areas are approximate only. Local conditions may be more or less severe than indicated by region classification. A severe classification is where weather conditions result in significant snowfall combined with extended periods during which there is little or no natural thawing causing deicing salts to be used extensively.

FIGURE R301.2(3)

WEATHERING PROBABILITY MAP FOR CONCRETEa, b

FIGURE R301.2(4)

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEEDS Vult

Note: Lines defining areas are approximate only. Local conditions may be more or less severe than indicated by the region classification.

FIGURE R301.2(6)

TERMITE INFESTATION PROBABILITY MAP

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

Note: a = 4 feet in all cases.

FIGURE R301.2(7)

COMPONENT AND CLADDING PRESSURE ZONES

R301.2.1 Wind design criteria.

Buildings and portions thereof shall be constructed in accordance with the wind provisions of this code using the ultimate design wind speed in Table R301.2(1) as determined from Figure R301.2(4). Where different construction methods and structural materials are used for various portions of a building, the applicable requirements of this section for each portion shall apply. Where not otherwise specified, the wind loads listed in Table R301.2(2) adjusted for height and exposure using Table R301.2(3) shall be used to determine design load performance requirements for wall coverings, curtain walls, roof coverings, exterior windows, skylights, and exterior doors (other than garage doors). Where loads for garage doors are not otherwise specified, the loads listed in Table R301.2(4) adjusted for height and exposure using Table R301.2(3) shall be used to determine design load performance requirements. Asphalt shingles shall be designed for wind speeds in accordance with Section R905.2.4. Metal roof shingles shall be designed for wind speeds in accordance with Section R905.4.4. A continuous load path shall be provided to transmit the applicable uplift forces from the roof assembly to the foundation.

R301.2.1.1 Wind design required.

In regions where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, from Figure R301.2(4) equals or exceeds 115 miles per hour (51 m/s), the design of concrete, masonry, wood and steel buildings for wind loads shall be in accordance with one or more of the following methods:

1.	AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual (WFCM).

2.	Concrete and masonry walls are permitted to be designed in accordance with ICC Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions (ICC 600).

3.	ASCEMinimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures (ASCE 7).

4.	AISI Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method For One- and Two-Family Dwellings (AISI S230).

5.	Florida Building Code, Building; or

6.	The MAFGuide to Concrete Masonry Residential Construction in High Wind Areas shall be permitted for applicable concrete masonry buildings for a basic wind speed of 130 mph (58 m/s) or less in Exposure B and 110 mph (49 m/s) or less in Exposure C in accordance with Figure R301.2(4) as converted in accordance with R301.2.1.3.

Exceptions:

1.	Footings and foundations shall comply with Chapter 4.

2.	Exterior windows and doors shall comply with Section R609.

3.	For structural insulated panels, the provisions of this code apply in accordance with the limitations of Section R610.

4.	Exterior wall coverings and soffits shall comply with Chapter 7.

5.	Roof sheathing shall be attached in accordance with Section R803.

6.	Roof coverings shall comply with Chapter 9.

7.	For concrete construction, the provisions of this code apply in accordance with the limitations of Section R608.2.

The elements of design not addressed by the methods in Items 1 through 6 shall be in accordance with the provisions of this code.

R301.2.1.1.1 Sunrooms.

Sunrooms shall comply with AAMA/NSA 2100. For the purpose of applying the criteria of AAMA/NSA 2100 based on the intended use, sunrooms shall be identified as one of the following categories by the permit applicant, design professional or the property owner or owner’s agent in the construction documents. Component and cladding pressures shall be used for the design of elements that do not qualify as main windforce-resisting systems. Main windforce-resisting system pressures shall be used for the design of elements assigned to provide support and stability for the overall sunroom.

Category I: A thermally isolated sunroom with walls that are open or enclosed with insect screening or 0.5 mm (20 mil) maximum thickness plastic film. The space is nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category II: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The openings are enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The space is nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category III: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The openings are enclosed with translucent or transparent plastic or glass. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for air infiltration resistance and water penetration resistance. The space is nonhabitable and unconditioned.

Category IV: A thermally isolated sunroom with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated or cooled by a separate temperature control or system and is thermally isolated from the primary structure. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for water penetration resistance, air infiltration resistance and thermal performance. The space is nonhabitable and conditioned.

Category V: A sunroom with enclosed walls. The sunroom is designed to be heated or cooled and is open to the main structure. The sunroom fenestration complies with additional requirements for water penetration resistance, air infiltration resistance and thermal performance. The space is habitable and conditioned.

R301.2.1.1.1.1 Aluminum structure design.

The AAF Guide to Aluminum Construction in High-Wind Areas shall be permitted for the construction of the aluminum structures therein addressed. Screen enclosures shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building Section 2002. Wind speeds shall be as for Risk Category I of Figure 1609.3(4) of the Florida Building Code, Building. Vinyl, tempered glass, and acrylic panels shall be permitted and shall be removable. Removable panels shall be identified as removable by a decal. The identification decal shall essentially state: “Removable panel SHALL be removed when wind speeds exceed 75 mph (34 m/s).” Decals shall be placed such that the decal is visible when the panel is installed.

R301.2.1.1.1.2 Sun control structure design.

A registered design professional shall design sun control structures.

R301.2.1.1.1.2.1.

Free-standing sun control structures shall be permitted to be designed to resist wind speeds for Risk Category I of Figure 1609.3(4) of the Florida Building Code, Building. Sun control structures relying on a host structure for support shall be designed for the Risk Category of the host structure.

R301.2.1.1.1.2.2.

Operable louvers shall be repositioned and locked in the vertical open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph or greater. The contractor shall post a legible and readily visible permanent decal or sign stating words to the effect that the operable louvers are to be locked in the vertically open position when wind speeds are predicted to be 75 mph and during a hurricane warning or alert as designated by the National Weather Service. The warning label should essentially read:

THIS SUN CONTROL
STRUCTURE SHALL HAVE
LOUVERED BLADES LOCKED IN
THE VERTICAL POSITION
DURING A HURRICANE
WARNING OR ALERT AS
DESIGNATED BY THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
OR WHEN WIND SPEEDS ARE
PREDICTED
TO BE 75 MPH.

R301.2.1.1.1.3 Electrical installations.

All electrical components and installations shall comply with Chapter 34 of this code.

R301.2.1.1.2 Alternative design method for screen enclosure.

(1)	The purpose of this section is to provide an alternate method for designing aluminum screen enclosures as defined by the Florida Building Code, permitting the loads of the structural frame to be based on portions of the screen in the screen walls removed, retracted, moved to the open position, or cut. The use of framing materials other than aluminum is allowed in accordance with Section 104.11 of the Florida Building Code, Building. The method applies only to walls and roofs with 100-percent screen.

(a)	Screen enclosure frames designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, shall be designed using signed and sealed site-specific engineering and shall be designed in accordance with the wind load provisions of the Florida Building Code, Building, Section 1609.1.1,

(b)	Designs that consider these screen alternates shall comply with Florida Building Code, Building Section 2002.4 and Table 2002.4, using the 110 mph column as modified by Table 2002.4A with all screen panels in place.

(c)	Design in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building, Section 1605.2 shall be permitted.

(d)	The design shall be by rational analysis or by 3D Finite Element Analysis. Either method will be acceptable.

(2)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, removable screen may consist of removable panels, retractable panels, or by designating specific screen panels in the design in which the screen is to be removed by cutting the screen. Removable panels shall be removed; retractable panels shall be placed in the retracted position without increasing the load on the affected area. Screen designated in the design to be cut shall be completely cut when wind speeds are forecast to exceed 75 mph.

(3)	Where screen enclosures designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section serve as the barrier required by Section R4501.17.1, the required minimum height of the barrier shall be maintained when screen panels are retracted, removed, moved to the open position, or cut.

(4)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, retractable screen panels, removable screen panels, and screen panels identified to be cut shall be clearly identified on adjacent structural members with highly visible permanent labels, at each panel, or by other means approved by the local building department.

(5)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, the retraction of screen panels, removal of screen panels, or cutting of screen panels shall not require the use of ladders or scaffolding.

(6)	Engineering documents submitted with building permit applications shall identify the panels to be removed, retracted, opened, or cut.

(7)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section based on removing screen panels by cutting the screen, the contractor shall provide replacement screen for a one-time replacement of all screen and spline designated by the design to be cut.

(8)	Where screen enclosures are designed in accordance with the screen removal alternates of this section, the contractor shall provide written notice to the owner and the local building code enforcement department that the owner must retract, remove, or cut a panel or panels of the screen enclosure in accordance with the project engineering design or the manufacturer’s instructions when wind speeds are expected to exceed 75 mph.

R301.2.1.2 Protection of openings.

Exterior glazed openings in buildings located in windborne debris regions shall be protected from windborne debris. Glazed opening protection for windborne debris shall meet the requirements of the Large Missile Test of ASTM E1996 and ASTM E1886 as modified in Section 301.2.1.2.1, TAS 201, 202 and 203, or AAMA 506, as applicable. Garage door glazed opening protection for windborne debris shall meet the requirements of an approved impact-resisting standard or ANSI/DASMA 115.

1.	Openings in sunrooms, balconies or enclosed porches constructed under existing roofs or decks are not required to be protected provided the spaces are separated from the building interior by a wall and all openings in the separating wall are protected in accordance with this section. Such space shall be permitted to be designed as either partially enclosed or enclosed structures.

2.	Storage sheds that are not designed for human habitation and that have a floor area of 720 square feet (67 m2) or less are not required to comply with the mandatory wind-borne debris impact standard of this code.

Exception: Wood structural panels with a thickness of not less than 7/16 inch (11 mm) and a span between lines of fasteners of 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be permitted for opening protection in buildings with a mean roof height of 33 feet or less in locations where Vult is 180 mph or less. Panels shall be precut to overlap the wall such that they extend a minimum of 2 inches (50.8 mm) beyond the lines of fasteners and attached to the framing surrounding the opening containing the product with the glazed opening. Panels shall be predrilled as required for the attachment method and secured with corrosion-resistant attachment hardware permanently installed on the building.

a.	Attachments shall be designed to resist the component and cladding loads determined in accordance with either Table R301.2(2) or ASCE 7, with the permanent corrosion-resistant attachment hardware provided and anchors permanently installed on the building.

b.	As an alternative, panels shall be fastened at 16 inches (406.4 mm) o.c. along the edges of the opposing long sides of the panel.

i.	For wood frame construction, fasteners shall be located on the wall such that they are embedded into the wall framing members, nominally a minimum of 1 inch (25.4 mm) from the edge of the opening and 2 inches (50.8 mm) inward from the panel edge. Permanently installed anchors used for buildings with wood frame wall construction shall have the threaded portion that will be embedded into the wall framing based on 1/4-inch (6.35 mm) lag-screws and shall be long enough to penetrate through the exterior wall covering with sufficient embedment length to provide an allowable minimum 300 pounds ASD design withdrawal capacity.

ii.	For concrete or masonry wall construction, fasteners shall be located on the wall a minimum of 1.5 inches (37.9 mm) from the edge of the opening and 2 inches (50.8 mm) inward of the panel edge. Permanently installed anchors in Concrete or masonry wall construction shall have an allowable minimum 300 pounds ASD design withdrawal capacity and an allowable minimum 525 pounds ASD design shear capacity with a 1.5 inch edge distance. Hex nuts, washered wing-nuts, or bolts used to attach the wood structural panels to the anchors shall be minimum 1/4-inch hardware and shall be installed with or have integral washers with a minimum 1-inch outside diameter.

iii.	Vibration-resistant alternative attachments designed to resist the component and cladding loads determined in accordance with provisions of Table R301.2(2) or ASCE 7 shall be permitted.

Table R301.2.1.2 Windborne Debris Protection Fastening Schedule for Wood Structural Panels. Reserved.

R301.2.1.2.1 Application of ASTM E1996.

The text of Section 2.2 of ASTM E1996 shall be substituted as follows:

2.2 ASCE Standard:

ASCE 7-10 American Society of Civil Engineers Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures

The text of Section 6.2.2 of ASTM E1996 shall be substituted as follows:

6.2.2 Unless otherwise specified, select the wind zone based on the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, as follows:

6.2.2.1 Wind Zone 1—130 mph ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult < 140 mph.

6.2.2.2 Wind Zone 2—140 mph ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult < 150 mph at greater than 1 mile (1.6 km) from the coastline. The coastline shall be measured from the mean high water mark.

6.2.2.3 Wind Zone 3—150 mph (58 m/s) ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult ≤ 170 mph (76 m/s), or 140 mph (54 m/s) ≤ ultimate design wind speed, Vult ≤ 170 mph (76 m/s) and within 1 mile (1.6 km) of the coastline. The coastline shall be measured from the mean high water mark.

6.2.2.4 Wind Zone 4—ultimate design wind speed, Vult > 170 mph (76 m/s).

R301.2.1.3 Wind speed conversion.

Where referenced documents are based on nominal design wind speeds and do not provide the means for conversion between ultimate design wind speeds and nominal design wind speeds, the ultimate design wind speeds, Vult, of Figure R301.2(4) shall be converted to nominal design wind speeds, Vasd, using Table R301.2.1.3.

TABLE R301.2.1.3

WIND SPEED CONVERSIONSa

Vult	110	115	120	130	140	150	160	170	180	190	200
Vasd	85	89	93	101	108	116	124	132	139	147	155

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	Linear interpolation is permitted.

R301.2.1.4 Exposure category.

For each wind direction considered, an exposure category that adequately reflects the characteristics of ground surface irregularities shall be determined for the site at which the building or structure is to be constructed. For a site located in the transition zone between categories, the category resulting in the largest wind forces shall apply. Account shall be taken of variations in ground surface roughness that arise from natural topography and vegetation as well as from constructed features. For a site where multiple detached one- and two-family dwellings, townhouses or other structures are to be constructed as part of a subdivision or master-planned community, or are otherwise designated as a developed area by the authority having jurisdiction, the exposure category for an individual structure shall be based upon the site conditions that will exist at the time when all adjacent structures on the site have been constructed, provided that their construction is expected to begin within one year of the start of construction for the structure for which the exposure category is determined.

Exception: An intermediate exposure between the exposure categories defined is permitted in a transition zone provided that it is determined by a rational analysis method.

R301.2.1.4.1 Wind directions and sectors.

For each selected wind direction at which the wind loads are to be evaluated, the exposure of the building or structure shall be determined for the two upwind sectors extending 45 degrees (0.79 rad) either side of the selected wind direction. The exposures in these two sectors shall be determined in accordance with Sections R301.2.1.4.2 and R301.2.1.4.3 and the exposure resulting in the highest wind loads shall be used to represent winds from that direction.

R301.2.1.4.2 Surface roughness categories.

A ground surface roughness within each 45-degree (0.79 rad) sector shall be determined for a distance upwind of the site as defined in Section R301.2.1.4.3 from the categories defined below, for the purpose of assigning an exposure category as defined in Section R301.2.1.4.3.

Surface Roughness B. Urban and suburban areas, wooded areas or other terrain with numerous closely spaced obstructions having the size of single-family dwellings or larger.

Surface Roughness C. Open terrain with scattered obstructions having heights generally less than 30 feet (9144 mm). This category includes flat open country and grasslands. This Surface Roughness shall also apply to any building located within Surface Roughness B-type terrain where the building is within 100 feet (30.5 m) horizontally in any direction of open areas of Surface Roughness C- or D-type terrain that extends more than 600 feet (182.9 m) and width greater than 150 feet (45.7 m) in the upwind direction.

Surface Roughness D. Flat, unobstructed areas and water surfaces. This category includes smooth mud flats, salt flats and unbroken ice.

R301.2.1.4.3 Exposure categories.

An exposure category shall be determined in accordance with the following:

Exposure B. For buildings with a mean roof height of less than or equal to 30 feet (9144 mm), Exposure B shall apply where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness B, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 1,500 feet (457 m). For buildings with a mean roof height greater than 30 feet (9144 mm), Exposure B shall apply where Surface Roughness B prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 2,600 feet (792 m) or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater.

Exposure C. Exposure C shall apply for all cases where Exposures B or D do not apply.

Exposure D. Exposure D shall apply where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness D, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 5,000 feet (1524 m) or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater. Exposure D shall also apply where the ground surface roughness immediately upwind of the site is B or C, and the site is within a distance of 600 feet (183 m) or 20 times the building height, whichever is greater, from an Exposure D condition as defined in the previous sentence.

R301.2.1.5 Topographic wind effects.

In areas designated in Table R301.2(1) as having local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings caused by wind speed-up at isolated hills, ridges and escarpments that are abrupt changes from the general topography of the area, topographic wind effects shall be considered in the design of the building in accordance with Section R301.2.1.5.1 or in accordance with the provisions of ASCE 7. See Figure R301.2.1.5.1(1) for topographic features for wind speed-up effect.

In these designated areas, topographic wind effects shall apply only to buildings sited on the top half of an isolated hill, ridge or escarpment where all of the following conditions exist:

1.	The average slope of the top half of the hill, ridge or escarpment is 10 percent or greater.

2.	The hill, ridge or escarpment is 60 feet (18 288 mm) or greater in height for Exposure B, 30 feet (9144 mm) or greater in height for Exposure C, and 15 feet (4572 mm) or greater in height for Exposure D.

3.	The hill, ridge or escarpment is isolated or unobstructed by other topographic features of similar height in the upwind direction for a distance measured from its high point of 100 times its height or 2 miles (3.2 km), whichever is less. See Figure R301.2.1.5.1(3) for upwind obstruction.

4.	The hill, ridge or escarpment protrudes by a factor of two or more above the height of other upwind topographic features located in any quadrant within a radius of 2 miles (3.2 km) measured from its high point.

R301.2.1.5.1 Simplified topographic wind speed-up method.

As an alternative to the ASCE 7 topographic wind provisions, the provisions of Section R301.2.1.5.1 shall be permitted to be used to design for wind speed-up effects, where required by Section R301.2.1.5.

Structures located on the top half of isolated hills, ridges or escarpments meeting the conditions of Section R301.2.1.5 shall be designed for an increased basic wind speed as determined by Table R301.2.1.5.1. On the high side of an escarpment, the increased basic wind speed shall extend horizontally downwind from the edge of the escarpment 1.5 times the horizontal length of the upwind slope (1.5L) or 6 times the height of the escarpment (6H), whichever is greater. See Figure R301.2.1.5.1(2) for where wind speed increase is applied.

TABLE R301.2.1.5.1

ULTIMATE DESIGN WIND SPEED MODIFICATION FOR TOPOGRAPHIC WIND EFFECTa, b

ULTIMATE DESIGN
WIND SPEED FROM
FIGURE R301.2(4)
(mph)
	AVERAGE SLOPE OF THE TOP HALF OF HILL, RIDGE OR ESCARPMENT (percent)
0.10	0.125	0.15	0.175	0.20	0.23	0.25
Required ultimate design wind speed-up, modified for topographic wind speed-up (mph)
110	132	137	142	147	152	158	162
115	138	143	148	154	159	165	169
120	144	149	155	160	166	172	176
130	156	162	168	174	179	N/A	N/A
140	168	174	181	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A
150	180	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Table applies to a feature height of 500 feet or less and dwellings sited a distance equal or greater than half the feature height.

b.	Reserved.

Note: H/2 determines the measurement point for Lh. L is twice Lh.

FIGURE R301.2.1.5.1(1)

TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES FOR WIND SPEED-UP EFFECT

FIGURE R301.2.1.5.1(2)

ILLUSTRATION OF WHERE ON A TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURE, WIND SPEED INCREASE IS APPLIED

FIGURE R301.2.1.5.1(3)

UPWIND OBSTRUCTION

R301.2.1.6 Testing to allowable or nominal loads.

Where testing for wind load resistance is based on allowable or nominal wind loads, the design wind loads determined in accordance with ASCE 7 or Section 1609 of the Florida Building Code, Building are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6 for the purposes of the wind load resistance testing.

R301.2.2 Seismic provisions.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.1 Determination of seismic design category.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.1.1 Alternative determination of seismic design category.

Reserved.

TABLE R301.2.2.1.1. Reserved.

R301.2.2.1.2 Alternative determination of Seismic Design Category E.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2 Seismic Design Category C.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2.1 Weights of materials.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2.2 Stone and masonry veneer.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2.3 Masonry construction.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2.4 Concrete construction.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.2.5 Irregular buildings.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3 Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.1 Height limitations.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.2 Stone and masonry veneer.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.3 Masonry construction.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.4 Concrete construction.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.5 Cold-formed steel framing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.6 Masonry chimneys.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.3.7 Anchorage of water heaters.

Reserved.

R301.2.2.4 Seismic Design Category E.

Reserved.

R301.2.3 Snow loads.

Reserved.

R301.2.4 Floodplain construction.

Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas (including A or V Zones) as established in Table R301.2(1), and substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section R322. Buildings and structures that are located in more than one flood hazard area shall comply with the provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area. Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.

R301.2.4.1 Alternative provisions.

As an alternative to the requirements in Section R322, ASCE 24 is permitted subject to the limitations of this code and the limitations therein.

R301.2.5 Structures seaward of a coastal construction control line.

Structures located seaward of the coastal construction control line shall be designed to resist the predicted forces of a 100-year storm event in accordance with Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

R301.3 Story height.

The provisions of this code shall apply to buildings with story heights not exceeding the following:

1.	For wood wall framing, the story height shall be in accordance with Section R602.3.

2.	For cold-formed steel wall framing, the story height shall be in accordance with Section R603.

3.	For masonry walls, the story height shall be in accordance with Section R606.

4.	For insulating concrete form walls, the maximum story height shall not exceed 11 feet 7 inches (3531 mm) and the maximum unsupported wall height per story as permitted by Section R608 tables shall not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm).

5.	For structural insulated panel (SIP) walls, the story height shall be not greater than 11 feet 7 inches (3531 mm) and the bearing wall height per story as permitted by Section R610 tables shall not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm).

Individual walls or wall studs shall be permitted to exceed these limits as permitted by Chapter 6 provisions, provided that story heights are not exceeded. An engineered design shall be provided for the wall or wall framing members where the limits of Chapter 6 are exceeded. Where the story height limits of this section are exceeded, the design of the building, or the noncompliant portions thereof, to resist wind loads shall be in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building.

R301.4 Dead load.

The actual weights of materials and construction shall be used for determining dead load with consideration for the dead load of fixed service equipment.

R301.5 Live load.

The minimum uniformly distributed live load shall be as provided in Table R301.5.

TABLE R301.5

MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED AND CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

OCCUPANCY OR USE	UNIFORM LOAD
(psf)
	CONCENTRATED LOAD
(lbs)

Uninhabitable attics without storageb	10	—
Uninhabitable attics with limited storageb, g	20	—
Habitable attics and attics served with fixed stairs	30	—
Balconies (exterior) and deckse	40	—
Fire escapes	40	—
Guards	—	200h, i
Guard in-fill componentsf	—	50h
Handrailsd	—	200h
Passenger vehicle garagesa	50a	2,000a
Rooms other than sleeping rooms	40	—
Sleeping rooms	30	—
Stairs	40c	300c

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 square inch = 645 mm2, 1 pound = 4.45 N.

a.	Elevated garage floors shall be capable of supporting the uniformly distributed live load or a 2,000-pound concentrated load applied on an area of 41/2 inches by 41/2 inches, whichever produces the greater stresses.

b.	Uninhabitable attics without storage are those where the clear height between joists and rafters is not more than 42 inches, or where there are not two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 42 inches in height by 24 inches in width, or greater, within the plane of the trusses. This live load need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirements.

c.	Individual stair treads shall be capable of supporting the uniformly distributed live load or a 300-pound concentrated load applied on an area of 2 inches by 2 inches, whichever produces the greater stresses.

d.	A single concentrated load applied in any direction at any point along the top. For a guard not required to serve as a handrail, the load need not be applied to the top element of the guard in a direction parallel to such element.

e.	See Section R507.1 for decks attached to exterior walls.

f.	Guard in-fill components (all those except the handrail), balusters and panel fillers shall be designed to withstand a horizontally applied normal load of 50 pounds on an area equal to 1 square foot. This load need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirement.

g.	Uninhabitable attics with limited storage are those where the clear height between joists and rafters is not greater than 42 inches, or where there are two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 42 inches in height by 24 inches in width, or greater, within the plane of the trusses.

 The live load need only be applied to those portions of the joists or truss bottom chords where all of the following conditions are met:

1.	The attic area is accessed from an opening not less than 20 inches in width by 30 inches in length that is located where the clear height in the attic is not less than 30 inches.

2.	The slopes of the joists or truss bottom chords are not greater than 2 units vertical to 12 units horizontal.

3.	Required insulation depth is less than the joist or truss bottom chord member depth.

 The remaining portions of the joists or truss bottom chords shall be designed for a uniformly distributed concurrent live load of not less than 10 pounds per square foot.

h.	Glazing used in handrail assemblies and guards shall be designed with a load adjustment factor of 4. The load adjustment factor shall be applied to each of the concentrated loads applied to the top of the rail, and to the load on the in-fill components. These loads shall be determined independent of one another, and loads are assumed not to occur with any other live load.

i.	Where the top of a guard system is not required to serve as a handrail, the single concentrated load shall be applied at any point along the top, in the vertical downward direction and in the horizontal direction away from the walking surface. Where the top of a guard is also serving as the handrail, a single concentrated load shall be applied in any direction at any point along the top. Concentrated load shall not be applied concurrently.

R301.6 Roof load.

The roof shall be designed for the live load indicated in Table R301.6.

TABLE R301.6

MINIMUM ROOF LIVE LOADS IN POUNDS-FORCE PER SQUARE FOOT OF HORIZONTAL PROJECTION

ROOF SLOPE	TRIBUTARY LOADED AREA IN
SQUARE FEET FOR ANY
STRUCTURAL MEMBER
0 to 200	201 to 600	Over 600
Flat or rise less than 4 inches per
foot (1:3)
	20	16	12
Rise 4 inches per foot (1:3) to
less than 12 inches per foot (1:1)
	16	14	12
Rise 12 inches per foot (1:1)
and greater
	12	12	12

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m.

R301.7 Deflection.

The allowable deflection of any structural member under the live load listed in Sections R301.5 and R301.6 or wind loads determined by Section R301.2.1 shall not exceed the values in Table R301.7.

TABLE R301.7

ALLOWABLE DEFLECTION OF STRUCTURAL MEMBERSb, c

STRUCTURAL MEMBER	ALLOWABLE
DEFLECTION

Rafters having slopes greater than 3:12 with
finished ceiling not attached to rafters
	L/180
Interior walls and partitions	H/180
Floors	L/360
Ceilings with brittle finishes (including plaster
and stucco)
	L/360
Ceilings with flexible finishes (including gypsum
board)
	L/240
All other structural members	L/240
Exterior walls—wind loadsa with plaster or
stucco finish
	H/360
Exterior walls—wind loadsa with other brittle
finishes
	H/240
Exterior walls—wind loadsa with flexible finishes	H/120d
Lintels supporting masonry veneer wallse	L/600

Note: L = span length, H = span height.

a.	For the purpose of the determining deflection limits herein, the wind load shall be permitted to be taken as 0.7 times the component and cladding (ASD) loads obtained from Table R301.2(2).

b	For cantilever members, L shall be taken as twice the length of the cantilever.

c.	For aluminum structural members or panels used in roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers, not supporting edge of glass or sandwich panels, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/60. For continuous aluminum structural members supporting edge of glass, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/175 for each glass lite or L/60 for the entire length of the member, whichever is more stringent. For sandwich panels used in roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/120.

d.	Deflection for exterior walls with interior gypsum board finish shall be limited to an allowable deflection of H/180.

e.	Refer to Section R703.8.2. Dead load of supported materials shall be included when calculating the deflection of these members.

R301.8 Nominal sizes.

For the purposes of this code, dimensions of lumber specified shall be deemed to be nominal dimensions unless specifically designated as actual dimensions.

R301.9

All exterior wall coverings and soffits shall be capable of resisting the design pressures specified for walls for components and cladding loads in accordance with Table R301.2(2) as modified by Table R301.2(3). Manufactured soffits shall be tested at 1.5 times the design pressure.

SECTION R302
FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
R302.1 Exterior walls.

Construction, projections, openings and penetrations of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings shall comply with Table R302.1.

Exceptions:

1.	Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire separation distance.

2.	Walls of individual dwelling units and their accessory structures located on the same lot.

3.	Detached tool sheds and storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits are not required to provide wall protection based on location on the lot. Projections beyond the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line.

4.	Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet (610 mm) of a lot line are permitted to have roof eave projections not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm).

5.	Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are permitted.

6.	Screen enclosure walls of insect screening with a maximum of 25-percent solid flexible finishes.

7.	For zero lot line developments where permitted by local regulations, openings and roof overhang projections shall be permitted on the exterior wall of a building located on a zero lot line when the building exterior wall is separated from an adjacent building exterior wall by a distance of 6 feet or more, and the roof overhang projection is separated from an adjacent building projection by a distance of 4 feet or more, with 1-hour fire-resistive construction on the underside of the overhang required, unless the separation between projections is 6 feet or more.

TABLE R302.1

EXTERIOR WALLS

EXTERIOR WALL ELEMENT	MINIMUM
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING
	MINIMUM FIRE
SEPARATION DISTANCE

Walls	Fire-resistance rated	1 hour—tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 with exposure from the
outside or calculated per Florida Building Code, Building
	0 feet
Not fire-resistance rated	0 hours	3 feeta
Projections	Not allowed	N/A	< 2 feet
Fire-resistance rated	1 hour on the underside, or heavy timber, or fire-
retardant-treated woodb, c
	2 feeta
Not fire-resistance rated	0 hours	3 feet
Openings in walls	Not allowed	N/A	< 3 feet
Unlimited	0 hours	3 feeta
Penetrations	All	Comply with Section R302.4	< 3 feet
None required	3 feeta

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

N/A = Not Applicable.

a.	For residential subdivisions where all dwellings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section P2904, the fire separation distance for nonrated exterior walls and rated projections shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 feet, and unlimited unprotected openings and penetrations shall be permitted, where the adjoining lot provides an open setback yard that is 6 feet or more in width on the opposite side of the property line.

b.	The roof eave fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave if fireblocking is provided from the wall top plate to the underside of the roof sheathing.

c.	The roof eave fire-resistance rating shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 hours on the underside of the eave provided that gable vent openings are not installed.

Table R302.1(1) Exterior Walls. Reserved.

Table R302.1(2) Exterior Walls—Dwellings with Fire Sprinklers. Reserved.

R302.2 Townhouses.

Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and shall be separated by separate fire-resistance rated exterior wall assemblies meeting the requirements of zero clearance from property lines of Section R302.1 for exterior walls.

Exception: A common 2-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E119, UL 263, or in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building Section 722 is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents in the cavity of the common wall unless such materials and methods of penetration comply with Section R302.4. The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against exterior walls and the underside of the roof sheathing. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 34. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with Section R302.4.

R302.2.1 Continuity.

The fire-resistance-rated wall or assembly separating townhouses shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab. The fire-resistance rating shall extend the full length of the wall or assembly, including wall extensions through and separating attached enclosed accessory structures.

R302.2.2 Parapets for townhouses.

Parapets constructed in accordance with Section R302.2.3 shall be constructed for townhouses as an extension of exterior walls or common walls in accordance with the following:

1.	Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at the same elevation, the parapet shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the roof surfaces.

2.	Where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at different elevations and the higher roof is not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof, the parapet shall extend not less than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof surface.

Exception: A parapet is not required in the preceding two cases where the roof covering complies with a minimum Class C rating as tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790 and the roof decking or sheathing is of noncombustible materials or approved fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 4 feet (1219 mm) on each side of the wall or walls, or one layer of 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board is installed directly beneath the roof decking or sheathing, supported by not less than nominal 2-inch (51 mm) ledgers attached to the sides of the roof framing members, for a distance of not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on each side of the wall or walls and any openings or penetrations in the roof are not within 4 feet (1219 mm) of the common walls.

3.	A parapet is not required where roof surfaces adjacent to the wall or walls are at different elevations and the higher roof is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the lower roof. The common wall construction from the lower roof to the underside of the higher roof deck shall have not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. The wall shall be rated for exposure from both sides.

R302.2.3 Parapet construction.

Parapets shall have the same fire-resistance rating as that required for the supporting wall or walls. On any side adjacent to a roof surface, the parapet shall have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 18 inches (457 mm), to include counterflashing and coping materials. Where the roof slopes toward a parapet at slopes greater than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.7-percent slope), the parapet shall extend to the same height as any portion of the roof within a distance of 3 feet (914 mm), and the height shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm).

R302.2.4 Structural independence.

Each individual townhouse shall be structurally independent.

Exceptions:

1.	Foundations supporting exterior walls or common walls.

2.	Structural roof and wall sheathing from each unit fastened to the common wall framing.

3.	Nonstructural wall and roof coverings.

4.	Flashing at termination of roof covering over common wall.

R302.3 Two-family dwellings.

Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and floor assemblies having not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating where tested in accordance with ASTM E119, UL 263 or Section 703.3 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing.

Exceptions:

1.	A fire-resistance rating of 1/2 hour shall be permitted in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13.

2.	Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces where the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board, an attic draft stop constructed as specified in Section R302.12.1 is provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings and the structural framing supporting the ceiling is protected by not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent.

3.	Screen enclosure walls of insect screening with a maximum of 25-percent solid flexible finishes.

R302.3.1 Supporting construction.

Where floor assemblies are required to be fire-resistance rated by Section R302.3, the supporting construction of such assemblies shall have an equal or greater fire-resistance rating.

R302.4 Dwelling unit rated penetrations.

Penetrations of wall or floor-ceiling assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section R302.2 or R302.3 shall be protected in accordance with this section.

R302.4.1 Through penetrations.

Through penetrations of fire-resistance-rated wall or floor assemblies shall comply with Section R302.4.1.1 or R302.4.1.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the penetrating items are steel, ferrous or copper pipes, tubes or conduits, the annular space shall be protected as follows:

1.1.	In concrete or masonry wall or floor assemblies, concrete, grout or mortar shall be permitted where installed to the full thickness of the wall or floor assembly or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating, provided that both of the following are complied with:

1.1.1.	The nominal diameter of the penetrating item is not more than 6 inches (152 mm).

1.1.2.	The area of the opening through the wall does not exceed 144 square inches (92 900 mm2).

1.2.	The material used to fill the annular space shall prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E119 or UL 263 time temperature fire conditions under a positive pressure differential of not less than 0.01 inch of water (3 Pa) at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated.

2.	The annular space created by the penetration of water-filled fire sprinkler piping, provided that the annular space is filled using a material complying with Item 1.2 of Exception 1.

R302.4.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assembly.

Penetrations shall be installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly.

R302.4.1.2 Penetration firestop system.

Penetrations shall be protected by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, with a positive pressure differential of not less than 0.01 inch of water (3 Pa) and shall have an F rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall or floor-ceiling assembly penetrated.

R302.4.2 Membrane penetrations.

Membrane penetrations shall comply with Section R302.4.1. Where walls are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed so that the required fire-resistance rating will not be reduced.

Exceptions:

1.	Membrane penetrations of not more than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 16 square inches (0.0103 m2) in area provided that the aggregate area of the openings through the membrane does not exceed 100 square inches (0.0645 m2) in any 100 square feet (9.29 m2) of wall area. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.1 mm). Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall shall be separated by one of the following:

1.1.	By a horizontal distance of not less than 24 inches (610 mm) where the wall or partition is constructed with individual noncommunicating stud cavities.

1.2.	By a horizontal distance of not less than the depth of the wall cavity where the wall cavity is filled with cellulose loose-fill, rockwool or slag mineral wool insulation.

1.3.	By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section R302.11.

1.4.	By protecting both boxes with listed putty pads.

1.5.	By other listed materials and methods.

2.	Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any materials provided that the boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.1 mm) unless listed otherwise. Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall shall be separated by one of the following:

2.1.	By the horizontal distance specified in the listing of the electrical boxes.

2.2.	By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section R302.11.

2.3.	By protecting both boxes with listed putty pads.

2.4.	By other listed materials and methods.

3.	The annular space created by the penetration of a fire sprinkler or water-filled fire sprinkler piping provided that the annular space is covered by a metal escutcheon plate.

4.	Ceiling membrane penetrations by listed luminaires or by luminaires protected with listed materials that have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

R302.5 Dwelling-garage opening and penetration protection.

Openings and penetrations through the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling from the garage shall be in accordance with Sections R302.5.1 through R302.5.3.

R302.5.1 Opening protection.

Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycombcore steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.

R302.5.2 Duct penetration.

Ducts in the garage and ducts penetrating the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling from the garage shall be constructed of a minimum No. 26 gage (0.48 mm) sheet steel, 1 inch (25.4 mm) minimum rigid nonmetallic Class 0 or Class 1 duct board, or other approved material and shall not have openings into the garage.

R302.5.3 Other penetrations.

Penetrations through the separation required in Section R302.6 shall be protected as required by Section R302.11, Item 4.

R302.6 Dwelling-garage fire separation.

The garage shall be separated as required by Table R302.6. Openings in garage walls shall comply with Section R302.5. Attachment of gypsum board shall comply with Table R702.3.5. The wall separation provisions of Table R302.6 shall not apply to garage walls that are perpendicular to the adjacent dwelling unit wall.

TABLE R302.6

DWELLING-GARAGE SEPARATION

SEPARATION	MATERIAL
From the residence and attics	Not less than 1/2-inch gypsum board or equivalent applied to the
garage side

From habitable rooms above the garage	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling assemblies used for separation
required by this section
	Not less than 1/2-inch gypsum board or equivalent
Garages located less than 3 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot	Not less than 1/2-inch gypsum board or equivalent applied to the interior
side of exterior walls that are within this area

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

R302.7 Under-stair protection.

Enclosed space under stairs that is accessed by a door or access panel shall have walls, under-stair surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.

R302.8 Foam plastics.

For requirements for foam plastics, see Section R316.

R302.8.1

Foam plastics used as interior finishes shall comply with Section R316.5.10.

R302.9 Flame spread index and smoke-developed index for wall and ceiling finishes.

Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes for wall and ceiling finishes shall be in accordance with Sections R302.9.1 through R302.9.4.

R302.9.1 Flame spread index.

Wall and ceiling finishes shall have a flame spread index of not greater than 200.

Exception: Flame spread index requirements for finishes shall not apply to trim defined as picture molds, chair rails, baseboards and handrails; to doors and windows or their frames; or to materials that are less than 1/28 inch (0.91 mm) in thickness cemented to the surface of walls or ceilings if these materials exhibit flame spread index values not greater than those of paper of this thickness cemented to a noncombustible backing.

R302.9.2 Smoke-developed index.

Wall and ceiling finishes shall have a smoke-developed index of not greater than 450.

R302.9.3 Testing.

Tests shall be made in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

R302.9.4 Alternative test method.

As an alternative to having a flame spread index of not greater than 200 and a smoke-developed index of not greater than 450 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, wall and ceiling finishes shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with NFPA 286. Materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286 shall meet the following criteria:

The interior finish shall comply with the following:

1.	During the 40 kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2.	The flame shall not spread to the outer extremity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.

3.	Flashover, as defined in NFPA 286, shall not occur.

4.	The peak heat release rate throughout the test shall not exceed 800 kW.

5.	The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m2.

R302.9.5 High density polyethylene (HDPE) and polypropylene (PP).

Where high density polyethylene or polypropylene is used as an interior finish material, it shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and comply with the requirements criteria in Section R302.9.4.

R302.10 Flame spread index and smoke-developed index for insulation.

Flame spread and smoke-developed index for insulation shall be in accordance with Sections R302.10.1 through R302.10.5.

R302.10.1 Insulation.

Insulating materials installed within floor-ceiling assemblies, roof-ceiling assemblies, wall assemblies, crawl spaces and attics shall comply with the requirements of this section. They shall exhibit a flame spread index not to exceed 25 and a smoke-developed index not to exceed 450 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Insulating materials, where tested in accordance with the requirements of this section, shall include facings, where used, such as vapor retarders, vapor-permeable membranes and similar coverings.

Exceptions:

1.	Where such materials are installed in concealed spaces, the flame spread index and smoke-developed index limitations do not apply to the facings, provided that the facing is installed in substantial contact with the unexposed surface of the ceiling, floor or wall finish.

2.	Cellulose fiber loose-fill insulation, that is not spray applied, complying with the requirements of Section R302.10.3, shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement but shall be required to meet a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

3.	Foam plastic insulation shall comply with Section R316.

R302.10.2 Loose-fill insulation.

Loose-fill insulation materials that cannot be mounted in the ASTM E84 or UL 723 apparatus without a screen or artificial supports shall comply with the flame spread and smoke-developed limits of Section R302.10.1 where tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation shall not be required to be tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2, provided such insulation complies with the requirements of Sections R302.10.1 and R302.10.3.

R302.10.3 Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation.

Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation shall comply with CPSC 16 CFR, Parts 1209 and 1404. Each package of such insulating material shall be clearly labeled in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR, Parts 1209 and 1404.

R302.10.4 Exposed attic insulation.

Exposed insulation materials installed on attic floors shall have a critical radiant flux not less than 0.12 watt per square centimeter.

R302.10.5 Testing.

Tests for critical radiant flux shall be made in accordance with ASTM E970.

R302.11 Fireblocking.

In combustible construction, fireblocking shall be provided to cut off both vertical and horizontal concealed draft openings and to form an effective fire barrier between stories, and between a top story and the roof space.

Fireblocking shall be provided in wood-framed construction in the following locations:

1.	In concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred spaces and parallel rows of studs or staggered studs, as follows:

1.1.	Vertically at the ceiling and floor levels.

1.2.	Horizontally at intervals not exceeding 10 feet (3048 mm).

2.	At interconnections between concealed vertical and horizontal spaces such as occur at soffits, drop ceilings and cove ceilings.

3.	In concealed spaces between stair stringers at the top and bottom of the run. Enclosed spaces under stairs shall comply with Section R302.7.

4.	At openings around vents, pipes, ducts, cables and wires at ceiling and floor level, with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and products of combustion. The material filling this annular space shall not be required to meet the ASTM E136 requirements.

5.	For the fireblocking of chimneys and fireplaces, see Section R1003.19.

6.	Fireblocking of cornices of a two-family dwelling is required at the line of dwelling unit separation.

R302.11.1 Fireblocking materials.

Except as provided in Section R302.11, Item 4, fireblocking shall consist of the following materials.

1.	Two-inch (51 mm) nominal lumber.

2.	Two thicknesses of 1-inch (25.4 mm) nominal lumber with broken lap joints.

3.	One thickness of 23/32-inch (18.3 mm) wood structural panels with joints backed by 23/32-inch (18.3 mm) wood structural panels.

4.	One thickness of 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) particleboard with joints backed by 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) particleboard.

5.	One-half-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board.

6.	One-quarter-inch (6.4 mm) cement-based millboard.

7.	Batts or blankets of mineral wool or glass fiber or other approved materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in place.

8.	Cellulose insulation installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263, for the specific application.

R302.11.1.1 Batts or blankets of mineral or glass fiber.

Batts or blankets of mineral or glass fiber or other approved nonrigid materials shall be permitted for compliance with the 10-foot (3048 mm) horizontal fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.

R302.11.1.2 Unfaced fiberglass.

Unfaced fiberglass batt insulation used as fireblocking shall fill the entire cross section of the wall cavity to a height of not less than 16 inches (406 mm) measured vertically. Where piping, conduit or similar obstructions are encountered, the insulation shall be packed tightly around the obstruction.

R302.11.1.3 Loose-fill insulation material.

Loose-fill insulation material shall not be used as a fireblock unless specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and to retard the spread of fire and hot gases.

R302.11.2 Fireblocking integrity.

The integrity of fireblocks shall be maintained.

R302.12 Draftstopping.

In combustible construction where there is usable space both above and below the concealed space of a floor-ceiling assembly, draftstops shall be installed so that the area of the concealed space does not exceed 1,000 square feet (92.9 m2). Draftstopping shall divide the concealed space into approximately equal areas. Where the assembly is enclosed by a floor membrane above and a ceiling membrane below, draftstopping shall be provided in floor-ceiling assemblies under the following circumstances:

1.	Ceiling is suspended under the floor framing.

2.	Floor framing is constructed of truss-type open-web or perforated members.

R302.12.1 Materials.

Draftstopping materials shall be not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board, 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) wood structural panels or other approved materials adequately supported. Draftstopping shall be installed parallel to the floor framing members unless otherwise approved by the building official. The integrity of the draftstops shall be maintained.

R302.13 Fire protection of floors.

Floor assemblies that are not required elsewhere in this code to be fire-resistance rated, shall be provided with a 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/8-inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane, or equivalent on the underside of the floor framing member. Penetrations or openings for ducts, vents, electrical outlets, lighting, devices, luminaires, wires, speakers, drainage, piping and similar openings or penetrations shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

1.	Floor assemblies located directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904, NFPA 13D, or other approved equivalent sprinkler system.

2.	Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended for storage or fuel-fired appliances.

3.	Portions of floor assemblies shall be permitted to be unprotected where complying with the following:

3.1.	The aggregate area of the unprotected portions does not exceed 80 square feet (7.4 m2) per story.

3.2.	Fireblocking in accordance with Section R302.11.1 is installed along the perimeter of the unprotected portion to separate the unprotected portion from the remainder of the floor assembly.

4.	Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber or structural composite lumber equal to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8 mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire performance.

R302.14 Combustible insulation clearance.

Combustible insulation shall be separated not less than 3 inches (76 mm) from recessed luminaires, fan motors and other heat-producing devices.

Exception: Where heat-producing devices are listed for lesser clearances, combustible insulation complying with the listing requirements shall be separated in accordance with the conditions stipulated in the listing.

Recessed luminaires installed in the building thermal envelope shall meet the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

SECTION R303
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
R303.1 Habitable rooms.

Habitable rooms shall have an aggregate glazing area of not less than 8 percent of the floor area of such rooms. Natural ventilation shall be through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or other approved openings to the outdoor air. Such openings shall be provided with ready access or shall otherwise be readily controllable by the building occupants. The openable area to the outdoors shall be not less than 4 percent of the floor area being ventilated.

Exceptions:

1.	For habitable rooms other than kitchens, the glazed areas need not be openable where the opening is not required by Section R310 and a whole-house mechanical ventilation system or a mechanical ventilation system capable of producing 0.35 air changes per hour in the habitable rooms is installed in accordance with Section M1507.

2.	For kitchens, the glazed areas need not be openable where the opening is not required by Section R310 and a local exhaust system is installed in accordance with Section M1507.

3.	The glazed areas need not be installed in rooms where Exception 1 is satisfied and artificial light is provided that is capable of producing an average illumination of 6 footcandles (65 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor level.

4.	Use of sunroom and patio covers, as defined in Section R202, shall be permitted for natural ventilation if in excess of 40 percent of the exterior sunroom walls are open, or are enclosed only by insect screening.

R303.2 Adjoining rooms.

For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room shall be considered to be a portion of an adjoining room where not less than one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room and not less than 25 square feet (2.3 m2).

Exception: Openings required for light or ventilation shall be permitted to open into a sunroom with thermal isolation or a patio cover, provided that there is an openable area between the adjoining room and the sunroom or patio cover of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room and not less than 20 square feet (2 m2). The minimum openable area to the outdoors shall be based upon the total floor area being ventilated.

R303.3 Bathrooms.

Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not less than 3 square feet (0.3 m2), one-half of which must be openable.

Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and a local exhaust system are provided. The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section M1507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors.

R303.4 Mechanical ventilation.

Where the air infiltration rate of a dwelling unit is less than 3.00 air changes per hour where tested with a blower door at a pressure of 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section R402.4.1.2 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation, the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3.

R303.5 Opening location.

Outdoor intake and exhaust openings shall be located in accordance with Sections R303.5.1 and R303.5.2.

R303.5.1 Intake openings.

Mechanical and gravity outdoor air intake openings shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from any hazardous or noxious contaminant, such as vents, chimneys, plumbing vents, streets, alleys, parking lots and loading docks.

For the purpose of this section, the exhaust from dwelling unit toilet rooms, bathrooms and kitchens shall not be considered as hazardous or noxious.

Exceptions:

1.	The 10-foot (3048 mm) separation is not required where the intake opening is located 3 feet (914 mm) or greater below the contaminant source.

2.	Vents and chimneys serving fuel-burning appliances shall be terminated in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapters 18 and 24.

3.	Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall be terminated in accordance with Section M1502.3.

R303.5.2 Exhaust openings.

Exhaust air shall not be directed onto walkways.

R303.6 Outside opening protection.

Air exhaust and intake openings that terminate outdoors shall be protected with corrosion-resistant screens, louvers or grilles having an opening size of not less than 1/4 inch (6 mm) and a maximum opening size of 1/2 inch (13 mm), in any dimension. Openings shall be protected against local weather conditions. Outdoor air exhaust and intake openings shall meet the provisions for exterior wall opening protectives in accordance with this code.

R303.7 Interior stairway illumination.

Interior stairways shall be provided with an artificial light source to illuminate the landings and treads. The light source shall be capable of illuminating treads and landings to levels of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) as measured at the center of treads and landings. There shall be a wall switch at each floor level to control the light source where the stairway has six or more risers.

Exception: A switch is not required where remote, central or automatic control of lighting is provided.

R303.8 Exterior stairway illumination.

Exterior stairways shall be provided with an artificial light source located at the top landing of the stairway. Exterior stairways providing access to a basement from the outdoor grade level shall be provided with an artificial light source located at the bottom landing of the stairway.

R303.9 Required glazed openings.

Required glazed openings shall open directly onto a street or public alley, or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building.

Exceptions:

1.	Required glazed openings that face into a roofed porch where the porch abuts a street, yard or court and the longer side of the porch is not less than 65 percent unobstructed and the ceiling height is not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

2.	Eave projections shall not be considered as obstructing the clear open space of a yard or court.

3.	Required glazed openings that face into the area under a deck, balcony, bay or floor cantilever where a clear vertical space not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height is provided.

R303.9.1 Sunroom additions.

Required glazed openings shall be permitted to open into sunroom additions or patio covers that abut a street, yard or court if in excess of 40 percent of the exterior sunroom walls are open, or are enclosed only by insect screening, and the ceiling height of the sunroom is not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

R303.10 Required heating.

Where the winter design temperature in Table R301.2(1) is below 60°F (16°C), every dwelling unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) at a point 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor and 2 feet (610 mm) from exterior walls in habitable rooms at the design temperature. The installation of one or more portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.

SECTION R304
MINIMUM ROOM AREAS
R304.1 Minimum area.

Habitable rooms shall have a floor area of not less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2).

Exception: Kitchens.

R304.2 Minimum dimensions.

Habitable rooms shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) in any horizontal dimension.

Exception: Kitchens.

R304.3 Height effect on room area.

Portions of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring less than 5 feet (1524 mm) or a furred ceiling measuring less than 7 feet (2134 mm) from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum required habitable area for that room.

SECTION R305
CEILING HEIGHT
R305.1 Minimum height.

Habitable space, hallways and portions of basements containing these spaces shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	For rooms with sloped ceilings, the required floor area of the room shall have a ceiling height of not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) and not less than 50 percent of the required floor area shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

2.	The ceiling height above bathroom and toilet room fixtures shall be such that the fixture is capable of being used for its intended purpose. A shower or tub equipped with a showerhead shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) above an area of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) by 30 inches (762 mm) at the showerhead.

3.	Beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions in basements containing habitable space shall be permitted to project to within 6 feet 4 inches (1931 mm) of the finished floor.

4.	Beams and girders spaced apart not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in clear finished width shall project not more than 78 inches (1981 mm) from the finished floor.

R305.1.1 Basements.

Portions of basements that do not contain habitable space or hallways shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).

Exception: At beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions, the ceiling height shall be not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1931 mm) from the finished floor.

SECTION R306
SANITATION
R306.1 Toilet facilities.

Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water closet, lavatory, and a bathtub or shower.

R306.2 Kitchen.

Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen area and every kitchen area shall be provided with a sink.

R306.3 Sewage disposal.

Plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system in accordance with Chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code, Standards for Onsite Sewage Treatment and Disposal Systems.

R306.4 Water supply to fixtures.

Plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved water supply. Kitchen sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, bidets, laundry tubs and washing machine outlets shall be provided with hot and cold water.

SECTION R307
TOILET, BATH AND SHOWER SPACES
R307.1 Space required.

Fixtures shall be spaced in accordance with Figure R307.1, and in accordance with the requirements of Section P2705.1.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R307.1

MINIMUM FIXTURE CLEARANCES

R307.2 Bathtub and shower spaces.

Bathtub and shower floors and walls above bathtubs with installed shower heads and in shower compartments shall be finished with a nonabsorbent surface. Such wall surfaces shall extend to a height of not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor.

SECTION R308
GLAZING
R308.1 Identification.

Except as indicated in Section R308.1.1 each pane of glazing installed in hazardous locations as defined in Section R308.4 shall be provided with a manufacturer’s designation specifying who applied the designation, designating the type of glass and the safety glazing standard with which it complies, which is visible in the final installation. The designation shall be acid etched, sandblasted, ceramic-fired, laser etched, embossed, or be of a type that once applied cannot be removed without being destroyed. A label shall be permitted in lieu of the manufacturer’s designation.

Exceptions:

1.	For other than tempered glass, manufacturer’s designations are not required provided that the building official approves the use of a certificate, affidavit or other evidence confirming compliance with this code.

2.	Tempered spandrel glass is permitted to be identified by the manufacturer with a removable paper designation.

R308.1.1 Identification of multiple assemblies.

Multipane assemblies having individual panes not exceeding 1 square foot (0.09 m2) in exposed area shall have not less than one pane in the assembly identified in accordance with Section R308.1. Other panes in the assembly shall be labeled “CPSC 16 CFR 1201” or “ANSI Z97.1” as appropriate.

R308.2 Louvered windows or jalousies.

Regular, float, wired or patterned glass in jalousies and louvered windows shall be not less than nominal 3/16 inch (5 mm) thick and not more than 48 inches (1219 mm) in length. Exposed glass edges shall be smooth.

R308.2.1 Wired glass prohibited.

Wired glass with wire exposed on longitudinal edges shall not be used in jalousies or louvered windows.

R308.3 Human impact loads.

Individual glazed areas, including glass mirrors in hazardous locations such as those indicated as defined in Section R308.4, shall pass the test requirements of Section R308.3.1.

Exceptions:

1.	Louvered windows and jalousies shall comply with Section R308.2.

2.	Mirrors and other glass panels mounted or hung on a surface that provides a continuous backing support.

3.	Glass unit masonry complying with Section R607.

R308.3.1 Impact test.

Where required by other sections of the code, glazing shall be tested in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR 1201. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Category II unless otherwise indicated in Table R308.3.1(1).

Exception: Glazing not in doors or enclosures for hot tubs, whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs and showers shall be permitted to be tested in accordance with ANSI Z97.1. Glazing shall comply with the test criteria for Class A unless indicated in Table R308.3.1(2).

CPSC 16 CFR 1201" data-bookmark= "" class="section-action-wrapper v-card v-sheet theme--light v-card--flat pa-3 my-2 border border-transparent rounded-lg">

TABLE R308.3.1(1)

MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING CPSC 16 CFR 1201

EXPOSED SURFACE
AREA OF ONE SIDE
OF ONE LITE	GLAZING IN
STORM OR
COMBINATION
DOORS
(Category Class)	GLAZING IN
DOORS
(Category Class)	GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
SECTION R308.4.3
(Category Class)
	GLAZED PANELS
REGULATED BY
SECTION R308.4.2
(Category Class)
	GLAZING IN
DOORS AND
ENCLOSURES
REGULATED BY
SECTION 308.4.5
(Category Class)
	SLIDING GLASS
DOORS PATIO TYPE
(Category Class)
9 square feet or less	I	I	NR	I	II	II
More than 9 square feet	II	II	II	II	II	II

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

NR = “No Requirement.”

TABLE R308.3.1(2)

MINIMUM CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION OF GLAZING USING ANSI Z97.1

EXPOSED SURFACE AREA
OF ONE SIDE OF ONE LITE
	GLAZED PANELS REGULATED BY
SECTION R308.4.3
(Category Class)
	GLAZED PANELS REGULATED BY
SECTION R308.4.2
(Category Class)
	DOORS AND ENCLOSURES REGULATED
BY SECTION R308.4.5a
(Category Class)

9 square feet or less	No requirement	B	A
More than 9 square feet	A	A	A

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Use is permitted only by the exception to Section R308.3.1.

R308.4 Hazardous locations.

The locations specified in Sections R308.4.1 through R308.4.7 shall be considered to be specific hazardous locations for the purposes of glazing.

R308.4.1 Glazing in doors.

Glazing in fixed and operable panels of swinging, sliding and bifold doors shall be considered to be a hazardous location.

Exceptions:

1.	Glazed openings of a size through which a 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) sphere is unable to pass.

2.	Decorative glazing.

R308.4.2 Glazing adjacent to doors.

Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel adjacent to a door shall be considered to be a hazardous location where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above the floor or walking surface and it meets either of the following conditions:

1.	Where the glazing is within 24 inches (610 mm) of either side of the door in the plane of the door in a closed position.

2.	Where the glazing is on a wall less than 180 degrees from the plane of the door in a closed position and within 24 inches (610 mm) of the hinge side of an in-swinging door.

Exceptions:

1.	Decorative glazing.

2.	Where there is an intervening wall or other permanent barrier between the door and the glazing.

3.	Where access through the door is to a closet or storage area 3 feet (914 mm) or less in depth. Glazing in this application shall comply with Section R308.4.3.

4.	Glazing that is adjacent to the fixed panel of patio doors.

R308.4.3 Glazing in windows.

Glazing in an individual fixed or operable panel that meets all of the following conditions shall be considered to be a hazardous location:

1.	The exposed area of an individual pane is larger than 9 square feet (0.836 m2),

2.	The bottom edge of the glazing is less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor,

3.	The top edge of the glazing is more than 36 inches (914 mm) above the floor; and

4.	One or more walking surfaces are within 36 inches (914 mm), measured horizontally and in a straight line, of the glazing.

Exceptions:

1.	Decorative glazing.

2.	Where glazing is adjacent to a walking surface and a horizontal rail is installed 34 to 38 inches (864 to 965 mm) above the walking surface. The rail shall be capable of withstanding a horizontal load of 50 pounds per linear foot (730 N/m) without contacting the glass and have a cross-sectional height of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

3.	Outboard panes in insulating glass units and other multiple glazed panels where the bottom edge of the glass is 25 feet (7620 mm) or more above grade, a roof, walking surfaces or other horizontal [within 45 degrees (0.79 rad) of horizontal] surface adjacent to the glass exterior.

R308.4.4 Glazing in guards and railings.

Glazing in guards and railings, including structural baluster panels and nonstructural in-fill panels, regardless of area or height above a walking surface shall be considered to be a hazardous location.

R308.4.5 Glazing and wet surfaces.

Glazing in walls, enclosures or fences containing, facing or adjacent to hot tubs, spas, whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, bathtubs, showers and indoor or outdoor swimming pools where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 60 inches (1524 mm) measured vertically above any standing or walking surface shall be considered to be a hazardous location. This shall apply to single glazing and each pane in multiple glazing.

Exceptions:

1.	Glazing that is more than 60 inches (1524 mm), measured horizontally from the water’s edge of a bathtub, hot tub, spa, whirlpool or swimming pool or from the edge of a shower, sauna or steam room.

2.	Outboard sacrificial panes in laminated insulating glass units in walls where the exterior of the unit is not exposed to any of the hazardous locations specified in Section R308.4.

R308.4.6 Glazing adjacent to stairs and ramps.

Glazing where the bottom exposed edge of the glazing is less than 36 inches (914 mm) above the plane of the adjacent walking surface of stairways, landings between flights of stairs and ramps shall be considered to be a hazardous location.

Exceptions:

1.	Where glazing is adjacent to a walking surface and a horizontal rail is installed at 34 to 38 inches (864 to 965 mm) above the walking surface. The rail shall be capable of withstanding a horizontal load of 50 pounds per linear foot (730 N/m) without contacting the glass and have a cross-sectional height of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

2.	Glazing 36 inches (914 mm) or more measured horizontally from the walking surface.

R308.4.7 Glazing adjacent to the bottom stair landing.

Glazing adjacent to the landing at the bottom of a stairway where the glazing is less than 36 inches (914 mm) above the landing and within a 60-inch (1524 mm) horizontal arc less than 180 degrees from the bottom tread nosing shall be considered to be a hazardous location. See Figure R308.4.7.

Exception: The glazing is protected by a guard complying with Section R312 and the plane of the glass is more than 18 inches (457 mm) from the guard.

FIGURE R308.4.7

HAZARDOUS GLAZING LOCATIONS AT BOTTOM STAIR LANDINGS

R308.5 Site-built windows.

Site-built windows shall comply with Section 2404 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

R308.6 Skylights and sloped glazing.

Skylights and sloped glazing shall comply with the following sections.

R308.6.1 Definitions.

The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:

SKYLIGHT, UNIT.

SKYLIGHTS AND SLOPED GLAZING.

TUBULAR DAYLIGHTING DEVICE (TDD).

R308.6.2 Materials.

The following types of glazing shall be permitted to be used:

1.	Laminated glass with not less than a 0.015-inch (0.38 mm) polyvinyl butyral interlayer for glass panes 16 square feet (1.5 m2) or less in area located such that the highest point of the glass is not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) above a walking surface; for higher or larger sizes, the interlayer thickness shall be not less than 0.030 inch (0.76 mm).

2.	Fully tempered glass.

3.	Heat-strengthened glass.

4.	Wired glass.

5.	Approved rigid plastics.

R308.6.3 Screens, general.

For fully tempered or heat-strengthened glass, a broken-glass retention screen meeting the requirements of Section R308.6.7 shall be installed below the full area of the glass, except for fully tempered glass that meets condition 1 or 2 listed in Section R308.6.5.

R308.6.4 Screens with multiple glazing.

Where the inboard pane is fully tempered, heat-strengthened or wired glass, a broken-glass retention screen meeting the requirements of Section R308.6.7 shall be installed below the full area of the glass, except for condition 1 or 2 listed in Section R308.6.5. Other panes in the multiple glazing shall be of any type listed in Section R308.6.2.

R308.6.5 Screens not required.

Screens shall not be required where laminated glass complying with Item 1 of Section R308.6.2 is used as single glazing or the inboard pane in multiple glazing. Screens shall not be required where fully tempered glass is used as single glazing or the inboard pane in multiple glazing and either of the following conditions is met:

1.	The glass area is 16 square feet (1.49 m2) or less. Highest point of glass not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) above a walking surface, nominal glass thickness not more than 3/16 inch (4.8 mm), and, for multiple glazing only, the other pane or panes fully tempered, laminated or wired glass.

2.	The glass area is greater than 16 square feet (1.49 m2); the glass is sloped 30 degrees (0.52 rad) or less from vertical; and highest point of glass is not more than 10 feet (3048 mm) above a walking surface.

R308.6.6 Glass in greenhouses.

Any glazing material is permitted to be installed without screening in the sloped areas of greenhouses, provided that the greenhouse height at the ridge does not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) above grade.

R308.6.7 Screen characteristics.

The screen and its fastenings shall: be capable of supporting twice the weight of the glazing; be firmly and substantially fastened to the framing members; be installed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the glass; and have a mesh opening of not greater than 1 inch by 1 inch (25 mm by 25 mm).

R308.6.8 Curbs for skylights.

Unit skylights installed in a roof with a pitch flatter than three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) shall be mounted on a curb extending not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the plane of the roof unless otherwise specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R308.6.9 Testing and labeling.

Unit skylights and tubular daylighting devices shall be tested by an approved independent laboratory, and bear a label identifying manufacturer, performance grade rating and approved inspection agency to indicate compliance with the requirements of AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440.

R308.6.9.1 Comparative analysis for glass-glazed unit skylights.

Structural wind load design pressures for glass-glazed unit skylights different than the size tested in accordance with Section R308.6.9 shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested unit where determined in accordance with one of the following comparative analysis methods:

1.	Structural wind load design pressures for glass-glazed unit skylights smaller than the size tested in accordance with Section R308.6.9 shall be permitted to be higher than the design value of the tested unit provided that such higher pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis. Components of the smaller unit shall be the same as those of the tested unit. Such calculated design pressures shall be validated by an additional test of the glass-glazed unit skylight having the highest allowable design pressure.

2.	In accordance with WDMA I.S. 11.

SECTION R309
GARAGES AND CARPORTS
R309.1 Floor surface.

Garage floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material.

The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.

R309.2 Carports.

Carports shall be open on not less than two sides. Carport floor surfaces shall be of approved noncombustible material. Carports not open on two or more sides shall be considered to be a garage and shall comply with the provisions of this section for garages.

Exception: Asphalt surfaces shall be permitted at ground level in carports.

The area of floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway.

R309.3 Flood hazard areas.

Garages and carports located in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall be constructed in accordance with Section R322.

R309.4 Automatic garage door openers.

Automatic garage door openers, if provided, shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 325.

R309.5 Fire sprinklers.

Private garages shall be protected by fire sprinklers where the garage wall has been designed based on Table R302.1, Footnote a. Sprinklers in garages shall be connected to an automatic sprinkler system that complies with Section P2904. Garage sprinklers shall be residential sprinklers or quick-response sprinklers, designed to provide a density of 0.05 gpm/ft2. Garage doors shall not be considered obstructions with respect to sprinkler placement.

SECTION R310
EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENINGS
R310.1 Emergency escape and rescue opening required.

Basements, habitable attics and every sleeping room shall have not less than one operable emergency escape and rescue opening. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be required in each sleeping room. Emergency escape and rescue openings shall open directly into a public way, or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.

Exceptions:

1.	Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical equipment not exceeding a total floor area of 200 square feet (18.58 m2).

2.	The emergency escape and rescue opening shall be permitted to open into a screen enclosure, open to the atmosphere, where a screen door is provided leading away from the residence.

R310.1.1 Operational constraints and opening control devices.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys, tools or special knowledge. Window opening control devices and fall prevention devices complying with ASTM F2090 shall be permitted for use on windows serving as a required emergency escape and rescue opening.

R310.2 Emergency escape and rescue openings.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have minimum dimensions in accordance with Sections 310.2.1 through 310.2.3.

R310.2.1 Minimum size.

Emergency and escape rescue openings shall have a net clear opening of not less than 5.7 square feet (0.530 m2). The minimum net clear opening for grade-floor emergency escape and rescue openings shall be 5 square feet (0.465 m2).

R310.2.2 Minimum dimensions.

The minimum net clear opening height dimension shall be 24 inches (610 mm). The minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be 20 inches (508 mm). The net clear opening dimensions shall be the result of normal operation of the opening.

R310.2.3 Maximum height from floor.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall have the bottom of the clear opening not greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) above the floor.

R310.2.4 Window wells.

The horizontal area of the window well shall be not less than 9 square feet (0.9 m2), with a horizontal projection and width of not less than 36 inches (914 mm). The area of the window well shall allow the emergency escape and rescue opening to be fully opened.

Exception: The ladder or steps required by Section R310.2.4.1 shall be permitted to encroach not more than 6 inches (152 mm) into the required dimensions of the window well.

R310.2.4.1 Ladder and steps.

Window wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the window in the fully open position. Ladders or steps required by this section shall not be required to comply with Sections R311.7 and R311.8. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), shall project not less than 3 inches (76 mm) from the wall and shall be spaced not more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center vertically for the full height of the window well.

R310.2.4.2 Drainage.

Window wells shall be designed for proper drainage by connecting to the building’s foundation drainage system required by Section R405.1 or by an approved alternative method.

Exception: A drainage system for window wells is not required where the foundation is on well-drained soil or sand-gravel mixture soils in accordance with the United Soil Classification System, Group I Soils, as detailed in Table R405.1.

R310.2.5 Emergency escape and rescue openings under decks and porches.

Emergency escape and rescue openings shall be permitted to be installed under decks and porches provided that the location of the deck allows the emergency escape and rescue openings to be fully opened and provides a path not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height to a yard or court.

R310.2.6 Replacement windows.

Replacement windows installed in buildings meeting the scope of this code shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections R310.2.1, R310.2.2 and R310.2.3 provided the replacement window meets the following conditions:

1.	The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window that will fit within the existing frame or existing rough opening. The replacement window is of the same operating style as the existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than the existing window.

2.	The replacement window is not part of a change of occupancy.

R310.3 Emergency escape and rescue doors.

Where a door is provided as the required emergency escape and rescue opening, it shall be permitted to be a side-hinged door or a slider. Where the opening is below the adjacent grade, it shall be provided with an area well.

R310.3.1 Minimum door opening size.

The minimum net clear height opening for any door that serves as an emergency and escape rescue opening shall be in accordance with Section R310.2.1.

R310.3.2 Area wells.

Area wells shall have a width of not less than 36 inches (914 mm). The area of the area well shall allow the emergency escape and rescue door to be fully opened.

R310.3.2.1 Ladder and steps.

Area wells with a vertical depth greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) shall be equipped with a permanently affixed ladder or steps usable with the door in the fully open position. Ladders or steps required by this section shall not be required to comply with Sections R311.7 and R311.8. Ladders or rungs shall have an inside width of not less than 12 inches (305 mm), shall project not less than 3 inches (76 mm) from the wall and shall be spaced not more than 18 inches (457 mm) on center vertically for the full height of the exterior stairwell.

R310.3.2.2 Drainage.

Area wells shall be designed for proper drainage by connecting to the building’s foundation drainage system required by Section R405.1 or by an approved alternative method.

Exception: A drainage system for area wells is not required where the foundation is on well-drained soil or sand-gravel mixture soils in accordance with the United Soil Classification System, Group I Soils, as detailed in Table R405.1.

R310.4 Bars, grilles, covers and screens.

Bars, grilles, covers, screens or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings, bulkhead enclosures, or window wells that serve such openings, provided that the minimum net clear opening size complies with Sections R310.1.1 to R310.2.3, and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool, special knowledge or force greater than that required for the normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. The temporary installation or closure of storm shutters, panels, and other approved hurricane protection devices shall be permitted on emergency escape and rescue openings and egress doors during the threat of a storm. Such devices shall not be required to comply with the operational constraints of Section R310.1.1 or R312.2. While such protection is provided, at least one means of escape from the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be provided. The means of escape shall be within the first floor of the dwelling or dwelling unit and shall not be located within a garage without a side-hinged door leading directly to the exterior. Occupants in any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be able to access the means of escape without passing through a lockable door not under their control.

R310.5 Dwelling additions.

Where dwelling additions occur that contain sleeping rooms, an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be provided in each new sleeping room. Where dwelling additions occur that have basements, an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be provided in the new basement.

Exceptions:

1.	An emergency escape and rescue opening is not required in a new basement that contains a sleeping room with an emergency escape and rescue opening.

2.	An emergency escape and rescue opening is not required in a new basement where there is an emergency escape and rescue opening in an existing basement that is accessed from the new basement.

R310.6 Alterations or repairs of existing basements.

An emergency escape and rescue opening is not required where existing basements undergo alterations or repairs.

Exception: New sleeping rooms created in an existing basement shall be provided with emergency escape and rescue openings in accordance with Section R310.1.

SECTION R311
MEANS OF EGRESS
R311.1 Means of egress.

Dwellings shall be provided with a means of egress in accordance with this section. The means of egress shall provide a continuous and unobstructed path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from all portions of the dwelling to the required egress door without requiring travel through a garage. The required egress door shall open directly into a public way or to a yard or court that opens to a public way.

R311.2 Egress door.

Not less than one egress door shall be provided for each dwelling unit. The egress door shall be side-hinged, and shall provide a clear width of not less than 32 inches (813 mm) where measured between the face of the door and the stop, with the door open 90 degrees (1.57 rad). The clear height of the door opening shall be not less than 78 inches (1981 mm) in height measured from the top of the threshold to the bottom of the stop. Other doors shall not be required to comply with these minimum dimensions. Egress doors shall be readily openable from inside the dwelling without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

Exception: Buildings that are 400 square feet or less and that are intended for use in conjunction with one- and two- family residences are not subject to the door height and width requirements of this code.

R311.3 Floors and landings at exterior doors.

There shall be a landing or floor on each side of each exterior door. The width of each landing shall be not less than the door served. Every landing shall have a dimension of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) measured in the direction of travel. The slope at exterior landings shall not exceed 1/4 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2 percent).

Exception: Exterior balconies less than 60 square feet (5.6 m2) and only accessed from a door are permitted to have a landing less than 36 inches (914 mm) measured in the direction of travel.

R311.3.1 Floor elevations at the required egress doors.

Landings or finished floors at the required egress door shall be not more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) lower than the top of the threshold.

Exception: The landing or floor on the exterior side shall be not more than 73/4 inches (196 mm) below the top of the threshold.

Where exterior landings or floors serving the required egress door are not at grade, they shall be provided with access to grade by means of a ramp in accordance with Section R311.8 or a stairway in accordance with Section R311.7.

R311.3.2 Floor elevations for other exterior doors.

Doors other than the required egress door shall be provided with landings or floors not more than 73/4 inches (196 mm) below the top of the threshold.

Exception: A top landing is not required where a stairway of not more than two risers is located on the exterior side of the door.

R311.3.3 Storm and screen doors.

Storm and screen doors shall be permitted to swing over exterior stairs and landings.

R311.4 Vertical egress.

Egress from habitable levels including habitable attics and basements not provided with an egress door in accordance with Section R311.2 shall be by a ramp in accordance with Section R311.8 or a stairway in accordance with Section R311.7.

R311.5 Construction.
R311.5.1 Attachment.

Exterior landings, decks, balconies, stairs and similar facilities shall be positively anchored to the primary structure to resist both vertical and lateral forces or shall be designed to be self-supporting. Attachment shall not be accomplished by use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal.

R311.6 Hallways.

The width of a hallway shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm).

R311.7 Stairways.

Where required by this code or provided, stairways shall comply with this section.

Exceptions:

1.	Stairways not within or serving a building, porch or deck.

2.	Stairways leading to nonhabitable attics.

3.	Stairways leading to crawl spaces.

R311.7.1 Width.

Stairways shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in clear width at all points above the permitted handrail height and below the required headroom height. The clear width of the stairway at and below the handrail height, including treads and landings, shall be not less than 311/2 inches (787 mm) where a handrail is installed on one side and 27 inches (698 mm) where handrails are provided on both sides.

Exception: The width of spiral stairways shall be in accordance with Section R311.7.10.1.

R311.7.2 Headroom.

The headroom in stairways shall be not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm) measured vertically from the sloped line adjoining the tread nosing or from the floor surface of the landing or platform on that portion of the stairway.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the nosings of treads at the side of a flight extend under the edge of a floor opening through which the stair passes, the floor opening shall be allowed to project horizontally into the required headroom not more than 43/4 inches (121 mm).

2.	The headroom for spiral stairways shall be in accordance with Section R311.7.10.1.

R311.7.3 Vertical rise.

A flight of stairs shall not have a vertical rise greater than 12 feet 7 inches (3835 mm) between floor levels or landings.

R311.7.4 Walkline.

The walkline across winder treads shall be concentric to the curved direction of travel through the turn and located 12 inches (305 mm) from the side where the winders are narrower. The 12-inch (305 mm) dimension shall be measured from the widest point of the clear stair width at the walking surface of the winder. If winders are adjacent within the flight, the point of the widest clear stair width of the adjacent winders shall be used.

R311.7.5 Stair treads and risers.

Stair treads and risers shall meet the requirements of this section. For the purposes of this section, dimensions and dimensioned surfaces shall be exclusive of carpets, rugs or runners.

R311.7.5.1 Risers.

The riser height shall be not more than 73/4 inches (196 mm). The riser height shall be measured vertically between leading edges of the adjacent treads. The greatest riser height within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Risers shall be vertical or sloped from the underside of the nosing of the tread above. Open risers are permitted provided that the openings located more than 30 inches (762 mm), as measured vertically, to the floor or grade below do not permit the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.

Exceptions:

1.	The opening between adjacent treads is not limited on spiral stairways.

2.	The riser height of spiral stairways shall be in accordance with Section R311.7.10.1.

R311.7.5.2 Treads.

The tread depth shall be not less than 10 inches (254 mm). The tread depth shall be measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads and at a right angle to the tread’s leading edge. The greatest tread depth within any flight of stairs shall not exceed the smallest by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

R311.7.5.2.1 Winder treads.

Winder treads shall have a tread depth of not less than 10 inches (254 mm) measured between the vertical planes of the foremost projection of adjacent treads at the intersections with the walkline. Winder treads shall have a tread depth of not less than 6 inches (152 mm) at any point within the clear width of the stair. Within any flight of stairs, the largest winder tread depth at the walkline shall not exceed the smallest winder tread by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Consistently shaped winders at the walkline shall be allowed within the same flight of stairs as rectangular treads and do not have to be within 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) of the rectangular tread depth.

Exception: The tread depth at spiral stairways shall be in accordance with Section R311.7.10.1.

R311.7.5.3 Nosings.

Nosings at treads, landings and floors of stairways shall have a radius of curvature at the nosing not greater than 9/16 inch (14 mm) or a bevel not exceeding 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). A nosing projection not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) and not more than 11/4 inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways. The greatest nosing projection shall not exceed the smallest nosing projection by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) within a stairway.

Exception: A nosing projection is not required where the tread depth is not less than 11 inches (279 mm).

R311.7.5.4 Exterior plastic composite stair treads.

Plastic composite exterior stair treads shall comply with the provisions of this section and Section R507.2.

R311.7.6 Landings for stairways.

There shall be a floor or landing at the top and bottom of each stairway. The width perpendicular to the direction of travel shall be not less than the width of the flight served. Landings of shapes other than square or rectangular shall be permitted provided that the depth at the walk line and the total area is not less than that of a quarter circle with a radius equal to the required landing width. Where the stairway has a straight run, the depth in the direction of travel shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	A floor or landing is not required at the top of an interior flight of stairs, including stairs in an enclosed garage, provided that a door does not swing over the stairs.

2.	See Section R311.3 for exterior doors where a step down is provided.

R311.7.7 Stairway walking surface.

The walking surface of treads and landings of stairways shall be sloped not steeper than one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

Exception: Where the surface of a landing is required elsewhere in the code to drain surface water, the walking surface of the landing shall be sloped not steeper than 1 unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) in the direction of travel.

R311.7.8 Handrails.

Handrails shall be provided on not less than one side of each flight with four or more risers.

R311.7.8.1 Height.

Handrail height, measured vertically from the sloped plane adjoining the tread nosing, or finish surface of ramp slope, shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	The use of a volute, turnout or starting easing shall be allowed over the lowest tread.

2.	Where handrail fittings or bendings are used to provide continuous transition between flights, transitions at winder treads, the transition from handrail to guard, or used at the start of a flight, the handrail height at the fittings or bendings shall be permitted to exceed 38 inches (956 mm).

R311.7.8.2 Continuity.

Handrails for stairways shall be continuous for the full length of the flight, from a point directly above the top riser of the flight to a point directly above the lowest riser of the flight. Handrail ends shall be returned or shall terminate in newel posts or safety terminals. Handrails adjacent to a wall shall have a space of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between the wall and the handrails.

Exceptions:

1.	Handrails shall be permitted to be interrupted by a newel post at the turn.

2.	The use of a volute, turnout, starting easing or starting newel shall be allowed over the lowest tread.

R311.7.8.3 Grip-size.

Required handrails shall be of one of the following types or provide equivalent graspability.

1.	Type I. Handrails with a circular cross section shall have an outside diameter of not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) and not greater than 2 inches (51 mm). If the handrail is not circular, it shall have a perimeter dimension of not less than 4 inches (102 mm) and not greater than 61/4 inches (160 mm) with a cross section of dimension of not more than 21/4 inches (57 mm). Edges shall have a radius of not less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).

2.	Type II. Handrails with a perimeter greater than 61/4 inches (160 mm) shall have a graspable finger recess area on both sides of the profile. The finger recess shall begin within a distance of 3/4 inch (19 mm) measured vertically from the tallest portion of the profile and achieve a depth of not less than 5/16 inch (8 mm) within 7/8 inch (22 mm) below the widest portion of the profile. This required depth shall continue for not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) to a level that is not less than 13/4 inches (45 mm) below the tallest portion of the profile. The width of the handrail above the recess shall be not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) and not more than 23/4 inches (70 mm). Edges shall have a radius of not less than 0.01 inch (0.25 mm).

R311.7.8.4 Exterior plastic composite handrails.

Plastic composite exterior handrails shall comply with the requirements of Section R507.2.

R311.7.8.5 Handrail projection.

Handrails shall not project more than 41/2 inches (114 mm) on either side of the stairway.

Exception: Where nosings of landings, floors or passing flights project into the stairway reducing the required clearance at passing handrails, the handrail shall project not more than 61/2 inches (165 mm) into the stairway, provided the required stair width and required handrail clearance are not reduced.

R311.7.9 Illumination.

Stairways shall be provided with illumination in accordance with Section R303.7.

R311.7.10 Special stairways.

Spiral stairways and bulkhead enclosure stairways shall comply with the requirements of Section R311.7 except as specified in Sections R311.7.10.1 and R311.7.10.2.

R311.7.10.1 Spiral stairways.

Spiral stairways are permitted, provided that the clear width at and below the handrail is not less than 26 inches (660 mm) and the walkline radius is not greater than 241/2 inches (622 mm). Each tread shall have a depth of not less than 63/4 inches (171 mm) at the walkline. All treads shall be identical, and the rise shall be not more than 91/2 inches (241 mm). Headroom shall be not less than 6 feet 6 inches (1982 mm).

R311.7.10.2 Bulkhead enclosure stairways.

Stairways serving bulkhead enclosures, not part of the required building egress, providing access from the outside grade level to the basement shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections R311.3 and R311.7 where the height from the basement finished floor level to grade adjacent to the stairway is not more than 8 feet (2438 mm) and the grade level opening to the stairway is covered by a bulkhead enclosure with hinged doors or other approved means.

R311.7.11 Alternating tread devices.

Alternating tread devices shall not be used as an element of a means of egress. Alternating tread devices shall be permitted provided that the required means of egress stairway or ramp serves the same space at each adjoining level or where a means of egress is not required. The clear width at and below the handrails shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm).

Exception: Alternating tread devices are allowed to be used as an element of a means of egress for lofts, mezzanines and similar areas of 200 gross square feet or less and not providing exclusive access to a kitchen or bathroom.

R311.7.11.1 Treads of alternating tread devices.

Alternating tread devices shall have a tread depth of not less than 5 inches (127 mm), a projected tread depth of not less than 81/2 inches (216 mm), a tread width of not less than 7 inches (178 mm) and a riser height of not more than 91/2 inches (241 mm). The tread depth shall be measured horizontally between the vertical planes of the foremost projections of adjacent treads. The riser height shall be measured vertically between the leading edges of adjacent treads. The riser height and tread depth provided shall result in an angle of ascent from the horizontal of between 50 and 70 degrees (0.87 and 1.22 rad). The initial tread of the device shall begin at the same elevation as the platform, landing or floor surface.

R311.7.11.2 Handrails of alternating tread devices.

Handrails shall be provided on both sides of alternating tread devices and shall comply with Sections R311.7.8.2 to R311.7.8.4. Handrail height shall be uniform, not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864 mm).

R311.7.12 Ships ladders.

Ships ladders shall not be used as an element of a means of egress. Ships ladders shall be permitted provided that a required means of egress stairway or ramp serves the same space at each adjoining level or where a means of egress is not required. The clear width at and below the handrails shall be not less than 20 inches.

Exception: Ships ladders are allowed to be used as an element of a means of egress for lofts, mezzanines and similar areas of 200 gross square feet or less and not providing exclusive access to a kitchen or bathroom.

R311.7.12.1 Treads of ships ladders.

Treads shall have a depth of not less than 5 inches (127 mm). The tread shall be projected such that the total of the tread depth plus the nosing projection is not less than 81/2 inches (216 mm). The riser height shall be not more than 91/2 inches (241 mm).

R311.7.12.2 Handrails of ships ladders.

Handrails shall be provided on both sides of ships ladders and shall comply with Sections R311.7.8.2 to R311.7.8.4. Handrail height shall be uniform, not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more than 34 inches (864 mm).

R311.8 Ramps.
R311.8.1 Maximum slope.

Ramps serving the egress door required by Section R311.2 shall have a slope of not more than 1 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8.3-percent slope). All other ramps shall have a maximum slope of 1 unit vertical in 8 units horizontal (12.5 percent).

Exception: Where it is technically infeasible to comply because of site constraints, ramps shall have a slope of not more than 1 unit vertical in 8 units horizontal (12.5 percent).

R311.8.2 Landings required.

There shall be a floor or landing at the top and bottom of each ramp, where doors open onto ramps, and where ramps change directions. The width of the landing perpendicular to the ramp slope shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm).

R311.8.3 Handrails required.

Handrails shall be provided on not less than one side of ramps exceeding a slope of one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8.33-percent slope).

R311.8.3.1 Height.

Handrail height, measured above the finished surface of the ramp slope, shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm).

R311.8.3.2 Grip size.

Handrails on ramps shall comply with Section R311.7.8.3.

R311.8.3.3 Continuity.

Handrails where required on ramps shall be continuous for the full length of the ramp. Handrail ends shall be returned or shall terminate in newel posts or safety terminals. Handrails adjacent to a wall shall have a space of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) between the wall and the handrails.

SECTION R312
GUARDS AND WINDOW FALL PROTECTION
R312.1 Guards.

Guards shall be provided in accordance with Sections R312.1.1 through R312.1.4.

R312.1.1 Where required.

Guards shall be provided for those portions of open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, ramps and landings, that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within 24 inches (610 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side. Insect screening shall not be considered as a guard.

R312.1.2 Height.

Required guards at open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, porches, balconies or landings, shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height as measured vertically above the adjacent walking surface or the line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

Exceptions:

1.	Guards on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not less than 34 inches (864 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

2.	Where the top of the guard serves as a handrail on the open sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) as measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.

R312.1.3 Opening limitations.

Required guards shall not have openings from the walking surface to the required guard height that allow passage of a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter.

Exceptions:

1.	The triangular openings at the open side of stair, formed by the riser, tread and bottom rail of a guard, shall not allow passage of a sphere 6 inches (153 mm) in diameter.

2.	Guards on the open side of stairs shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 43/8 inches (111 mm) in diameter.

R312.1.4 Exterior plastic composite guards.

Plastic composite exterior guards shall comply with the requirements of Section R317.4.

R312.2 Window fall protection.

Window fall protection shall be provided in accordance with Sections R312.2.1 and R312.2.2.

R312.2.1 Window sills opening height.

In dwelling units, where the bottom of the clear opening of an operable window opening is located less than 24 inches (610 mm) above the finished floor and greater than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below on the exterior of the building, the operable window shall comply with one of the following:

1.	Operable windows with openings that will not allow a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere to pass through the opening where the opening is in its largest opened position.

2.	Operable windows that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2090.

3.	Operable windows that are provided with window opening control devices that comply with Section R312.2.2.

R312.2.2 Window opening control devices.

Window opening control devices shall comply with ASTM F2090. The window opening control device, after operation to release the control device allowing the window to fully open, shall not reduce the net clear opening area of the window unit to less than the area required by Section R310.2.1 and R310.2.2.

SECTION R313
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS

RESERVED

SECTION R314
SMOKE ALARMS
R314.1 General.

Smoke alarms shall comply with NFPA 72 and Section R314.

R314.1.1 Listings.

Smoke alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 217. Combination smoke and carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 217 and UL 2034.

R314.2 Where required.

Smoke alarms shall be provided in accordance with this section.

R314.2.1 New construction.

Smoke alarms shall be provided in dwelling units.

R314.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions.

Where alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or where one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings.

Exceptions:

1.	Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding, the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck.

2.	Installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing or mechanical systems.

R314.3 Location.

Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following locations:

1.	In each sleeping room.

2.	Outside each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.

3.	On each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and habitable attics and not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.

4.	Smoke alarms shall be installed not less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally from the door or opening of a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm required by Section R314.3.

R314.3.1 Installation near cooking appliances.

Smoke alarms shall not be installed in the following locations unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm in a location required by Section R314.3.

1.	Ionization smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 20 feet (6096 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

2.	Ionization smoke alarms with an alarm-silencing switch shall not be installed less than 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

3.	Photoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 6 feet (1828 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

4.	Smoke alarms listed and marked “helps reduce cooking nuisance alarms” shall not be installed less than 6 feet (1828 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking appliance.

R314.4 Interconnection.

Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in accordance with Section R314.3, the alarm devices shall be interconnected in such a manner that the actuation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual dwelling unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm.

Exception: Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where alterations or repairs do not result in removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.

R314.5 Combination alarms.

Combination smoke and carbon monoxide alarms shall be permitted to be used in lieu of smoke alarms.

R314.6 Power source.

Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and, where primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection.

Exceptions:

1.	Smoke alarms shall be permitted to be battery operated where installed in buildings without commercial power.

2.	One-family and two-family dwellings and townhomes undergoing a repair, or a Level 1 alteration as defined in the Florida Building Code, may use smoke alarms powered by 10-year nonremovable, nonreplaceable batteries in lieu of retrofitting such dwelling with smoke alarms powered by the dwelling’s electrical system. A battery-powered smoke alarm that is newly installed or replaces an existing battery-powered smoke alarm as a result of a Level 1 alteration must be powered by a nonremovable, nonreplaceable battery that powers the alarm for at least 10 years. The battery requirements of this section do not apply to a fire alarm, smoke detector, smoke alarm, or ancillary component that is electronically connected as a part of a centrally monitored or supervised alarm system, that uses a low-power, radio frequency wireless communication signal; or that contains multiple sensors, such as a smoke alarm combined with a carbon monoxide alarm or other multisensor devices, and is approved and listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

R314.7 Fire alarm systems.

Fire alarm systems shall be permitted to be used in lieu of smoke alarms and shall comply with Sections R314.7.1 through R314.7.4.

R314.7.1 General.

Fire alarm systems shall comply with the provisions of this code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72. Smoke detectors shall be listed in accordance with UL 268.

R314.7.2 Location.

Smoke detectors shall be installed in the locations specified in Section R314.3.

R314.7.3 Permanent fixture.

Where a household fire alarm system is installed, it shall become a permanent fixture of the occupancy, owned by the homeowner.

R314.7.4 Combination detectors.

Combination smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be permitted to be installed in fire alarm systems in lieu of smoke detectors, provided that they are listed in accordance with UL 268 and UL 2075.

SECTION R315
CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS
R315.1 Carbon monoxide protection.

Every separate building or an addition to an existing building for which a permit for new construction is issued and having a fossil-fuel-burning heater or appliance, a fireplace, an attached garage, or other feature, fixture, or element that emits carbon monoxide as byproduct of combustion shall have an operational carbon monoxide alarm installed within 10 feet of each room used for sleeping purposes.

Exception: This section shall not apply to existing buildings that are undergoing alterations or repair unless the alteration is an addition as defined in Section R315.1.3.

R315.1.1 Carbon monoxide alarm.

The requirements of Section R315.1 shall be satisfied by providing for one of the following alarm installations:

1.	A hard-wired carbon monoxide alarm.

2.	A battery-powered carbon monoxide alarm.

3.	A hard-wired combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarm.

4.	A battery-powered combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarm.

R315.1.2 Combination alarms.

Combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed and labeled by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

R315.1.3 Addition shall mean.

An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or height of a building or structure.

SECTION R316
FOAM PLASTIC
R316.1 General.

The provisions of this section shall govern the materials, design, application, construction and installation of foam plastic materials.

R316.2 Labeling and identification.

Packages and containers of foam plastic insulation and foam plastic insulation components delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer’s name, the product listing, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the requirements.

R316.3 Surface burning characteristics.

Unless otherwise allowed in Section R316.5, foam plastic or foam plastic cores used as a component in manufactured assemblies used in building construction shall comply with Section R316.3.1 or R316.3.2. Loose-fill-type foam plastic insulation shall be tested as board stock for the flame spread index and smoke-developed index.

Exception: Spray foam plastic insulation more than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested at a thickness of 4 inches (102 mm), and at the density intended for use, provided that the spray foam plastic is separated from the interior of a building by 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard, or by a material that has been tested in accordance with NFPA 275, and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test.

R316.3.1 Foam plastic insulation 4 inches thick or less.

Foam plastic insulation installed at 4 inches (102 mm) thickness or less shall have a flame spread index of not more than 75 and shall have a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested in the maximum thickness and density intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

R316.3.2 Foam plastic insulation more than 4 inches thick.

Foam plastic insulation installed at more than 4 inches (102 mm) thickness shall have a flame spread index of not more than 75 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested at a thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL723, provided that the end use is approved in accordance with Section R316.6 using the thickness and density intended for use.

R316.4 Thermal barrier.

Unless otherwise allowed in Section R316.5, foam plastic shall be separated from the interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier of not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard, 23/32-inch (18.2 mm) wood structural panel or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275.

R316.5 Specific requirements.

The following requirements shall apply to these uses of foam plastic unless specifically approved in accordance with Section R316.6 or by other sections of the code or the requirements of Sections R316.2 through R316.4 have been met.

R316.5.1 Masonry or concrete construction.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required in a masonry or concrete wall, floor or roof when the foam plastic insulation is separated from the interior of the building by not less than a 1-inch (25 mm) thickness of masonry or concrete.

R316.5.2 Roofing.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required where the foam plastic in a roof assembly or under a roof covering is installed in accordance with the code and the manufacturer’s instructions and is separated from the interior of the building by tongue-and-groove wood planks or wood structural panel sheathing, in accordance with Section R803, that is not less than 15/32 inch (11.9 mm) thick bonded with exterior glue, identified as Exposure 1 and with edges supported by blocking or tongue-and-groove joints or an equivalent material. The smoke-developed index for roof applications shall not be limited.

R316.5.3 Attics.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required where all of the following apply:

1.	Attic access is required by Section R807.1.

2.	The space is entered only for purposes of repairs or maintenance.

3.	The foam plastic insulation has been tested in accordance with Section R316.6 or the foam plastic insulation is protected against ignition using one of the following ignition barrier materials:

3.1.	11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) mineral fiber insulation.

3.2.	1/4-inch-thick (6.4 mm) wood structural panels.

3.3.	3/8-inch (9.5 mm) particleboard.

3.4.	1/4-inch (6.4 mm) hardboard.

3.5.	3/8-inch (9.5 mm) gypsum board.

3.6.	Corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.406 mm).

3.7.	11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) cellulose insulation; or

3.8.	1/4-inch (6.4 mm) fiber-cement panel, soffit or backer board.

The ignition barrier is not required where the foam plastic insulation has been tested in accordance with Section R316.6.

R316.5.4 Crawl spaces.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required where all of the following apply:

1.	Crawl space access is required by Section R408.4.

2.	Entry is made only for purposes of repairs or maintenance.

3.	The foam plastic insulation has been tested in accordance with Section R316.6 or the foam plastic insulation is protected against ignition using one of the following ignition barrier materials:

3.1.	11/2-inch-thick (38 mm) mineral fiber insulation;

3.2.	1/4-inch-thick (6.4 mm) wood structural panels;

3.3.	3/8-inch (9.5 mm) particleboard;

3.4.	1/4-inch (6.4 mm) hardboard;

3.5.	3/8-inch (9.5 mm) gypsum board;

3.6.	Corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.016 inch (0.406 mm); or

3.7.	1/4-inch (6.4 mm) fiber-cement panel, soffit or backer board.

R316.5.5 Foam-filled exterior doors.

Foam-filled exterior doors are exempt from the requirements of Sections R316.3 and R316.4.

R316.5.6 Foam-filled garage doors.

Foam-filled garage doors in attached or detached garages are exempt from the requirements of Sections R316.3 and R316.4.

R316.5.7 Foam backer board.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required where siding backer board foam plastic insulation has a thickness of not more than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and a potential heat of not more than 2000 Btu per square foot (22 720 kJ/m2) when tested in accordance with NFPA 259 provided that:

1.	The foam plastic insulation is separated from the interior of the building by not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of mineral fiber insulation;

2.	The foam plastic insulation is installed over existing exterior wall finish in conjunction with re-siding; or

3.	The foam plastic insulation has been tested in accordance with Section R316.6.

R316.5.8 Re-siding.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required where the foam plastic insulation is installed over existing exterior wall finish in conjunction with re-siding provided that the foam plastic has a thickness of not more than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and a potential heat of not more than 2000 Btu per square foot (22 720 kJ/m2) when tested in accordance with NFPA 259.

R316.5.9 Interior trim.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required for exposed foam plastic interior trim, provided that all of the following are met:

1.	The density is not less than 20 pounds per cubic foot (320 kg/m3).

2.	The thickness of the trim is not more than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) and the width is not more than 8 inches (204 mm).

3.	The interior trim shall not constitute more than 10 percent of the aggregate wall and ceiling area of any room or space.

4.	The flame spread index does not exceed 75 when tested per ASTM E84 or UL 723. The smoke-developed index is not limited.

R316.5.10 Interior finish.

Foam plastics shall be permitted as interior finish where approved in accordance with Section R316.6. Foam plastics that are used as an interior finish shall meet the flame spread index and smoke-developed index requirements of Sections R302.9.1 and R302.9.2.

R316.5.11 Sill plates and headers.

Foam plastic shall be permitted to be spray applied to sill plates and headers or installed in the perimeter joist space without the thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 subject to all of the following:

1.	The thickness of the foam plastic shall be not more than 31/4 inches (83 mm).

2.	The density of the foam plastic shall be in the range of 0.5 to 2.0 pounds per cubic foot (8 to 32 kg/m3).

3.	The foam plastic shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less and an accompanying smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

R316.5.12 Sheathing.

Foam plastic insulation used as sheathing shall comply with Section R316.3 and Section R316.4. Where the foam plastic sheathing is exposed to the attic space at a gable or kneewall, the provisions of Section R316.5.3 shall apply. Where foam plastic insulation is used as exterior wall sheathing on framed wall assemblies, it shall comply with Section R316.8.

R316.5.13 Floors.

The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is not required to be installed on the walking surface of a structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation when the foam plastic is covered by not less than a nominal 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) wood structural panel or equivalent. The thermal barrier specified in Section R316.4 is required on the underside of the structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation when the underside of the structural floor system is exposed to the interior of the building.

R316.6 Specific approval.

Foam plastic not meeting the requirements of Sections R316.3 through R316.5 shall be specifically approved on the basis of one of the following approved tests: NFPA 286 with the acceptance criteria of Section R302.9.4, FM 4880, UL 1040 or UL 1715, or fire tests related to actual end-use configurations. Approval shall be based on the actual end-use configuration and shall be performed on the finished foam plastic assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use. Assemblies tested shall include seams, joints and other typical details used in the installation of the assembly and shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

R316.7 Termite damage.

The use of foam plastics in areas of “very heavy” termite infestation probability shall be in accordance with Section R318.8.

R316.8 Wind resistance.

Foam plastic insulation complying with ASTM C578 and ASTM C1289 and used as exterior wall sheathing on framed wall assemblies shall comply with SBCA FS 100 for wind pressure resistance unless installed directly over a sheathing material that is separately capable of resisting the wind load or otherwise exempted from the scope of SBCA FS 100.

SECTION R317
PROTECTION OF WOOD AND WOOD-BASED
PRODUCTS AGAINST DECAY
R317.1 Protection of wood members from decay.

Protection of wood and wood-based products from decay shall be provided in the following locations by the use of naturally durable wood or wood that is preservative-treated in accordance with AWPA U1.

1.	In crawl spaces or unexcavated areas located within the periphery of the building foundation, wood joists or the bottom of a wood structural floor where closer than 18 inches (457 mm) to exposed ground, wood girders where closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to exposed ground, and wood columns where closer than 8 inches (204 mm) to exposed ground.

2.	Wood framing members, including columns, that rest directly on concrete or masonry exterior foundation walls and are less than 8 inches (203 mm) from the exposed ground.

3.	Sills and sleepers on a concrete or masonry slab that is in direct contact with the ground unless separated from such slab by an impervious moisture barrier.

4.	The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or concrete walls having clearances of less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) on tops, sides and ends.

5.	Wood siding, sheathing and wall framing on the exterior of a building having a clearance of less than 6 inches (152 mm) from the ground or less than 2 inches (51 mm) measured vertically from concrete steps, porch slabs, patio slabs and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather.

6.	Wood structural members supporting moisture-permeable floors or roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs, unless separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier.

7.	Wood furring strips or other wood framing members attached directly to the interior of exterior masonry walls or concrete walls below grade except where an approved vapor retarder is applied between the wall and the furring strips or framing members.

8.	Portions of wood structural members that form the structural supports of buildings, balconies, porches or similar permanent building appurtenances where those members are exposed to the weather without adequate protection from a roof, eave, overhang or other covering that would prevent moisture or water accumulation on the surface or at joints between members.

Exception: Sawn lumber used in buildings located in a geographical region where experience has demonstrated that climatic conditions preclude the need to use naturally durable or perservative-treated wood where the structure is exposed to the weather.

9.	Wood columns in contact with basement floor slabs unless supported by concrete piers or metal pedestals projecting at least 1 inch (25 mm) above the concrete floor and separated from the concrete pier by an impervious moisture barrier.

R317.1.1 Field treatment.

Field-cut ends, notches and drilled holes of preservative-treated wood shall be treated in the field in accordance with AWPA M4.

R317.1.2 Ground contact.

All wood in contact with the ground, embedded in concrete in direct contact with the ground or embedded in concrete exposed to the weather that supports permanent structures intended for human occupancy shall be approved pressure-preservative-treated wood suitable for ground contact use, except that untreated wood used entirely below groundwater level or continuously submerged in fresh water shall not be required to be pressure-preservative treated.

R317.2 Quality mark.

Lumber and plywood required to be pressure-preservative treated in accordance with Section R317.1 shall bear the quality mark of an approved inspection agency that maintains continuing supervision, testing and inspection over the quality of the product and that has been approved by an accreditation body that complies with the requirements of the American Lumber Standard Committee treated wood program.

R317.2.1 Required information.

The required quality mark on each piece of pressure-preservative-treated lumber or plywood shall contain the following information:

1.	Identification of the treating plant.

2.	Type of preservative.

3.	The minimum preservative retention.

4.	End use for which the product was treated.

5.	Standard to which the product was treated.

6.	Identity of the approved inspection agency.

7.	The designation “Dry,” if applicable.

Exception: Quality marks on lumber less than 1 inch (25 mm) nominal thickness, or lumber less than nominal 1 inch by 5 inches (25 mm by 127 mm) or 2 inches by 4 inches (51 mm by 102 mm) or lumber 36 inches (914 mm) or less in length shall be applied by stamping the faces of exterior pieces or by end labeling not less than 25 percent of the pieces of a bundled unit.

R317.3 Fasteners and connectors in contact with preservative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, and connectors in contact with preservative-treated wood and fire-retardant-treated wood shall be in accordance with this section. The coating weights for zinc-coated fasteners shall be in accordance with ASTM A153. Stainless steel driven fasteners shall be in accordance with the material requirements of ASTM F1667.

R317.3.1 Fasteners for preservative-treated wood.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for preservative-treated wood shall be of hot-dipped, zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Staples shall be of stainless steel. Coating types and weights for connectors in contact with preservative-treated wood shall be in accordance with the connector manufacturer’s recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, a minimum of ASTM A653 type G185 zinc-coated galvanized steel, or equivalent, shall be used.

Exceptions:

1.	1/2-inch-diameter (12.7 mm) or greater steel bolts.

2.	Fasteners other than nails, staples and timber rivets shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B695, Class 55 minimum.

3.	Plain carbon steel fasteners in SBX/DOT and zinc borate preservative-treated wood in an interior, dry environment shall be permitted.

R317.3.2 Fastenings for wood foundations.

Fastenings, including nuts and washers, for wood foundations shall be as required in AF&PA PWF.

R317.3.3 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant-treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations shall be of hot-dipped, zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Fasteners other than nails, staples and timber rivets shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B695, Class 55 minimum.

R317.3.4 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior applications.

Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior locations shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. In the absence of the manufacturer’s recommendations, Section R317.3.3 shall apply.

R317.4 Plastic composites.

Plastic composite exterior deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails containing wood, cellulosic or other biodegradable materials shall comply with the requirements of Section R507.2.

SECTION R318
PROTECTION AGAINST TERMITES
R318.1 Termite protection.

Termite protection shall be provided by registered termiticides, including soil applied pesticides, baiting systems, and pesticides applied to wood, or other approved methods of termite protection labeled for use as a preventative treatment to new construction. See Section 202, “Registered termiticide.” Upon completion of the application of the termite protective treatment, a Certificate of Compliance shall be issued to the building department by the licensed pest control company that contains the following statement: “The building has received a complete treatment for the prevention of subterranean termites. Treatment is in accordance with rules and laws established by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.”

R318.1.1

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, the initial chemical soil treatment inside the foundation perimeter shall be done after all excavation, backfilling and compaction is complete.

R318.1.2

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, soil area disturbed after initial chemical soil treatment shall be retreated with a chemical soil treatment, including spaces boxed or formed.

R318.1.3

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, space in concrete floors boxed out or formed for the subsequent installation of plumbing traps, drains or any other purpose shall be created by using plastic or metal permanently placed forms of sufficient depth to eliminate any planned soil disturbance after initial chemical soil treatment.

R318.1.4

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, chemically treated soil shall be protected with a minimum 6 mil vapor retarder to protect against rainfall dilution. If rainfall occurs before vapor retarder placement, retreatment is required. Any work, including placement of reinforcing steel, done after chemical treatment until the concrete floor is poured, shall be done in such manner as to avoid penetrating or disturbing treated soil.

R318.1.5

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, concrete overpour or mortar accumulated along the exterior foundation perimeter shall be removed prior to exterior chemical soil treatment, to enhance vertical penetration of the chemicals.

R318.1.6

If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, chemical soil treatments shall also be applied under all exterior concrete or grade within 1 foot (305 mm) of the primary structure sidewalls. Also, a vertical chemical barrier shall be applied promptly after construction is completed, including initial landscaping and irrigation/sprinkler installation. Any soil disturbed after the chemical vertical barrier is applied shall be promptly retreated.

R318.1.7

If a registered termiticide formulated and registered as a bait system is used for subterranean termite prevention, Sections R318.1.1 through R318.1.6 do not apply; however, a signed contract assuring the installation, maintenance and monitoring of the baiting system that is in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 482, Florida Statutes shall be provided to the building official prior to the pouring of the slab, and the system must be installed prior to final building approval.

If the baiting system directions for use require a monitoring phase prior to installation of the pesticide active ingredient, the installation of the monitoring phase components shall be deemed to constitute installation of the system.

R318.1.8

If a registered termiticide formulated and registered as a wood treatment is used for subterranean termite prevention, Sections R318.1.1 through R318.1.6 do not apply. Application of the wood treatment termiticide shall be as required by label directions for use, and must be completed prior to final building approval.

R318.2 Penetration.

Protective sleeves around piping penetrating concrete slab-on-grade floors shall not be of cellulose-containing materials. If soil treatment is used for subterranean termite protection, the sleeve shall have a maximum wall thickness of 0.010 inch (0.25 mm), and be sealed within the slab using a noncorrosive clamping device to eliminate the annular space between the pipe and the sleeve. No termiticides shall be applied inside the sleeve.

R318.3 Cleaning.

Cells and cavities in masonry units and air gaps between brick, stone or masonry veneers and the structure shall be cleaned of all nonpreservative treated or nonnaturally durable wood, or other cellulose-containing material prior to concrete placement.

Exception: Inorganic material manufactured for closing cells in foundation concrete masonry unit construction or clean earth fill placed in concrete masonry unit voids below slab level before termite treatment is performed.

R318.4 Concrete bearing ledge.

Brick, stone or other veneer shall be supported by a concrete bearing ledge at least equal to the total thickness of the brick, stone or other veneer which is poured integrally with the concrete foundation. No supplemental concrete foundation pours which will create a hidden cold joint shall be used without supplemental treatment in the foundation unless there is an approved physical barrier. An approved physical barrier shall also be installed from below the wall sill plate or first block course horizontally to embed in a mortar joint. If masonry veneer extends below grade, a termite protective treatment must be applied to the cavity created between the veneer and the foundation, in lieu of a physical barrier.

Exception: Veneer supported by a structural member secured to the foundation sidewall in accordance with ACI 530/ASCE 5/TMS 402, provided at least a 6 inch (152 mm) clear inspection space of the foundation sidewall exterior exist between the veneer and the top of any soil, sod, mulch or other organic landscaping component, deck, apron, porch, walk or any other work immediately adjacent to or adjoining the structure.

R318.5 Protection against decay and termites.

Condensate lines, irrigation/sprinkler system risers for spray heads, and roof downspouts shall discharge at least 1 foot (305 mm) away from the structure sidewall, whether by underground piping, tail extensions or splash blocks. Gutters with downspouts are required on all buildings with eaves of less than 6 inches (152 mm) horizontal projection except for gable end rakes or on a roof above another roof.

R318.6 Preparation of building site and removal of debris.
R318.6.1

All building sites shall be graded to provide drainage under all portions of the building not occupied by basements.

R318.6.2

The foundation and the area encompassed within 1 foot (305 mm) therein shall have all vegetation, stumps, dead roots, cardboard, trash and foreign material removed and the fill material shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to assure adequate support of the foundation.

R318.6.3

After all work is completed, loose wood and debris shall be completely removed from under the building and within 1 foot (305 mm) thereof. All wood forms and supports shall be completely removed. This includes, but is not limited to: wooden grade stakes, forms, contraction spacers, tub trap boxes, plumbing supports, bracing, shoring, forms or other cellulose-containing material placed in any location where such materials are not clearly visible and readily removable prior to completion of the work. Wood shall not be stored in contact with the ground under any building.

R318.7 Inspection for termites.

In order to provide for inspection for termite infestation, clearance between exterior wall coverings and final earth grade on the exterior of a building shall not be less than 6 inches (152 mm).

Exceptions:

l.	Paint or decorative cementitious finish less than 5/8 inch (17.1 mm) thick adhered directly to the masonry foundation sidewall.

2.	Access or vehicle ramps which rise to the interior finish floor elevation for the width of such ramps only.

3.	A 4-inch (102 mm) inspection space above patio and garage slabs and entry areas.

4.	If the patio has been soil treated for termites, the finish elevation may match the building interior finish floor elevations on masonry construction only.

5.	Masonry veneers constructed in accordance with Section R318.4.

R318.8 Foam plastic protection.

In areas where the probability of termite infestation is “very heavy” as indicated in Figure R301.2(6), extruded and expanded polystyrene, polyisocyanurate and other foam plastics shall not be installed on the exterior face or under interior or exterior foundation walls or slab foundations located below grade. The clearance between foam plastics installed above grade and exposed earth shall be at least 6 inches (152 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	Buildings where the structural members of walls, floors, ceilings and roofs are entirely of noncombustible materials or pressure-preservative-treated wood.

2.	When in addition to the requirements of Section R318.1, an approved method of protecting the foam plastic and structure from subterranean termite damage is used.

3.	On the interior side of basement walls.

SECTION R319
SITE ADDRESS
R319.1 Address identification.

Buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.

SECTION R320
ACCESSIBILITY
R320.1 Scope.

Shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Accessibility.

R320.1.1

All new single-family houses, duplexes, triplexes, condominiums and townhouses shall provide at least one bathroom, located with maximum possible privacy, where bathrooms are provided on habitable grade levels, with a door that has a 29-inch (737 mm) clear opening. However, if only a toilet room is provided at grade level, such toilet rooms shall have a clear opening of not less than 29 inches (737 mm).

SECTION R321
ELEVATORS AND PLATFORM LIFTS
R321.1 Elevators.

Where provided, passenger elevators, limited-use and limited-application elevators or private residence elevators shall comply with ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

R321.2 Platform lifts.

Where provided, platform lifts shall comply with ASME A18.1.

R321.3 Accessibility.

Reserved.

R321.4 Clearance requirements between elevator doors for elevators inside a private residence.
R321.4.1 For elevators installed in a private residence:

(a)	The distance between the hoistway face of the hoistway doors and the hoistway edge of the landing sill may not exceed 3/4 inch for swinging doors and 21/4 inches for sliding doors.

(b)

1.	Horizontal sliding car doors and gates shall be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally on an area 4 inches by 4 inches at right angles to and at any location on the car door without permanent deformation. The deflection may not exceed 3/4 inch and may not displace the door from its guides or tracks. The force must be applied while the door is in the fully closed position.

2.	Folding car doors shall be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally using a 4-inch-diameter sphere at any location within the folds on the car door without permanent deformation. The deflection may not exceed 3/4 inch and may not displace the door from its guides or tracks. The force must be applied while the door is in the fully closed position.

(c)	The distance between the hoistway face of the landing door and the hoistway face of the car door or gate shall conform to one of the following:

1.	If a power-operated horizontally sliding hoistway and car doors are used, the measurement between the leading edge of the doors or sight guard, if provided, may not exceed 4 inches. If it is possible for a user to detach or disconnect either door from the operator and such detachment or disconnection allows the user to operate the door manually, the requirement in subparagraph 5 applies.

2.	If swinging hoistway doors and folding car doors are used and both doors are in the fully closed position, the space between the hoistway door and the folding door must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

3.	If swinging hoistway doors and car gates are used, the space between the hoistway door and the car gate must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

4.	If the car doors are powered and arranged so that they cannot be closed until after the hoistway door is closed, and the car doors automatically open when the car is at a landing and the hoistway door is opened, the measurement between the hoistway face of the hoistway door and the hoistway face of the car door at its leading edge may not exceed 4 inches. If it is possible for a user to detach or disconnect either door from the operator and such detachment or disconnection allows the user to operate the door manually, the requirement in subparagraph 5 applies.

5.	If swinging or horizontally sliding hoistway doors and manual horizontally sliding car doors are used and both doors are in the fully closed position, the space between the swinging or horizontally sliding hoistway door and the manual horizontally sliding car doors must reject a 4-inch-diameter sphere at all points.

Exception: As an alternative to compliance with Section R321.4.1, Items 2 through 5, a permanent installation of a nonremovable, hoistway door space guard is allowed. The door space guard must be designed and installed to withstand a force of 75 pounds applied horizontally using a 4-inch-diameter sphere at any location within the folds on the car door without permanent deformation.

R321.4.2

During normal operation, the elevator controller must monitor the closed and locked contacts of the hoistway door locking device, whether electrical or mechanical. If the closed and locked contacts of the landing locks are open while the car is not in the unlocking zone for the hoistway door locking device, the elevator controller must interrupt power to the motor and brake and must not allow the elevator car to restart until the owner or the owner’s agent, with a master elevator key, has checked for obstructions above and below the elevator car, returned the hoistway door locking device contacts to the normal operating position, and manually reset the elevator controller with the master elevator key. Additionally, a visual indicator must be visible at all landings until the hoistway door locking device has been returned to the normal operating position and the elevator controller has been manually reset.

SECTION R322
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
R322.1 General.

Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas, including A or V Zones and Coastal A Zones, as established in Table R301.2(1), and substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions contained in this section. Buildings and structures that are located in more than one flood hazard area shall comply with the provisions associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area. Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.

R322.1.1 Alternative provisions.

As an alternative to the requirements in Section R322, ASCE 24 is permitted subject to the limitations of this code and the limitations therein.

R322.1.2 Structural systems.

Structural systems of buildings and structures shall be designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral movement due to structural loads and stresses from flooding equal to the design flood elevation.

R322.1.3 Flood-resistant construction.

Buildings and structures erected in areas prone to flooding shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

R322.1.4 Establishing the design flood elevation.

The design flood elevation shall be used to define flood hazard areas. At a minimum, the design flood elevation shall be the higher of the following:

1.	The base flood elevation at the depth of peak elevation of flooding, including wave height, that has a 1 percent (100-year flood) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; or

2.	The elevation of the design flood associated with the area designated on a flood hazard map adopted by the community, or otherwise legally designated.

R322.1.4.1 Determination of design flood elevations.

If design flood elevations are not specified, the building official is authorized to require the applicant to comply with either of the following:

1.	Obtain and reasonably use data available from a federal, state or other source; or

2.	Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices used to define special flood hazard areas. Determinations shall be undertaken by a registered design professional who shall document that the technical methods used reflect currently accepted engineering practice. Studies, analyses and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough review and approval.

R322.1.4.2 Determination of impacts.

In riverine flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall demonstrate that the effect of the proposed buildings and structures on design flood elevations, including fill, when combined with other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction.

R322.1.5 Lowest floor.

The lowest floor shall be the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, and excluding any unfinished flood-resistant enclosure that is useable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the building or structure in violation of this section.

R322.1.6 Protection of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems.

Electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning; plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment shall be located at or above the elevation required in Section R322.2 or R322.3. Replacement of exterior equipment and exterior appliances damaged by flood shall meet the requirements of this section. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning and plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section. Systems, fixtures, and equipment and components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through walls intended to break away under flood loads.

Exception: Locating electrical systems, equipment and components; heating, ventilating, air conditioning; plumbing appliances and plumbing fixtures; duct systems; and other service equipment is permitted below the elevation required in Section R322.2 or R322.3 provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the required elevation in accordance with ASCE 24. Equipment for pools, spas and water features shall be permitted below the elevation required in Section R322.2 or R322.3 provided it is elevated to the extent practical, is anchored to prevent flotation and resist flood forces, and is supplied by branch circuits that have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below the required elevation provided that they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of this code for wet locations.

R322.1.7 Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.

New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems in accordance with the plumbing provisions of this code. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into floodwaters in accordance with the plumbing provisions of this code and in accordance with Chapter 64E-6, Florida Administrative Code, Standards for Onsite Sewage Treatment and Disposal Systems.

R322.1.8 Flood-resistant materials.

Building materials and installation methods used for flooring and interior and exterior walls and wall coverings below the elevation required in Section R322.2 or R322.3 shall be flood damage-resistant materials that conform to the provisions of FEMA TB-2.

R322.1.9 Manufactured homes.

In addition to the applicable requirements of the state agency with jurisdiction over installation of manufactured homes, installation of manufactured homes in flood hazard areas is subject to the applicable provisions of the local floodplain management ordinance.

R322.1.10 As-built elevation documentation.

A licensed professional surveyor and mapper or registered design professional shall prepare and seal documentation of the elevations specified in Section R322.2 or R322.3.

R322.1.11 Structures seaward of a coastal control construction line.

In addition to the requirements of this section, structures located in flood hazard areas and seaward of the coastal construction line shall be designed to resist the predicted forces of a 100-year storm event in accordance with Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building, and the more restrictive provisions shall govern.

R322.2 Flood hazard areas (including A Zones).

Areas that have been determined to be prone to flooding and that are not subject to high-velocity wave action shall be designated as flood hazard areas. Flood hazard areas that have been delineated as subject to wave heights between 11/2 feet (457 mm) and 3 feet (914 mm) or otherwise designated by the jurisdiction shall be designated as Coastal A Zones and are subject to the requirements of Section R322.3. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections R322.2.1 through R322.2.3.

R322.2.1 Elevation requirements.

1.	Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not including flood hazard areas designated as Coastal A Zones, shall have the lowest floors elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher.

2.	In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a height above the highest adjacent grade of not less than the depth number specified in feet (mm) on the FIRM plus 1 foot (305 mm), or not less than 3 feet (915 mm) if a depth number is not specified.

3.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm), or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher.

4.	Attached garages and carports shall comply with one of the following:

4.1.	The floors shall be elevated to or above the elevations required in Item 1 or Item 2, as applicable.

4.2.	The floors shall be at or above grade on not less than one side. Where an attached garage or carport is enclosed by walls, the walls shall have flood openings that comply with Section R322.2.2 and the attached garage or carport shall be used solely for parking, building access or storage.

5.	Detached accessory structures and detached garages shall comply with either of the following:

5.1.	The floors shall be elevated to or above the elevations required in Item 1 or Item 2, as applicable.

5.2.	The floors are permitted below the elevations required in Item 1 or Item 2, as applicable, provided such detached structures comply with all of the following:

5.2.1.	Are used solely for parking or storage.

5.2.2.	Are one story and not larger than 600 square feet (56 m2).

5.2.3.	Are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from design flood loads.

5.2.4.	Have flood openings that comply with Section R322.2.2.

5.2.5.	Are constructed of flood damageresistant materials that comply with Section R322.1.8.

5.2.6.	Have mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, if applicable, that comply with Section R322.1.6.

Exception: Enclosed areas below the elevation required in this section, including basements with floors that are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2.

R322.2.2 Enclosed area below required elevation.

Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the elevation required in Section R322.2.1 shall:

1.	Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

2.	Be provided with flood openings that meet the following criteria and are installed in accordance with Section R322.2.2.1:

2.1.	The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not less than 1 square inch (645 mm2) for each square foot (0.093 m2) of enclosed area where the enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls, or the openings shall be designed as engineered openings and the construction documents shall include a statement by a registered design professional that the design of the openings will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters as specified in Section 2.7.2.2 of ASCE 24.

2.2.	Openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in any direction in the plane of the wall.

2.3.	The presence of louvers, blades, screens and faceplates or other covers and devices shall allow the automatic flow of floodwater into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be accounted for in the determination of the net open area.

Exception: The following are not required to comply with this section:

1.	Elevator shafts.

2.	Utility chases that protect utility lines from freezing, provided the utility chases are the minimum size necessary to protect the utility lines and do not provide access for a person to enter the space.

R322.2.2.1 Installation of openings.

The walls of enclosed areas shall have openings installed such that:

1.	There shall be not less than two openings on different sides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosed area each area shall have openings.

2.	The bottom of each opening shall be not more than 1 foot (305 mm) above the higher of the final interior grade or floor and the finished exterior grade immediately under each opening.

3.	Openings shall be permitted to be installed in doors and windows; doors and windows without installed openings do not meet the requirements of this section.

R322.2.3 Foundation design and construction.

Foundation walls for buildings and structures erected in flood hazard areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 4.

Exception: Unless designed in accordance with Section R404:

1.	The unsupported height of 6-inch (152 mm) plain masonry walls shall be not more than 3 feet (914 mm).

2.	The unsupported height of 8-inch (203 mm) plain masonry walls shall be not more than 4 feet (1219 mm).

3.	The unsupported height of 8-inch (203 mm) reinforced masonry walls shall be not more than 8 feet (2438 mm).

For the purpose of this exception, unsupported height is the distance from the finished grade of the under-floor space to the top of the wall.

R322.2.4 Tanks.

Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. Above-ground tanks shall be installed at or above the elevation required in Section R322.2.1 or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.

R322.2.5 Pools in flood hazard areas.

Pools that are located in flood hazard areas established by Table R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground pools, and in-ground pools that involve placement of fill, shall comply with Section R322.2.5.1 or R322.2.5.2.

Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of designated floodways.

R322.2.5.1 Pools located in designated floodways.

Where pools are located in designated floodways, documentation shall be submitted to the building official, which demonstrates that the construction of the pool will not increase the design flood elevation at any point within the jurisdiction.

R322.2.5.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated.

Where pools are located in riverine flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall provide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed pool will not increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction.

R322.3 Coastal high-hazard areas (including V Zones and Coastal A Zones, where designated).

Areas that have been determined to be subject to wave heights in excess of 3 feet (914 mm) or subject to high-velocity wave action or wave-induced erosion shall be designated as coastal high-hazard areas. Flood hazard areas that have been designated as subject to wave heights between 11/2 feet (457 mm) and 3 feet (914 mm) or otherwise designated by the jurisdiction shall be designated as Coastal A Zones. Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in coastal high-hazard areas and coastal A Zones, where designated, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections R322.3.1 through R322.3.10.

R322.3.1 Location and site preparation.

1.	New buildings and buildings that are determined to be substantially improved pursuant to the Florida Building Code, Existing Building shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.

2.	For any alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands, the building official shall require submission of an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage.

R322.3.2 Elevation requirements.

1.	Buildings and structures erected within coastal highhazard areas and Coastal A Zones, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 1 foot (305 mm) or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. Where stem wall foundations are permitted in Coastal A Zones in accordance with Section R322.3.3, the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the lowest floor is the top of the foundation wall, or top of the portion of the foundation wall, supporting the slab.

2.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited.

3.	Attached garages used solely for parking, building access or storage, and carports shall comply with Item 1 or shall be at or above grade on not less than one side and, if enclosed with walls, such walls shall comply with Item 7.

4.	Detached accessory structures and detached garages shall comply with either of the following:

4.1.	The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member supporting the floors shall be elevated to or above the elevation required in Item 1.

4.2.	The floors are permitted below the elevations required in Item 1, provided such detached structures comply with all of the following:

4.2.1.	Are used solely for parking or storage.

4.2.2.	Are one story and not larger than 100 square feet (9.29 m2).

4.2.3.	Are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from design flood loads.

5.	The use of fill for structural support is prohibited.

6.	Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways.

7.	Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the elevation required in this section shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.5 and R322.3.6.

R322.3.3 Foundations.

Buildings and structures erected in coastal high-hazard areas and Coastal A Zones shall be supported on pilings or columns and shall be adequately anchored to such pilings or columns and shall comply with the following:

1.	The space below the elevated building shall be either free of obstruction or, if enclosed with walls, the walls shall meet the requirements of Section R322.3.5.

2.	Pilings shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 24 to have adequate soil penetrations to resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift) and pile embedment shall include consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by scour of soil strata surrounding the piling.

3.	Columns and their supporting foundations shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 24 to resist combined wave and wind loads, lateral and uplift, and shall include consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by scour of soil strata surrounding the columns. Spread footing, mat, raft or other foundations that support columns shall not be permitted where soil investigations that are required in accordance with Section R401.4 indicate that soil material under the spread footing, mat, raft or other foundation is subject to scour or erosion from wave-velocity flow conditions. If permitted, spread footing, mat, raft or other foundations that support columns shall be designed in accordance with ASCE 24.

4.	Flood and wave loads shall be determined in accordance with ASCE 7 and shall include loads associated with the design flood. Wind loads shall be those required by this code.

5.	Foundation designs and construction documents shall be prepared and sealed in accordance with Section R322.3.9.

Exception: In Coastal A Zones, stem wall foundations supporting a floor system above and backfilled with soil or gravel to the underside of the floor system shall be permitted provided the foundations are designed to account for wave action, debris impact, erosion and local scour. Where soils are susceptible to erosion and local scour, stem wall foundations shall have deep footings to account for the loss of soil.

R322.3.3.1 Pools.

Pools in coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in conformance with ASCE 24.

R322.3.4 Concrete slabs.

Concrete slabs used for parking, floors of enclosures, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar uses that are located beneath structures, or slabs that are located such that if undermined or displaced during base flood conditions could cause structural damage to the building foundation, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with one of the following:

1.	To be structurally independent of the foundation system of the structure, to not transfer flood loads to the main structure, and to be frangible and break away under flood conditions prior to base flood conditions. Slabs shall be a maximum of 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness, shall not have turned-down edges, shall not contain reinforcing, shall have isolation joints at pilings and columns, and shall have control or construction joints in both directions spaced not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) apart.

2.	To be self-supporting, structural slabs capable of remaining intact and functional under base flood conditions, including erosion and local scour, and the main structure shall be capable of resisting any added flood loads and effects of local scour caused by the presence of the slabs.

R322.3.5 Walls below required elevation.

Walls and partitions are permitted below the elevation required provided that such walls and partitions are not part of the structural support of the building or structure and:

1.	Electrical, mechanical and plumbing system components are not to be mounted on or penetrate through walls that are designed to break away under flood loads; and

2.	Are constructed with insect screening or open lattice; or

3.	Are designed to break away or collapse without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Such walls, framing and connections shall have a resistance of not less than 10 (479 Pa) and not more than 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa) as determined using allowable stress design; or

4.	Where wind loading values of this code exceed 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa), as determined using allowable stress design, the construction documents shall include documentation prepared and sealed by a registered design professional that:

4.1.	The walls and partitions below the required elevation have been designed to collapse from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood.

4.2.	The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system have been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on structural and nonstructural building components. Water-loading values used shall be those associated with the design flood. Wind-loading values shall be those required by this code.

5.	Walls intended to break away under flood loads as specified in Item 3 or 4 have flood openings that meet the criteria in Section R322.2.2, Item 2.

Exception: The following are not required to comply with this section:

1.	Elevator shafts.

2.	Utility chases that protect utility lines from freezing, provided the utility chases are the minimum size necessary to protect the utility lines and do not provide access for a person to enter the space.

R322.3.6 Enclosed areas below required elevation.

Enclosed areas below the elevation required in Section R322.3.2 shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.

R322.3.6.1 Protection of building envelope.

An exterior door that meets the requirements of Section R609 shall be installed at the top of stairs that provide access to the building and that are enclosed with walls designed to break away in accordance with Section R322.3.5.

R322.3.7 Stairways and ramps.

Stairways and ramps that are located below the lowest floor elevations specified in Section R322.3.2 shall comply with one or more of the following:

1.	Be designed and constructed with open or partially open risers and guards.

2.	Stairways and ramps not part of the required means of egress shall be designed and constructed to break away during design flood conditions without causing damage to the building or structure, including foundation.

3.	Be retractable, or able to be raised to or above the lowest floor elevation, provided that the ability to be retracted or raised prior to the onset of flooding is not contrary to the means of egress requirements of the code.

4.	Be designed and constructed to resist flood loads and minimize transfer of flood loads to the building or structure, including foundation.

Areas below stairways and ramps shall not be enclosed with walls below the elevation required in Section R322.3.2 unless such walls are constructed in accordance with Section R322.3.5.

R322.3.8 Decks and porches.

Attached decks and porches shall meet the elevation requirements of Section R322.3.2 and shall either meet the foundation requirements of this section or shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or structure. Self-supporting decks and porches that are below the elevation required in Section R322.3.2 shall not be enclosed by solid, rigid walls, including walls designed to break away. Self-supporting decks and porches shall be designed and constructed to remain in place during base flood conditions or shall be frangible and break away under base flood conditions.

R322.3.9 Construction documents.

The construction documents shall include documentation that is prepared and sealed by a registered design professional that the design and methods of construction to be used meet the applicable criteria of this section.

R322.3.10 Tanks.

Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood. Above-ground tanks shall be installed at or above the elevation required in Section R322.3.2. Where elevated on platforms, the platforms shall be cantilevered from or knee braced to the building or shall be supported on foundations that conform to the requirements of Section R322.3.

SECTION R323
STORM SHELTERS
R323.1 General.

This section applies to storm shelters where constructed as separate detached buildings or where constructed as safe rooms within buildings for the purpose of providing refuge from storms that produce high winds, such as tornados and hurricanes. In addition to other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with ICC/NSSA-500.

SECTION 324
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
R324.1 General.

Solar energy systems shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R324.2 Solar thermal systems.

Solar thermal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Chapter 23 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

R324.3 Photovoltaic systems.

Photovoltaic systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Sections R324.3.1 through R324.7.1, NFPA 70 and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R324.3.1 Equipment listings.

Photovoltaic panels and modules shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703. Inverters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1741. Systems connected to the utility grid shall use inverters listed for utility interaction. Mounting systems listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2703 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and their listings.

R324.4 Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems installed on or above the roof covering shall be designed and installed in accordance with this section.

R324.4.1 Structural requirements.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed to structurally support the system and withstand applicable gravity loads in accordance with Chapter 3. The roof on which these systems are installed shall be designed and constructed to support the loads imposed by such systems in accordance with Chapter 8.

R324.4.1.1 Roof load.

Portions of roof structures not covered with photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed for dead loads and roof loads in accordance with Sections R301.4 and R301.6. Portions of roof structures covered with photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed for the following load cases:

1.	Dead load (including photovoltaic panel weight).

2.	Dead load (excluding photovoltaic panel weight) plus roof live load in accordance with Section R301.6.

R324.4.1.2 Wind load.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel or module systems and their supports shall be designed and installed for wind loads in accordance with ASCE 7.

R324.4.2 Fire classification.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems shall have the same fire classification as the roof assembly required in Section R902.4.

R324.4.3 Roof penetrations.

Roof penetrations shall be flashed and sealed in accordance with Chapter 9.

R324.5 Building-integrated photovoltaic systems.

Building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems that serve as roof coverings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R905.

R324.5.1 Photovoltaic shingles.

Photovoltaic shingles shall comply with Section R905.16.

R324.5.2 Fire classification.

Building-integrated photovoltaic systems shall have a fire classification in accordance with Section R902.1.

R324.5.3 BIPV roof panels.

BIPV roof panels shall comply with Section R905.16.

R324.6 Roof access and pathways.

Roof access, pathways and setback requirements shall be provided in accordance with Sections R324.6.1 through R324.6.2.1. Access and minimum spacing shall be required to provide emergency access to the roof, to provide pathways to specific areas of the roof, to provide for smoke ventilation opportunity areas and to provide emergency egress from the roof.

Exceptions:

1.	Detached, nonhabitable structures, including but not limited to detached garages, parking shade structures, carports, solar trellises and similar structures, shall not be required to provide roof access.

2.	Roof access, pathways and setbacks need not be provided where the code official has determined that rooftop operations will not be employed.

3.	These requirements shall not apply to roofs with slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope) or less.

R324.6.1 Pathways.

Not fewer than two pathways, on separate roof planes from lowest roof edge to ridge and not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide, shall be provided on all buildings. Not fewer than one pathway shall be provided on the street or driveway side of the roof. For each roof plane with a photovoltaic array, a pathway not less than 36 inches wide (914 mm) shall be provided from the lowest roof edge to ridge on the same roof plane as the photovoltaic array, on an adjacent roof plane, or straddling the same and adjacent roof planes. Pathways shall be over areas capable of supporting fire fighters accessing the roof. Pathways shall be located in areas with minimal obstructions such as vent pipes, conduit or mechanical equipment.

R324.6.2 Setback at ridge.

For photovoltaic arrays occupying not more than 33 percent of the plan view total roof area, not less than an 18-inch (457 mm) clear setback is required on both sides of a horizontal ridge. For photovoltaic arrays occupying more than 33 percent of the plan view total roof area, not less than a 36-inch (914 mm) clear setback is required on both sides of a horizontal ridge.

R324.6.2.1 Alternative setback at ridge.

Where an automatic sprinkler system is installed within the dwelling in accordance with NFPA 13D or Section P2904, setbacks at ridges shall comply with one of the following:

1.	For photovoltaic arrays occupying not more than 66 percent of the plan view total roof area, not less than an 18-inch (457 mm) clear setback is required on both sides of a horizontal ridge.

2.	For photovoltaic arrays occupying more than 66 percent of the plan view total roof area, not less than a 36-inch (914 mm) clear setback is required on both sides of a horizontal ridge.

R324.6.2.2 Emergency escape and rescue opening.

Panels and modules installed on dwellings shall not be placed on the portion of a roof that is below an emergency escape and rescue opening. A pathway not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide shall be provided to the emergency escape and rescue opening.

R324.7 Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R301.

R324.7.1 Fire separation distances.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be subject to the fire separation distance requirements determined by the local jurisdiction.

SECTION R325
MEZZANINES
R325.1 General.

Mezzanines shall comply with Section R325.

R325.2 Mezzanines.

The clear height above and below mezzanine floor construction shall be not less than 7 feet (2134 mm).

R325.3 Area limitation.

The aggregate area of a mezzanine or mezzanines shall be not greater than one-third of the floor area of the room or space in which they are located. The enclosed portion of a room shall not be included in a determination of the floor area of the room in which the mezzanine is located.

R325.4 Means of egress.

The means of egress for mezzanines shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section R311.

R325.5 Openness.

Mezzanines shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which they are located except for walls not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height and not more than 42 inches (1067 mm) in height, columns and posts.

Exceptions:

1.	Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which they are located, provided that the aggregate floor area of the enclosed space is not greater than 10 percent of the mezzanine area.

2.	In buildings that are not more than two stories above grade plane and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D or Section P2904 of this code, a mezzanine shall not be required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located.

SECTION R326
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
R326.1 General.

The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with Chapter 45 of this code.

SECTION R327
AIRPORT NOISE
R327.1 Airport noise study guidelines.

The Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement Act of 1979 14 CFR Part 150 (US Department of Transportation) including revisions through January 2005 and hereby adopted as a guideline for establishing airport noise control. When required by a local government by local ordinance to provide noise attenuation in a new structure or addition to an existing structure near an airport in the area of the local government, the applicant must provide either:

1.	A testing certificate from an accredited noise testing lab that a new structure or addition to existing structure built to the submitted engineering plans will achieve an average minimum dBA reduction equal to or greater than the reduction required,

2.	An engineering judgment signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in the State of Florida that the structure or addition built to the submitted engineering plans will achieve an average minimum dBA reduction equal to or greater than the reduction required, or

3.	Plans using the standards contained in “Guidelines for Sound Insulation of Residences Exposed to Aircraft Operations” prepared for the Department of the Navy by Wyle Research and Consulting, Arlington, Virginia, April 2005 on file with the Florida Building Commission.

SECTION R328
STATIONARY STORAGE BATTERY SYSTEMS
R328.1 General.

Energy storage systems (ESS) shall comply with the provisions of this section.

Exceptions:

1.	ESS listed and labeled in accordance with UL 9540 and marked “For use in residential dwelling units” where installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and NFPA 70.

2.	ESS less than 1 kWh (3.6 megajoules).

R328.2 Equipment listings.

Energy storage systems (ESS) shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 9540.

Exception:Where approved, repurposed unlisted battery systems from electric vehicles are allowed to be installed outdoors or in detached sheds located not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from exterior walls, property lines and public ways.

R328.3 Installation.

ESS shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and their listing.

R328.3.1 Spacing.

Individual units shall be separated from each other by not less than 3 feet (914 mm) except where smaller separation distances are documented to be adequate based on large-scale fire testing complying with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

R328.4 Locations.

ESS shall be installed only in the following locations:

1.	Detached garages and detached accessory structures.

2.	Attached garages separated from the dwelling unit living space in accordance with Section R302.6.

3.	Outdoors or on the exterior side of exterior walls located not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from doors and windows directly entering the dwelling unit.

4.	Enclosed utility closets, basements, storage or utility spaces within dwelling units with finished or noncombustible walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of unfinished wood-framed construction shall be provided with not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum wallboard. ESS shall not be installed in sleeping rooms, or closets or spaces opening directly into sleeping rooms.

R328.5 Energy ratings.

Individual ESS units shall have a maximum rating of 20 kWh. The aggregate rating of the ESS shall not exceed:

1.	40 kWh within utility closets, basements and storage or utility spaces.

2.	80 kWh in attached or detached garages and detached accessory structures.

3.	80 kWh on exterior walls.

4.	80 kWh outdoors on the ground. ESS installations exceeding the permitted individual or aggregate ratings shall be installed in accordance with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

R328.6 Electrical installation.

ESS shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 70. Inverters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1741 or provided as part of the UL 9540 listing. Systems connected to the utility grid shall use inverters listed for utility interaction.

R328.7 Fire detection.

Rooms and areas within dwelling units, basements and attached garages in which ESS are installed shall be protected by smoke alarms in accordance with Section R314. A heat detector, listed and interconnected to the smoke alarms, shall be installed in locations within dwelling units and attached garages where smoke alarms cannot be installed based on their listing.

R328.8 Protection from impact.

ESS installed in a location subject to vehicle damage shall be protected by approved barriers.

R328.9 Ventilation.

Indoor installations of ESS that produce hydrogen or other flammable gases during charging shall be provided with mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1307.4.

R328.10 Electric vehicle use.

The temporary use of an owner or occupant’s electric-powered vehicle to power a dwelling unit while parked in an attached or detached garage or outdoors shall comply with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions and NFPA 70.

R328.11 Documentation and labeling.

The following information shall be provided:

1.	A copy of the manufacturer’s installation, operation, maintenance and decommissioning instructions shall be provided to the owner or placed in a conspicuous location near the ESS equipment.

2.	A label on the installed system containing the contact information for the qualified maintenance and service providers.

SECTION R329
STATIONARY ENGINE GENERATORS
R329.1 General.

Stationary engine generators shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2200 and shall comply with this section. The connection of stationary engine generators to the premise wiring system shall be by means of a listed transfer switch.

R329.2 Installation.

The installation of stationary engine generators shall be in an approved location and in accordance with the listing, the manufacturer’s installation instructions, and Chapter 34.

SECTION R330
STATIONARY FUEL CELL POWER SYSTEMS
R330.1 General.

Stationary fuel cell power systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall comply with the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-30]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 30
SANITARY DRAINAGE
SECTION P3001
GENERAL
P3001.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and installation of sanitary drainage systems. Plumbing materials shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. The drainage, waste and vent (DWV) system shall consist of piping for conveying wastes from plumbing fixtures, appliances and appurtenances, including fixture traps; above-grade drainage piping; below-grade drains within the building (building drain); below- and above-grade venting systems; and piping to the public sewer or private septic system.

P3001.2 Protection from freezing.

No portion of the above-grade DWV system, other than vent terminals, shall be located outside of a building, in attics or crawl spaces, concealed in outside walls, or in any other place subjected to freezing temperatures unless adequate provision is made to protect them from freezing by insulation or heat or both, except in localities having a winter design temperature greater than 32°F (0°C) (ASHRAE 97.5 percent column, winter, see Chapter 3).

P3001.3 Flood-resistant installation.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), drainage, waste and vent systems shall be located and installed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.

SECTION P3002
MATERIALS
P3002.1 Piping within buildings.

Drain, waste and vent (DWV) piping in buildings shall be as indicated in Tables P3002.1(1) and P3002.1(2) except that galvanized wrought-iron or galvanized steel pipe shall not be used underground and shall be maintained not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above ground. Allowance shall be made for the thermal expansion and contraction of plastic piping.

TABLE P3002.1(1)

ABOVE-GROUND DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, cellular core or
composite wall	ASTM D2661; ASTM F628; ASTM F1488; CSA B181.1
Cast-iron pipe	ASTM A74; CISPI 301; ASTM A888
Copper or copper-alloy pipe	ASTM B42; ASTM B43; ASTM B302
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV)	ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM B251; ASTM B306
Galvanized steel pipe	ASTM A53
Polyolefin pipe	CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including schedule 40,
DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, cellular core or composite wall
	ASTM D2665; ASTM F891; CSA B181.2; ASTM F1488
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid, cellular
core or composite wall
	ASTM D2949; ASTM F1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L	ASME A112.3.1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE P3002.1(2)

UNDERGROUND BUILDING DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPE

PIPE	STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including
schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, cellular
core or composite wall	ASTM D2661; ASTM F628; ASTM F1488; CSA B181.1
Cast-iron pipe	ASTM A74; CISPI 301; ASTM A888
Copper or copper alloy tubing (Type K, L, M or DWV)	ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM B251; ASTM B306
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe (SDR-PR)	ASTM F714
Polyolefin pipe	ASTM F714; ASTM F1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including schedule
40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a solid, cellular core or
composite wall	ASTM D2665; ASTM F891; ASTM F1488; CSA B181.2
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid,
cellular core or composite wall
	ASTM D2949; ASTM F1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Type 316L	ASME A112.3.1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P3002.2 Building sewer.

Building sewer piping shall be as shown in Table P3002.2. Forced main sewer piping shall conform to one of the standards for ABS plastic pipe, copper or copper-alloy tubing, PVC plastic pipe or pressure-rated pipe indicated in Table P3002.2.

TABLE P3002.2

BUILDING SEWER PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters,
including schedule 40, DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with a
solid, cellular core or composite wall	ASTM D2661; ASTM D2680; ASTM F628; ASTM F1488
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in sewer and drain
diameters, including SDR 42 (PS 20), PS35, SDR 35 (PS 45), PS50,
PS100, PS140, SDR 23.5 (PS 150) and PS200; with a
solid, cellular core or composite wall
	ASTM F1488; ASTM D2751
Cast-iron pipe	ASTM A74; ASTM A888; CISPI 301
Concrete pipe	ASTM C14; ASTM C76; CSA A257.1M; CSA A257.2M
Copper or copper-alloy tubing (Type K or L)	ASTM B75; ASTM B88; ASTM B251
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe (SDR-PR)	ASTM F714
Polyolefin pipe	ASTM F1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in IPS diameters, including schedule 40,
DR 22 (PS 200) and DR 24 (PS 140); with solid, cellular core or composite wall
	ASTM D2665; ASTM D2949; ASTM D3034;
ASTM F1412; CSA B182.2; CSA B182.4

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in sewer and drain diameters,
including PS 25, SDR 41 (PS 28), PS 35, SDR 35 (PS 46), PS 50,
PS 100, SDR 26 (PS 115), PS140 and PS 200; with a solid, cellular
core or composite wall
	ASTM F891; ASTM F1488; ASTM D3034; CSA B182.2;
CSA B182.4

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D. and a solid, cellular
core or composite wall
	ASTM D2949, ASTM F1488
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L	ASME A112.3.1
Vitrified clay pipe	ASTM C425; ASTM C700

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P3002.2.1 Building sewer pipe near the water service.

The proximity of a building sewer to a water service shall comply with Section P2905.4.1.

P3002.3 Fittings.

Pipe fittings shall be approved for installation with the piping material installed and shall comply with the applicable standards indicated in Table P3002.3.

TABLE P3002.3

PIPE FITTINGS

PIPE MATERIAL	FITTING STANDARD
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in IPS diameters	ASME A112.4.4; ASTM D2661; ASTM D3311; ASTM F628; CSA B181.1
Acrylonotrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe in sewer and
drain diameters
	ASTM D2751
Cast-iron	ASME B16.4; ASME B16.12; ASTM A74; ASTM A888; CISPI 301
Copper or copper alloy	ASME B16.15; ASME B16.18; ASME B16.22; ASME B16.23; ASME B16.26; ASME B16.29
Gray iron and ductile iron	AWWA C 110/A21.10
Polyethylene	ASTM D2683
Polyolefin	ASTM F1412; CSA B181.3
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic in IPS diameters	ASME A112.4.4; ASTM D2665; ASTM D3311; ASTM F1866
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe in sewer and drain diameters	ASTM D3034
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic pipe with a 3.25 inch O.D.	ASTM D2949
PVC fabricated fittings	ASTM F1866
Stainless steel drainage systems, Types 304 and 316L	ASME A112.3.1
Vitrified clay	ASTM C700

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P3002.3.1 Drainage.

Drainage fittings shall have a smooth interior waterway of the same diameter as the piping served. Fittings shall conform to the type of pipe used. Drainage fittings shall not have ledges, shoulders or reductions that can retard or obstruct drainage flow in the piping. Threaded drainage pipe fittings shall be of the recessed drainage type, black or galvanized. Drainage fittings shall be designed to maintain one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) grade. This section shall not be applicable to tubular waste fittings used to convey vertical flow upstream of the trap seal liquid level of a fixture trap.

P3002.4 Other materials.

Sheet lead, lead bends, lead traps and sheet copper shall comply with Sections P3002.4.1 through P3002.4.3.

P3002.4.1 Sheet lead.

Sheet lead shall weigh not less than indicated for the following applications:

1.	Flashing of vent terminals, 3 psf (15 kg/m2).

2.	Prefabricated flashing for vent pipes, 21/2 psf (12 kg/m2).

P3002.4.2 Lead bends and traps.

Lead bends and lead traps shall be not less than 1/8-inch (3 mm) wall thickness.

P3002.4.3 Sheet copper.

Sheet copper shall weigh not less than indicated for the following applications:

1.	General use, 12 ounces per square feet (4 kg/m2).

2.	Flashing for vent pipes, 8 ounces per square feet (2.5 kg/m2).

SECTION P3003
JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS
P3003.1 Tightness.

Joints and connections in the DWV system shall be gas tight and water tight for the intended use or pressure required by test.

P3003.1.1 Threaded joints, general.

Pipe and fitting threads shall be tapered.

P3003.2 Prohibited joints.

Running threads and bands shall not be used in the drainage system. Drainage and vent piping shall not be drilled, tapped, burned or welded.

The following types of joints and connections shall be prohibited:

1.	Cement or concrete.

2.	Mastic or hot-pour bituminous joints.

3.	Joints made with fittings not approved for the specific installation.

4.	Joints between different diameter pipes made with elastomeric rolling O-rings.

5.	Solvent-cement joints between different types of plastic pipe except where provided for in Section P3003.13.4.

6.	Saddle-type fittings.

P3003.3 ABS plastic.

Joints between ABS plastic pipe or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.3.1 through P3003.3.3.

P3003.3.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints on drainage pipes shall be made with an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C1173, ASTM D3212 or CSA B602. Mechanical joints shall be installed only in underground systems unless otherwise approved. Joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.3.2 Solvent cementing.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Solvent cement that conforms to ASTM D2235 or CSA B181.1 shall be applied to joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM D2235, ASTM D2661, ASTM F628 or CSA B181.1. Solvent-cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground.

P3003.3.3 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1. Schedule 80 or heavier pipe shall be permitted to be threaded with dies specifically designed for plastic pipe. Approved thread lubricant or tape shall be applied on the male threads only.

P3003.3.4 Push-fit fittings.

Push-fit DWV fittings shall be listed and labeled to ASME A112.4.4 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions

P3003.4 Cast iron.

Joints between cast-iron pipe or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.4.1 through P3003.4.3.

P3003.4.1 Caulked joints.

Joints for hub and spigot pipe shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp. Molten lead shall be poured in one operation to a depth of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). The lead shall not recede more than 1/8 inch (3 mm) below the rim of the hub and shall be caulked tight. Paint, varnish or other coatings shall not be permitted on the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Lead shall be run in one pouring and shall be caulked tight.

P3003.4.2 Compression gasket joints.

Compression gaskets for hub and spigot pipe and fittings shall conform to ASTM C564. Gaskets shall be compressed when the pipe is fully inserted.

P3003.4.3 Mechanical joint coupling.

Mechanical joint couplings for hubless pipe and fittings shall consist of an elastomeric sealing sleeve and a metallic shield that comply with CISPI 310, ASTM C1277 or ASTM C1540. The elastomeric sealing sleeve shall conform to ASTM C564 or CSA B602 and shall have a center stop. Mechanical joint couplings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.5 Concrete joints.

Joints between concrete pipe and fittings shall be made with an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C443, ASTM C1173, CSA A257.3M or CSA B602.

P3003.6 Copper and copper-alloy pipe and tubing.

Joints between copper or copper-alloy pipe tubing or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.6.1 through P3003.6.4.

P3003.6.1 Brazed joints.

All joint surfaces shall be cleaned. An approved flux shall be applied where required. Brazing materials shall have a melting point in excess of 1,000°F (538°C). Brazing alloys filler metal shall be in accordance with AWS A5.8.

P3003.6.2 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.6.3 Soldered joints.

Copper and copper-alloy joints shall be soldered in accordance with ASTM B828. Cut tube ends shall be reamed to the full inside diameter of the tube end. All joint surfaces shall be cleaned. Fluxes for soldering shall be in accordance with ASTM B813 and shall become noncorrosive and nontoxic after soldering. The joint shall be soldered with a solder conforming to ASTM B32.

P3003.6.4 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1. Pipe-joint compound or tape shall be applied on the male threads only.

P3003.7 Steel.

Joints between galvanized steel pipe or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.7.1 and P3003.7.2.

P3003.7.1 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1. Pipe-joint compound or tape shall be applied on the male threads only.

P3003.7.2 Mechanical joints.

Joints shall be made with an approved elastomeric seal. Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.8 Lead.

Joints between lead pipe or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.8.1 and P3003.8.2.

P3003.8.1 Burned.

Burned joints shall be uniformly fused together into one continuous piece. The thickness of the joint shall be not less than the thickness of the lead being joined. The filler metal shall be of the same material as the pipe.

P3003.8.2 Wiped.

Joints shall be fully wiped, with an exposed surface on each side of the joint not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). The joint shall be not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) thick at the thickest point.

P3003.9 PVC plastic.

Joints between PVC plastic pipe or fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.9.1 through P3003.9.3.

P3003.9.1 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints on drainage pipe shall be made with an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C1173, ASTM D3212 or CSA B602. Mechanical joints shall not be installed in above-ground systems, unless otherwise approved. Joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer, or other approved primer, that conforms to ASTM F656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D2564, CSA B137.3 or CSA B181.2 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet, and shall be in accordance with ASTM D2855. Solvent-cement joints shall be installed above or below ground.

Exception: A primer shall not be required where all of the following conditions apply:

1.	The solvent cement used is third-party certified as conforming to ASTM D2564.

2.	The solvent cement is used only for joining PVC drain, waste and vent pipe and fittings in non-pressure applications in sizes up to and including 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter.

P3003.9.3 Threaded joints.

Threads shall conform to ASME B1.20.1. Schedule 80 or heavier pipe shall be permitted to be threaded with dies specifically designed for plastic pipe. Approved thread lubricant or tape shall be applied on the male threads only.

P3003.9.4 Push-fit fittings.

Push-fit fittings shall conform to ASME A112.4.4 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.10 Vitrified clay.

Joints between vitrified clay pipe or fittings shall be made with an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C425, ASTM C1173 or CSA B602.

P3003.11 Polyolefin plastic.

Joints between polyolefin plastic pipe and fittings shall comply with Sections P3003.11.1 and P3003.11.2.

P3003.11.1 Heat-fusion joints.

Heat-fusion joints for polyolefin pipe and tubing joints shall be installed with socket-type heat-fused polyolefin fittings or electrofusion polyolefin fittings. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. The joint shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM F1412 or CSA B181.3.

P3003.11.2 Mechanical and compression sleeve joints.

Mechanical and compression sleeve joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.12 Polyethylene plastic pipe.

Joints between polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings shall be underground and shall comply with Section P3003.12.1 or P3003.12.2.

P3003.12.1 Heat fusion joints.

Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. Joint surfaces shall be cut, heated to melting temperature and joined using tools specifically designed for the operation. Joints shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM D2657 and the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.12.2 Mechanical joints.

Mechanical joints in drainage piping shall be made with an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C1173, ASTM D3212 or CSA B602. Mechanical joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.13 Joints between different materials.

Joints between different piping materials shall be made with a mechanical joint of the compression or mechanical-sealing type conforming to ASTM C1173, ASTM C1460 or ASTM C1461. Connectors and adapters shall be approved for the application and such joints shall have an elastomeric seal conforming to ASTM C425, ASTM C443, ASTM C564, ASTM C1440, ASTM D1869, ASTM F477, CSA A257.3M or CSA B602, or as required in Sections P3003.13.1 through P3003.13.6. Joints between glass pipe and other types of materials shall be made with adapters having a TFE seal. Joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3003.13.1 Copper pipe or tubing to cast-iron hub pipe.

Joints between copper pipe or tubing and cast-iron hub pipe shall be made with a copper-alloy ferrule or compression joint. The copper pipe or tubing shall be soldered to the ferrule in an approved manner, and the ferrule shall be joined to the cast-iron hub by a caulked joint or a mechanical compression joint.

P3003.13.2 Copper pipe or tubing to galvanized steel pipe.

Joints between copper pipe or tubing and galvanized steel pipe shall be made with a copper-alloy or dielectric fitting. The copper tubing shall be soldered to the fitting in an approved manner, and the fitting shall be screwed to the threaded pipe.

P3003.13.3 Cast-iron pipe to galvanized steel or copper-alloy pipe.

Joints between cast-iron and galvanized steel or copper-alloy pipe shall be made by either caulked or threaded joints or with an approved adapter fitting.

P3003.13.4 Plastic pipe or tubing to other piping material.

Joints between different types of plastic pipe shall be made with an approved adapter fitting or by a solvent cement joint only where a single joint is made between ABS and PVC pipes at the end of a building drainage pipe and the beginning of a building sewer pipe using a solvent cement complying with ASTM D3138. Joints between plastic pipe and cast-iron hub pipe shall be made by a caulked joint or a mechanical compression joint.

P3003.13.5 Lead pipe to other piping material.

Joints between lead pipe and other piping material shall be made by a wiped joint to a caulking ferrule, soldering nipple, or bushing or shall be made with an approved adapter fitting.

P3003.13.6 Stainless steel drainage systems to other materials.

Joints between stainless steel drainage systems and other piping materials shall be made with approved mechanical couplings.

P3003.14 Joints between drainage piping and water closets.

Joints between drainage piping and water closets or similar fixtures shall be made by means of a closet flange or a waste connector and sealing gasket compatible with the drainage system material, securely fastened to a structurally firm base. The joint shall be bolted, with an approved gasket flange to fixture connection complying with ASME A112.4.3 or setting compound between the fixture and the closet flange or waste connector and sealing gasket. The waste connector and sealing gasket joint shall comply with the joint-tightness test of ASME A112.4.3 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION P3004
DETERMINING DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS
P3004.1 DWV system load.

The load on DWV-system piping shall be computed in terms of drainage fixture unit (d.f.u.) values in accordance with Table P3004.1.

TABLE P3004.1

DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT (d.f.u.) VALUES FOR VARIOUS PLUMBING FIXTURES

TYPE OF FIXTURE OR GROUP OF FIXTURES	DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT
VALUE (d.f.u.)a

Bar sink	1
Bathtub (with or without a shower head or whirlpool attachments)	2
Bidet	1
Clothes washer standpipe	2
Dishwasher	2
Floor drainb	0
Kitchen sink	2
Lavatory	1
Laundry tub	2
Shower stall	2
Water closet (1.6 gallons per flush)	3
Water closet (greater than 1.6 gallons per flush)	4
Full-bath group with bathtub (with 1.6 gallon per flush water closet, and with or without shower head and/or
whirlpool attachment on the bathtub or shower stall)
	5
Full-bath group with bathtub (water closet greater than 1.6 gallon per flush, and with or without shower head
and/or whirlpool attachment on the bathtub or shower stall)
	6
Half-bath group (1.6 gallon per flush water closet plus lavatory)	4
Half-bath group (water closet greater than 1.6 gallon per flush plus lavatory)	5
Kitchen group (dishwasher and sink with or without food-waste disposer)	2
Laundry group (clothes washer standpipe and laundry tub)	3
Multiple-bath groupsc:	
 1.5 baths	7
 2 baths	8
 2.5 baths	9
 3 baths	10
 3.5 baths	11

For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L.

a.	For a continuous or semicontinuous flow into a drainage system, such as from a pump or similar device, 1.5 fixture units shall be allowed per gpm of flow. For a fixture not listed, use the highest d.f.u. value for a similar listed fixture.

b.	A floor drain itself does not add hydraulic load. Where used as a receptor, the fixture unit value of the fixture discharging into the receptor shall be applicable.

c.	Add 2 d.f.u. for each additional full bath.

SECTION P3005
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
P3005.1 Drainage fittings and connections.

Changes in direction in drainage piping shall be made by the appropriate use of sanitary tees, wyes, sweeps, bends or by a combination of these drainage fittings in accordance with Table P3005.1. Change in direction by combination fittings, heel or side inlets or increasers shall be installed in accordance with Table P3005.1 and Sections P3005.1.1 through P3005.1.4. based on the pattern of flow created by the fitting.

TABLE P3005.1

FITTINGS FOR CHANGE IN DIRECTION

TYPE OF FITTING PATTERN	CHANGE IN DIRECTION
Horizontal to verticalc	Vertical to horizontal	Horizontal to horizontal
Sixteenth bend	X	X	X
Eighth bend	X	X	X
Sixth bend	X	X	X
Quarter bend	X	Xa	Xa
Short sweep	X	Xa,b	Xa
Long sweep	X	X	X
Sanitary tee	Xc	—	—
Wye	X	X	X
Combination wye and eighth bend	X	X	X

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The fittings shall only be permitted for a 2-inch or smaller fixture drain.

b.	Three inches and larger.

c.	For a limitation on multiple connection fittings, see Section P3005.1.1.

P3005.1.1 Horizontal to vertical (multiple connection fittings).

Double fittings such as double sanitary tees and tee-wyes or approved multiple connection fittings and back-to-back fixture arrangements that connect two or more branches at the same level shall be permitted as long as directly opposing connections are the same size and the discharge into directly opposing connections is from similar fixture types or fixture groups. Double sanitary tee patterns shall not receive the discharge of back-to-back water closets and fixtures or appliances with pumping action discharge.

Exception: Back-to-back water closet connections to double sanitary tee patterns shall be permitted where the horizontal developed length between the outlet of the water closet and the connection to the double sanitary tee is 18 inches (457 mm) or greater.

P3005.1.2 Heel- or side-inlet quarter bends, drainage.

Heel-inlet quarter bends shall be an acceptable means of connection, except where the quarter bends serves a water closet. A low-heel inlet shall not be used as a wet-vented connection. Side-inlet quarter bends shall be an acceptable means of connection for both drainage, wet venting and stack venting arrangements.

P3005.1.3 Heel- or side-inlet quarter bends, venting.

Heel-inlet or side-inlet quarter bends, or any arrangement of pipe and fittings producing a similar effect, shall be acceptable as a dry vent where the inlet is placed in a vertical position. The inlet is permitted to be placed in a horizontal position only where the entire fitting is part of a dry vent arrangement.

P3005.1.4 Water closet connection between flange and pipe.

One-quarter bends 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter shall be acceptable for water closet or similar connections, provided that a 4-inch by 3-inch (102 mm by 76 mm) flange is installed to receive the closet fixture horn. Alternately, a 4-inch by 3-inch (102 mm by 76 mm) elbow shall be acceptable with a 4-inch (102 mm) flange.

P3005.1.5 Provisions for future fixtures.

Where drainage has been roughed-in for future fixtures, the drainage unit values of the future fixtures shall be considered in determining the required drain sizes. Such future installations shall be terminated with an accessible permanent plug or cap fitting.

P3005.1.6 No reduction in size in the direction of flow.

The size of the drainage piping shall not be reduced in the direction of the flow. The following shall not be considered a reduction in size in the direction of flow:

1.	A 4-inch by 3-inch (102 mm by 76 mm) water closet flange.

2.	A water closet bend fitting having a 4-inch (102 mm) inlet and a 3-inch (76 mm) outlet, provided that the 4-inch leg of the fitting is upright and below, but not necessarily directly connected to, the water closet flange.

3.	An offset closet flange.

P3005.2 Cleanouts required.

Cleanouts shall be provided for drainage piping in accordance with Sections P3005.2.1 through P3005.2.11.

P3005.2.1 Horizontal drains and building drains.

Horizontal drainage pipes in buildings shall have cleanouts located at intervals of not more than 100 feet (30 480 mm). Building drains shall have cleanouts located at intervals of not more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) except where manholes are used instead of cleanouts, the manholes shall be located at intervals of not more than 400 feet (122 m). The interval length shall be measured from the cleanout or manhole opening, along the developed length of the piping to the next drainage fitting providing access for cleaning, the end of the horizontal drain or the end of the building drain.

Exception: Horizontal fixture drain piping serving a nonremovable trap shall not be required to have a cleanout for the section of piping between the trap and the vent connection for such trap.

P3005.2.2 Building sewers.

Building sewers smaller than 8 inches (203 mm) shall have cleanouts located at intervals of not more than 100 feet (30 480 mm). Building sewers 8 inches (203 mm) and larger shall have a manhole located not more than 200 feet (60 960 mm) from the junction of the building drain and building sewer and at intervals of not more than 400 feet (122 m). The interval length shall be measured from the cleanout or manhole opening, along the developed length of the piping to the next drainage fitting providing access for cleaning, a manhole or the end of the building sewer.

P3005.2.3 Building drain and building sewer junction.

The junction of the building drain and the building sewer shall be served by a cleanout that is located at the junction or within 10 feet (3048 mm) developed length of piping upstream of the junction. For the requirements of this section, removal of a water closet shall not be required to provide cleanout access.

P3005.2.4 Changes of direction.

Where a horizontal drainage pipe, a building drain or a building sewer has a change of horizontal direction greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad), a cleanout shall be installed at the change of direction. Where more than one change of horizontal direction greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) occurs within 40 feet (12 192 mm) of developed length of piping, the cleanout installed for the first change of direction shall serve as the cleanout for all changes in direction within that 40 feet (12 192 mm) of developed length of piping.

P3005.2.5 Cleanout size.

Cleanouts shall be the same size as the piping served by the cleanout, except cleanouts for piping larger than 4 inches (102 mm) need not be larger than 4 inches (102 mm).

Exceptions:

1.	A removable P-trap with slip or ground joint connections can serve as a cleanout for drain piping that is one size larger than the P-trap size.

2.	Cleanouts located on stacks can be one size smaller than the stack size.

3.	The size of cleanouts for cast-iron piping can be in accordance with the referenced standards for cast iron fittings as indicated in Table P3002.3.

P3005.2.6 Cleanout plugs.

Cleanout plugs shall be copper alloy, plastic or other approved materials. Cleanout plugs for borosilicate glass piping systems shall be of borosilicate glass. Copper-alloy cleanout plugs shall conform to ASTM A74 and shall be limited for use only on metallic piping systems. Plastic cleanout plugs shall conform to the referenced standards for plastic pipe fittings as indicated in Table P3002.3. Cleanout plugs shall have a raised square head, a countersunk square head or a countersunk slot head. Where a cleanout plug will have a trim cover screw installed into the plug, the plug shall be manufactured with a blind end threaded hole for such purpose.

P3005.2.7 Manholes.

Manholes and manhole covers shall be of an approved type. Manholes located inside of a building shall have gas-tight covers that require tools for removal.

P3005.2.8 Installation arrangement.

The installation arrangement of a cleanout shall enable cleaning of drainage piping only in the direction of drainage flow.

Exceptions:

1.	Test tees serving as cleanouts.

2.	A two-way cleanout installation that is approved for meeting the requirements of Section P3005.2.3.

P3005.2.9 Required clearance.

Cleanouts for 6-inch (153 mm) and smaller piping shall be provided with a clearance of not less than 18 inches (457 mm) from, and perpendicular to, the face of the opening to any obstruction. Cleanouts for 8-inch (203 mm) and larger piping shall be provided with a clearance of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) from, and perpendicular to, the face of the opening to any obstruction.

P3005.2.10 Cleanout access.

Required cleanouts shall not be installed in concealed locations. For the purposes of this section, concealed locations include, but are not limited to, the inside of plenums, within walls, within floor/ceiling assemblies, below grade and in crawl spaces where the height from the crawl space floor to the nearest obstruction along the path from the crawl space opening to the cleanout location is less than 24 inches (610 mm). Cleanouts with openings at a finished wall shall have the face of the opening located within 11/2 inches (38 mm) of the finished wall surface. Cleanouts located below grade shall be extended to grade level so that the top of the cleanout plug is at or above grade. A cleanout installed in a floor or walkway that will not have a trim cover installed shall have a counter-sunk plug installed so the top surface of the plug is flush with the finished surface of the floor or walkway.

P3005.2.10.1 Cleanout equivalent.

A fixture trap or a fixture with integral trap, removable without altering the concealed piping shall be acceptable as a cleanout equivalent.

P3005.2.10.2 Cleanout plug trim covers.

Trim covers and access doors for cleanout plugs shall be designed for such purposes. Trim cover fasteners that thread into cleanout plugs shall be corrosion resistant. Cleanout plugs shall not be covered with mortar, plaster or any other permanent material.

P3005.2.10.3 Floor cleanout assemblies.

Where it is necessary to protect a cleanout plug from the loads of vehicular traffic, cleanout assemblies in accordance with ASME A112.36.2M shall be installed.

P3005.2.11 Prohibited use.

The use of a threaded cleanout opening to add a fixture or extend piping shall be prohibited except where another cleanout of equal size is installed with the required access and clearance.

P3005.3 Horizontal drainage piping slope.

Horizontal drainage piping shall be installed in uniform alignment at uniform slopes not less than 1/4 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for 21/2 inch (64 mm) diameter and less, and not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope) for diameters of 3 inches (76 mm) or more.

P3005.4 Drain pipe sizing.

Drain pipes shall be sized according to drainage fixture unit (d.f.u.) loads. The size of the drainage piping shall not be reduced in size in the direction of flow. The following general procedure is permitted to be used:

1.	Draw an isometric layout or riser diagram denoting fixtures on the layout.

2.	Assign d.f.u. values to each fixture group plus individual fixtures using Table P3004.1.

3.	Starting with the top floor or most remote fixtures, work downstream toward the building drain accumulating d.f.u. values for fixture groups plus individual fixtures for each branch. Where multiple bath groups are being added, use the reduced d.f.u. values in Table P3004.1, which take into account probability factors of simultaneous use.

4.	Size branches and stacks by equating the assigned d.f.u. values to pipe sizes shown in Table P3005.4.1.

5.	Determine the pipe diameter and slope of the building drain and building sewer based on the accumulated d.f.u. values, using Table P3005.4.2.

P3005.4.1 Branch and stack sizing.

Branches and stacks shall be sized in accordance with Table P3005.4.1. Below grade drain pipes shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in diameter. Drain stacks shall be not smaller than the largest horizontal branch connected.

Exceptions:

1.	A 4-inch by 3-inch (102 mm by 76 mm) closet bend or flange.

2.	A 4-inch (102 mm) closet bend connected to a 3-inch (76 mm) stack tee shall not be prohibited.

TABLE P3005.4.1

MAXIMUM FIXTURE UNITS ALLOWED TO BE CONNECTED TO BRANCHES AND STACKS

NOMINAL PIPE SIZE
(inches)
	ANY HORIZONTAL
FIXTURE BRANCH
	ANY ONE VERTICAL
STACK OR DRAIN

11/4a	—	—
11/2b	3	4
2b	6	10
21/2b	12	20
3	20	48
4	160	240

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	11/4-inch pipe size limited to a single-fixture drain or trap arm. See Table P3201.7.

b.	No water closets.

P3005.4.2 Building drain and sewer size and slope.

Pipe sizes and slope shall be determined from Table P3005.4.2 on the basis of drainage load in fixture units (d.f.u.) computed from Table P3004.1.

TABLE P3005.4.2

MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FIXTURE UNITS ALLOWED TO BE CONNECTED TO THE BUILDING DRAIN, BUILDING DRAIN BRANCHES OR THE BUILDING SEWER

DIAMETER OF
PIPE (inches)
	SLOPE PER FOOT
1/8 inch	1/4 inch	1/2 inch
11/2a, b	—	Note a	Note a
2b	—	21	27
21/2b	—	24	31
3	36	42	50
4	180	216	250

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	11/2-inch pipe size limited to a building drain branch serving not more than two waste fixtures, or not more than one waste fixture if serving a pumped discharge fixture or food waste disposer discharge.

b.	No water closets.

P3005.5 Connections to offsets and bases of stacks.

Horizontal branches shall connect to the bases of stacks at a point located not less than 10 times the diameter of the drainage stack downstream from the stack. Horizontal branches shall connect to horizontal stack offsets at a point located not less than 10 times the diameter of the drainage stack downstream from the upper stack.

SECTION P3006
SIZING OF DRAIN PIPE OFFSETS
P3006.1 Vertical offsets.

An offset in a vertical drain, with a change of direction of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) or less from the vertical, shall be sized as a straight vertical drain.

P3006.2 Horizontal offsets above the lowest branch.

A stack with an offset of more than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the vertical shall be sized as follows:

1.	The portion of the stack above the offset shall be sized as for a regular stack based on the total number of fixture units above the offset.

2.	The offset shall be sized as for a building drain in accordance with Table P3005.4.2.

3.	The portion of the stack below the offset shall be sized as for the offset or based on the total number of fixture units on the entire stack, whichever is larger.

P3006.3 Horizontal offsets below the lowest branch.

In soil or waste stacks below the lowest horizontal branch, a change in diameter shall not be required if the offset is made at an angle not greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the vertical. If an offset greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the vertical is made, the offset and stack below it shall be sized as a building drain (see Table P3005.4.2).

SECTION P3007
SUMPS AND EJECTORS
P3007.1 Building subdrains.

Building subdrains that cannot be discharged to the sewer by gravity flow shall be discharged into a tightly covered and vented sump from which the liquid shall be lifted and discharged into the building gravity drainage system by automatic pumping equipment or other approved method. In other than existing structures, the sump shall not receive drainage from any piping within the building capable of being discharged by gravity to the building sewer.

P3007.2 Valves required.

A check valve and a full open valve located on the discharge side of the check valve shall be installed in the pump or ejector discharge piping between the pump or ejector and the gravity drainage system. Access shall be provided to such valves. Such valves shall be located above the sump cover required by Section P3007.3.2 or, where the discharge pipe from the ejector is below grade, the valves shall be accessibly located outside the sump below grade in an access pit with a removable access cover.

P3007.3 Sump design.

The sump pump, pit and discharge piping shall conform to the requirements of Sections P3007.3.1 through P3007.3.5.

P3007.3.1 Sump pump.

The sump pump capacity and head shall be appropriate to anticipated use requirements.

P3007.3.2 Sump pit.

The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) in diameter and 24 inches (610 mm) deep, unless otherwise approved. The pit shall be accessible and located so that drainage flows into the pit by gravity. The sump pit shall be constructed of tile, concrete, steel, plastic or other approved materials. The pit bottom shall be solid and provide permanent support for the pump. The sump pit shall be fitted with a gas-tight removable cover that is installed above grade level or floor level, or not more than 2 inches (51 mm) below grade or floor level. The cover shall be adequate to support anticipated loads in the area of use. The sump pit shall be vented in accordance with Chapter 31.

P3007.3.3 Discharge pipe and fittings.

Discharge pipe and fittings serving sump pumps and ejectors shall be constructed of materials in accordance with Sections P3007.3.3.1 and P3007.3.3.2.

P3007.3.3.1 Materials.

Pipe and fitting materials shall be constructed of copper alloy, copper, CPVC, ductile iron, PE, or PVC.

P3007.3.3.2 Ratings.

Pipe and fittings shall be rated for the maximum system operating pressure and temperature. Pipe fitting materials shall be compatible with the pipe material. Where pipe and fittings are buried in the earth, they shall be suitable for burial.

P3007.3.4 Maximum effluent level.

The effluent level control shall be adjusted and maintained to at all times prevent the effluent in the sump from rising to within 2 inches (51 mm) of the invert of the gravity drain inlet into the sump.

P3007.3.5 Ejector connection to the drainage system.

Pumps connected to the drainage system shall connect to a building sewer, building drain, soil stack, waste stack or horizontal branch drain. Where the discharge line connects into horizontal drainage piping, the connection shall be made through a wye fitting into the top of the drainage piping and such wye fitting shall be located not less than 10 pipe diameters from the base of any soil stack, waste stack or fixture drain.

P3007.4 Sewage pumps and sewage ejectors.

A sewage pump or sewage ejector shall automatically discharge the contents of the sump to the building drainage system.

P3007.5 Macerating toilet systems and pumped waste systems.

Macerating toilet systems and pumped waste systems shall comply with ASME A112.3.4/CSA B45.9 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3007.6 Capacity.

Sewage pumps and sewage ejectors shall have the capacity and head for the application requirements. Pumps and ejectors that receive the discharge of water closets shall be capable of handling spherical solids with a diameter of up to and including 2 inches (51 mm). Other pumps or ejectors shall be capable of handling spherical solids with a diameter of up to and including 1/2 inch (13 mm). The minimum capacity of a pump or ejector based on the diameter of the discharge pipe shall be in accordance with Table 3007.6.

Exceptions:

1.	Grinder pumps or grinder ejectors that receive the discharge of water closets shall have a discharge opening of not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm).

2.	Macerating toilet assemblies that serve single water closets shall have a discharge opening of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm).

TABLE 3007.6

MINIMUM CAPACITY OF SEWAGE PUMP OR SEWAGE EJECTOR

DIAMETER OF THE
DISCHARGE PIPE
(inches)	CAPACITY OF PUMP OR EJECTOR
(gpm)

2	21
21/2	30
3	46

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m.

SECTION P3008
BACKWATER VALVES
P3008.1 Where required.

Where the flood level rims of plumbing fixtures are below the elevation of the manhole cover of the next upstream manhole in the public sewer, the fixtures shall be protected by a backwater valve installed in the building drain, branch of the building drain or horizontal branch serving such fixtures.

P3008.2 Allowable installation.

Where plumbing fixtures are installed on a floor with a finished floor elevation above the elevation of the manhole cover of the next upstream manhole in the public sewer, and a backwater valve is installed in the building drain or horizontal branch serving such fixtures, the backwater valve shall be of the normally open type.

Exception: Normally closed backwater valve installations for existing buildings shall not be prohibited.

P3008.3 Material.

Backwater valves shall comply with ASME A112.14.1, CSA B181.1 or CSA B181.2.

P3008.4 Location.

Backwater valves shall be installed so that access is provided to the working parts.

SECTION P3009
SUBSURFACE GRAYWATER
SOIL ABSORPTION SYSTEMS


RESERVED

SECTION P3010
REPLACEMENT OF UNDERGROUND BUILDING
SEWERS AND BUILDING DRAINS BY PIPE
BURSTING METHODS
P3010.1 General.

This section shall govern the replacement of existing building sewer and building drain piping by pipe-bursting methods.

P3010.2 Applicability.

The replacement of building sewer and building drain piping by pipe bursting methods shall be limited to gravity drainage piping of sizes 6 inches (150 mm) and smaller. The replacement piping shall be of the same nominal size as the existing piping.

P3010.3 Preinstallation inspection.

The existing piping sections to be replaced shall be inspected internally by a recorded video camera survey. The survey shall include notations of the position of cleanouts and the depth of connections to the existing piping.

P3010.4 Pipe.

The replacement pipe shall be made of a high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and shall be in compliance with ASTM F714.

P3010.5 Pipe fittings.

Pipe fittings to be connected to the replacement pipe shall be made of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and shall be in compliance with ASTM D2683.

P3010.6 Cleanouts.

Where the existing building sewer or building drain did not have cleanouts meeting the requirements of this code, cleanout fittings shall be installed as required by this code.

P3010.7 Post-installation inspection.

The completed replacement piping section shall be inspected internally by a recorded video camera survey. The video survey shall be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to pressure testing of the replacement piping system.

P3010.8 Pressure testing.

The replacement piping system and the connections to the replacement piping shall be tested in accordance with Section P2503.4.

SECTION P3011
RELINING OF BUILDING
SEWERS AND BUILDING DRAINS
P3011.1 General.

This section shall govern the relining of existing building sewer and building drainage piping.

P3011.2 Applicability.

The relining of existing building sewer and building drainage piping shall be limited to gravity drainage piping 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter and larger. The relined piping shall be of the same nominal size as the existing piping.

P3011.3 Pre-installation requirements.

Prior to commencement of the relining installation, the existing piping sections to be relined shall be descaled and cleaned. After the cleaning process has occurred and water has been flushed through the system, the piping shall be inspected internally by a recorded video camera survey.

P3011.3.1 Pre-installation recorded video camera survey.

The video survey shall include verification of the project address location. The video shall include notations of the cleanout and fitting locations, and the approximate depth of the existing piping. The video shall also include notations of the length of piping at intervals no greater than 25 feet (7260 mm).

P3011.4 Permitting.

Prior to issuing a permit for relining, the building official shall review and evaluate the pre-installation recorded video camera survey to determine whether the piping system is capable to be relined in accordance with the proposed lining system manufacturer’s installation requirements and applicable referenced standards.

P3011.5 Prohibited applications.

Where review of the pre-installation recorded video camera survey reveals that piping systems are not installed correctly, or defects exist, relining shall not be permitted. The defective portions of piping shall be exposed and repaired with pipe and fittings in accordance with this code. Defects shall include, but are not limited to, backslope or insufficient slope, complete pipe wall deterioration or complete separations such as from tree root invasion or improper support.

P3011.6 Relining materials.

The relining materials shall be manufactured in compliance with applicable standards and certified as required in Section P2609. Fold-and-form pipe reline materials shall be manufactured in compliance with ASTM F1504 or ASTM F1871.

P3011.7 Installation.

The installation of relining materials shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions, applicable referenced standards and this code.

P3011.7.1 Material data report.

The installer shall record the data as required by the relining material manufacture and applicable standards. The recorded data shall include but is not limited to the location of the project, relining material type, amount of product installed and conditions of the installation. A copy of the data report shall be provided to the building official prior to final approval.

P3011.8 Post-installation recorded video camera survey.

The completed relined piping system shall be inspected internally by a recorded video camera survey after the system has been flushed and flow tested with water. The video survey shall be submitted to the code official prior to finalization of the permit. The video survey shall be reviewed and evaluated to provide verification that no defects exist. Any defects identified shall be repaired and replaced in accordance with this code.

P3011.9 Certification.

A certification shall be provided in writing to the building official, from the permit holder, that the relining materials have been installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the applicable standards and this code.

P3011.10 Approval.

Upon verification of compliance with the requirements of Sections P3011.1 through P3011.9, the building official shall approve the installation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-31]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 31
VENTS
SECTION P3101
VENT SYSTEMS
P3101.1 General.

This chapter shall govern the selection and installation of piping, tubing and fittings for vent systems. This chapter shall control the minimum diameter of vent pipes, circuit vents, branch vents and individual vents, and the size and length of vents and various aspects of vent stacks and stack vents. Additionally, this chapter regulates vent grades and connections, height above fixtures and relief vents for stacks and fixture traps, and the venting of sumps and sewers.

P3101.2 Trap seal protection.

The plumbing system shall be provided with a system of vent piping that will allow the admission or emission of air so that the liquid seal of any fixture trap shall not be subjected to a pressure differential of more than 1 inch of water column (249 Pa).

P3101.2.1 Venting required.

Every trap and trapped fixture shall be vented in accordance with one of the venting methods specified in this chapter.

P3101.3 Use limitations.

The plumbing vent system shall not be used for purposes other than the venting of the plumbing system.

P3101.4 Extension outside a structure.

In climates where the 97.5-percent value for outside design temperature is 0°F (-18°C) or less (ASHRAE 97.5-percent column, winter, see Chapter 3), vent pipes installed on the exterior of the structure shall be protected against freezing by insulation, heat or both. Vent terminals shall be protected from frost closure in accordance with Section P3103.2.

P3101.5 Flood resistance.

In flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1), vents shall be located at or above the elevation required in Section R322.1 (flood hazard areas including A Zones) or R322.2 (coastal high-hazard areas including V Zones).

SECTION P3102
VENT STACKS AND STACK VENTS
P3102.1 Required vent extension.

The vent system serving each building drain shall have not less than one vent pipe that extends to the outdoors.

P3102.2 Installation.

The required vent shall be a dry vent that connects to the building drain or an extension of a drain that connects to the building drain. Such vent shall not be an island fixture vent as permitted by Section P3112.

P3102.3 Size.

The required vent shall be sized in accordance with Section P3113.1 based on the required size of the building drain.

SECTION P3103
VENT TERMINALS
P3103.1 Vent pipes terminating outdoors.

Vent pipes terminating outdoors shall be extended to the outdoors through the roof or a side wall of the building in accordance with one of the methods identified in Sections P3103.1.1 through P3103.1.4.

P3103.1.1 Roof extension.

Open vent pipes that extend through a roof and that do not meet the conditions of Section P3103.1.2 or Section P3103.1.3 shall terminate not less than 6 inches (150 mm) above the roof.

P3103.1.2 Roof used for recreational purposes.

Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck, sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.

P3103.1.3 Roof extension covered.

Where an open vent pipe terminates above a sloped roof and is covered by either a roof-mounted panel such as a solar collector or photovoltaic panel mounted over the vent opening, or by a roof element such as an architectural feature or a decorative shroud, the vent pipe shall terminate not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the roof surface. Such roof elements shall be designed to prevent the adverse effects of wind on the function of the vent. The placement of a panel over a vent pipe and the design of a roof element covering the vent pipe shall provide for an open area for the vent pipe to the outdoors that is not less than the area of the pipe, as calculated from the inside diameter of the pipe. Such vent terminals shall be protected by a method that prevents birds and rodents from entering or blocking the vent pipe opening.

P3103.1.4 Side wall vent terminal.

Vent terminals extending through the wall shall terminate not closer than 10 feet (3048 mm) from a lot line and not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) above the highest grade elevation within 10 feet (3048 mm) in any direction horizontally of the vent terminal. Vent pipes shall not terminate under the overhang of a structure where the overhang includes soffit vents. Such vent terminals shall be protected by a method that prevents birds and rodents from entering or blocking the vent pipe opening and that does not reduce the open area of the vent pipe.

P3103.2 Frost closure.

Where the 97.5-percent value for outside design temperature is 0°F (-18°C) or less, vent extensions through a roof or wall shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. Any increase in the size of the vent shall be made not less than 1 foot (304.8 mm) inside the thermal envelope of the building.

P3103.3 Flashings and sealing.

The juncture of each vent pipe with the roof line shall be made water tight by an approved flashing. Vent extensions in walls and soffits shall be made weather tight by caulking.

P3103.4 Prohibited use.

A vent terminal shall not be used for any purpose other than a vent terminal.

P3103.5 Location of vent terminal.

An open vent terminal from a drainage system shall not be located less than 4 feet (1219 mm) directly beneath any door, openable window, or other air intake opening of the building or of an adjacent building, nor shall any such vent terminal be within 10 feet (3048 mm) horizontally of such an opening unless it is not less than 3 feet (914 mm) above the top of such opening.

SECTION P3104
VENT CONNECTIONS AND GRADES
P3104.1 Connection.

Individual branch and circuit vents shall connect to a vent stack, stack vent or extend to the open air.

Exception: Individual, branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to terminate at an air admittance valve in accordance with Section P3114.

P3104.2 Grade.

Vent and branch vent pipes shall be graded, connected and supported to allow moisture and condensate to drain back to the soil or waste pipe by gravity.

P3104.3 Vent connection to drainage system.

A dry vent connecting to a horizontal drain shall connect above the centerline of the horizontal drain pipe.

P3104.4 Vertical rise of vent.

A dry vent shall rise vertically to not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the highest trap or trapped fixture being vented.

P3104.5 Height above fixtures.

A connection between a vent pipe and a vent stack or stack vent shall be made not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the highest fixture served by the vent. Horizontal vent pipes forming branch vents shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the highest fixture served.

P3104.6 Vent for future fixtures.

Where the drainage piping has been roughed-in for future fixtures, a rough-in connection for a vent, not less than one-half the diameter of the drain, shall be installed. The vent rough-in shall connect to the vent system or shall be vented by other means as provided in this chapter. The connection shall be identified to indicate that the connection is a vent.

SECTION P3105
FIXTURE VENTS
P3105.1 Distance of trap from vent.

Each fixture trap shall have a protecting vent located so that the slope and the developed length in the fixture drain from the trap weir to the vent fitting are within the requirements set forth in Table P3105.1.

Exception: The developed length of the fixture drain from the trap weir to the vent fitting for self-siphoning fixtures, such as water closets, shall not be limited.

TABLE P3105.1

MAXIMUM DISTANCE OF FIXTURE TRAP FROM VENT

SIZE OF TRAP
(inches)
	SLOPE
(inch per foot)
	DISTANCE FROM
TRAP (feet)

11/4	1/4	5
11/2	1/4	6
2	1/4	8
3	1/8	12
4	1/8	16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m.

P3105.2 Fixture drains.

The total fall in a fixture drain resulting from pipe slope shall not exceed one pipe diameter, nor shall the vent pipe connection to a fixture drain, except for water closets, be below the weir of the trap.

P3105.3 Crown vent prohibited.

A vent shall not be installed within two pipe diameters of the trap weir.

SECTION P3106
INDIVIDUAL VENT
P3106.1 Individual vent permitted.

Each trap and trapped fixture shall be permitted to be provided with an individual vent. The individual vent shall connect to the fixture drain of the trap or trapped fixture being vented.

SECTION P3107
COMMON VENT
P3107.1 Individual vent as common vent.

An individual vent shall be permitted to vent two traps or trapped fixtures as a common vent. The traps or trapped fixtures being common vented shall be located on the same floor level.

P3107.2 Connection at the same level.

Where the fixture drains being common vented connect at the same level, the vent connection shall be at the interconnection of the fixture drains or downstream of the interconnection.

P3107.3 Connection at different levels.

Where the fixture drains connect at different levels, the vent shall connect as a vertical extension of the vertical drain. The vertical drain pipe connecting the two fixture drains shall be considered the vent for the lower fixture drain, and shall be sized in accordance with Table P3107.3. The upper fixture shall not be a water closet.

TABLE P3107.3

COMMON VENT SIZES

PIPE SIZE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM DISCHARGE FROM
UPPER FIXTURE DRAIN (d.f.u.)

11/2	1
2	4
21/2 to 3	6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

SECTION P3108
WET VENTING
P3108.1 Horizontal wet vent permitted.

Any combination of fixtures within two bathroom groups located on the same floor level shall be permitted to be vented by a horizontal wet vent. The wet vent shall be considered the vent for the fixtures and shall extend from the connection of the dry vent along the direction of the flow in the drain pipe to the most downstream fixture drain connection. Each fixture drain shall connect horizontally to the horizontal branch being wet vented or shall have a dry vent. Each wet-vented fixture drain shall connect independently to the horizontal wet vent. Only the fixtures within the bathroom groups shall connect to the wet-vented horizontal branch drain. Any additional fixtures shall discharge downstream of the horizontal wet vent.

P3108.2 Dry vent connection.

The required dry-vent connection for wet-vented systems shall comply with Sections P3108.2.1 and P3108.2.2.

P3108.2.1 Horizontal wet vent.

The dry-vent connection for a horizontal wet-vent system shall be an individual vent or a common vent for any bathroom group fixture, except an emergency floor drain. Where the dry vent connects to a water closet fixture drain, the drain shall connect horizontally to the horizontal wet vent system. Not more than one wet-vented fixture drain shall discharge upstream of the dry-vented fixture drain connection.

P3108.2.2 Vertical wet vent.

The dry-vent connection for a vertical wet-vent system shall be an individual vent or common vent for the most upstream fixture drain.

P3108.3 Size.

Horizontal and vertical wet vents shall be not less than the size as specified in Table P3108.3, based on the fixture unit discharge to the wet vent. The dry vent serving the wet vent shall be sized based on the largest required diameter of pipe within the wet-vent system served by the dry vent.

TABLE P3108.3

WET VENT SIZE

WET VENT PIPE SIZE
(inches)
	FIXTURE UNIT LOAD
(d.f.u.)

11/2	1
2	4
21/2	6
3	12
4	32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

P3108.4 Vertical wet vent permitted.

A combination of fixtures located on the same floor level shall be permitted to be vented by a vertical wet vent. The vertical wet vent shall be considered the vent for the fixtures and shall extend from the connection of the dry vent down to the lowest fixture drain connection. Each wet-vented fixture shall connect independently to the vertical wet vent. All water closet drains shall connect at the same elevation. Other fixture drains shall connect above or at the same elevation as the water closet fixture drains. The dry vent connection to the vertical wet vent shall be an individual or common vent serving one or two fixtures.

P3108.5 Trap weir to wet vent distances.

The maximum developed length of wet-vented fixture drains shall comply with Table P3105.1.

SECTION P3109
WASTE STACK VENT
P3109.1 Waste stack vent permitted.

A waste stack shall be considered a vent for all of the fixtures discharging to the stack where installed in accordance with the requirements of this section.

P3109.2 Stack installation.

The waste stack shall be vertical, and both horizontal and vertical offsets shall be prohibited between the lowest fixture drain connection and the highest fixture drain connection to the stack. Every fixture drain shall connect separately to the waste stack. The stack shall not receive the discharge of water closets or urinals.

P3109.3 Stack vent.

A stack vent shall be installed for the waste stack. The size of the stack vent shall be not less than the size of the waste stack. Offsets shall be permitted in the stack vent and shall be located not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level of the highest fixture, and shall be in accordance with Section P3104.5. The stack vent shall be permitted to connect with other stack vents and vent stacks in accordance with Section P3113.3.

P3109.4 Waste stack size.

The waste stack shall be sized based on the total discharge to the stack and the discharge within a branch interval in accordance with Table P3109.4. The waste stack shall be the same size throughout the length of the waste stack.

TABLE P3109.4

WASTE STACK VENT SIZE

STACK SIZE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FIXTURE UNITS (d.f.u.)
Total discharge into
one branch interval
	Total discharge
for stack

11/2	1	2
2	2	4
21/2	No limit	8
3	No limit	24
4	No limit	50

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

SECTION P3110
CIRCUIT VENTING
P3110.1 Circuit vent permitted.

Not greater than eight fixtures connected to a horizontal branch drain shall be permitted to be circuit vented. Each fixture drain shall connect horizontally to the horizontal branch being circuit vented. The horizontal branch drain shall be classified as a vent from the most downstream fixture drain connection to the most upstream fixture drain connection to the horizontal branch.

P3110.2 Vent connection.

The circuit vent connection shall be located between the two most upstream fixture drains. The vent shall connect to the horizontal branch and shall be installed in accordance with Section P3104. The circuit vent pipe shall not receive the discharge of any soil or waste.

P3110.3 Slope and size of horizontal branch.

The slope of the vent section of the horizontal branch drain shall be not greater than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope). The entire length of the vent section of the horizontal branch drain shall be sized for the total drainage discharge to the branch in accordance with Table P3005.4.1.

P3110.4 Additional fixtures.

Fixtures, other than the circuit vented fixtures shall be permitted to discharge, to the horizontal branch drain. Such fixtures shall be located on the same floor as the circuit vented fixtures and shall be either individually or common vented.

SECTION P3111
COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEM
P3111.1 Type of fixtures.

A combination waste and vent system shall only serve floor drains, sinks, lavatories and drinking fountains. A combination waste and vent system shall be considered to be the vent for those fixtures. The developed length of a fixture drain to the combination waste and vent system piping shall not exceed the limitations of Table P3105.1.

P3111.1.1 Single fixture systems.

A horizontal fixture drain shall be considered to be a combination waste and vent system, provided that the fixture drain size complies with Table P3111.3.

P3111.2 Installation.

The only vertical pipe of a combination waste and vent system shall be the connection between a fixture drain and a horizontal combination waste and vent pipe. The length of the vertical pipe shall be not greater than 8 feet (2438 mm).

P3111.2.1 Slope.

The slope of a horizontal combination waste and vent piping shall be not greater than 1/2 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope) and shall not be less than that indicated in Section P3005.2.

P3111.2.2 Vent connection.

A combination waste and vent system shall be provided with a dry vent connected at any point within the system or the system shall connect to a horizontal drain or building drain that serves vented fixtures located on the same floor. Combination waste and vent systems connecting to building drains receiving only the discharge from one or more stacks shall be provided with a dry vent. The dry vent connected to the combination waste and vent pipe shall extend vertically to a point not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the highest fixture being vented by the combination waste and vent system before horizontal offsets in the dry vent piping are allowed.

P3111.2.3 Vent size.

The dry vent connected to the combination waste and vent system shall be sized for the total drainage fixture unit load in accordance with Section P3111.1.

P3111.3 Size and length.

The size of a combination drain and vent piping shall be not less than that specified in Table 3111.3. The horizontal length of a combination drain and vent system shall be unlimited.

TABLE P3111.3

SIZE OF COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT PIPE

DIAMETER PIPE
(inches)
	MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FIXTURE UNITS (d.f.u.)
Connecting to a
horizontal branch
or stack	Connecting to a
building drain or
building subdrain
2	3	4
21/2	6	26
3	12	31
4	20	50

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

SECTION P3112
ISLAND FIXTURE VENTING
P3112.1 Limitation.

Island fixture venting shall not be permitted for fixtures other than sinks and lavatories. Kitchen sinks with a dishwasher waste connection, a food waste disposer, or both, in combination with the kitchen sink waste, shall be permitted to be vented in accordance with this section.

P3112.2 Vent connection.

The island fixture vent shall connect to the fixture drain as required for an individual or common vent. The vent shall rise vertically to above the drainage outlet of the fixture being vented before offsetting horizontally or vertically downward. The vent or branch vent for multiple island fixture vents shall extend not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the highest island fixture being vented before connecting to the outside vent terminal.

P3112.3 Vent installation below the fixture flood level rim.

The vent located below the flood level rim of the fixture being vented shall be installed as required for drainage piping in accordance with Chapter 30, except for sizing. The vent shall be sized in accordance with Section P3113.1. The lowest point of the island fixture vent shall connect full size to the drainage system. The connection shall be to a vertical drain pipe or to the top half of a horizontal drain pipe. Cleanouts shall be provided in the island fixture vent to permit rodding of all vent piping located below the flood level rim of the fixtures. Rodding in both directions shall be permitted through a cleanout.

SECTION P3113
VENT PIPE SIZING
P3113.1 Size of vents.

The required diameter of individual vents, branch vents, circuit vents, vent stacks and stack vents shall be not less than one-half the required diameter of the drain served. The required size of the drain shall be determined in accordance with Chapter 30. Vent pipes shall be not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) in diameter. Vents exceeding 40 feet (12 192 mm) in developed length shall be increased by one nominal pipe size for the entire developed length of the vent pipe.

P3113.2 Developed length.

The developed length of individual, branch, and circuit vents shall be measured from the farthest point of vent connection to the drainage system, to the point of connection to the vent stack, stack vent or termination outside of the building.

P3113.3 Branch vents.

Where branch vents are connected to a common branch vent, the common branch vent shall be sized in accordance with this section, based on the size of the common horizontal drainage branch that is or would be required to serve the total drainage fixture unit (d.f.u.) load being vented.

P3113.4 Sump vents.

Sump vent sizes shall be determined in accordance with Sections P3113.4.1 and P3113.4.2.

P3113.4.1 Sewage pumps and sewage ejectors other than pneumatic.

Drainage piping below sewer level shall be vented in the same manner as that of a gravity system. Building sump vent sizes for sumps with sewage pumps or sewage ejectors, other than pneumatic, shall be determined in accordance with Table P3113.4.1.

TABLE P3113.4.1

SIZE AND LENGTH OF SUMP VENTS

DISCHARGE CAPACITY OF PUMP
(gpm)
	MAXIMUM DEVELOPED LENGTH OF VENT (feet)a
Diameter of vent (inches)
11/4	11/2	2	21/2	3
10	No limitb	No limit	No limit	No limit	No limit
20	270	No limit	No limit	No limit	No limit
40	72	160	No limit	No limit	No limit
60	31	75	270	No limit	No limit

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon per minute (gpm) = 3.785 L/m.

a.	Developed length plus an appropriate allowance for entrance losses and friction caused by fittings, changes in direction and diameter. Suggested allowances shall be obtained from NBS Monograph 31 or other approved sources. An allowance of 50 percent of the developed length shall be assumed if a more precise value is not available.

b.	Actual values greater than 500 feet.

P3113.4.2 Pneumatic sewage ejectors.

The air pressure relief pipe from a pneumatic sewage ejector shall be connected to an independent vent stack terminating as required for vent extensions through the roof. The relief pipe shall be sized to relieve air pressure inside the ejector to atmospheric pressure, but shall be not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) in size.

SECTION P3114
AIR ADMITTANCE VALVES
P3114.1 General.

Vent systems using air admittance valves shall comply with this section. Individual and branch-type air admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1051. Stack-type air admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1050.

P3114.2 Installation.

The valves shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this section and the manufacturer’s instructions. Air admittance valves shall be installed after the DWV testing required by Section P2503.5.1 or P2503.5.2 has been performed.

P3114.3 Where permitted.

Individual vents, branch vents, circuit vents and stack vents shall be permitted to terminate with a connection to an air admittance valve. Individual and branch type air admittance valves shall vent only fixtures that are on the same floor level and connect to a horizontal branch drain.

P3114.4 Location.

Individual and branch air admittance valves shall be located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the horizontal branch drain or fixture drain being vented. Stack-type air admittance valves shall be located not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the highest fixture being vented. The air admittance valve shall be located within the maximum developed length permitted for the vent. The air admittance valve shall be installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above insulation materials where installed in attics.

P3114.5 Access and ventilation.

Access shall be provided to air admittance valves. Such valves shall be installed in a location that allows air to enter the valve.

P3114.6 Size.

The air admittance valve shall be rated for the size of the vent to which the valve is connected.

P3114.7 Vent required.

Within each plumbing system, not less than one stack vent or a vent stack shall extend outdoors to the open air.

P3114.8 Prohibited installations.

Air admittance valves shall not be used to vent sumps or tanks except where the vent system for the sump or tank has been designed by an engineer.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-32]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 32
TRAPS
SECTION P3201
FIXTURE TRAPS
P3201.1 Design of traps.

Traps shall be of standard design, shall have smooth uniform internal waterways, shall be self-cleaning and shall not have interior partitions except where integral with the fixture. Traps shall be constructed of lead, cast iron, copper or copper alloy or approved plastic. Copper or copper alloy traps shall be not less than No. 20 gage (0.8 mm) thickness. Solid connections, slip joints and couplings shall be permitted to be used on the trap inlet, trap outlet, or within the trap seal. Traps having slip-joint connections shall comply with Section P2704.1.

P3201.2 Trap seals.

Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and not more than 4 inches (102 mm).

P3201.2.1 Trap seal protection.

Traps seals of emergency floor drain traps and traps subject to evaporation shall be protected by one of the methods in Sections P3201.2.1.1 through P3201.2.1.4.

P3201.2.1.1 Potable water-supplied trap seal primer valve.

A potable water-supplied trap seal primer valve shall supply water to the trap. Water-supplied trap seal primer valves shall conform to ASSE 1018. The discharge pipe from the trap seal primer valve shall connect to the trap above the trap seal on the inlet side of the trap.

P3201.2.1.2 Reclaimed or gray-water-supplied trap seal primer valve.

A reclaimed or gray-water-supplied trap seal primer valve shall supply water to the trap. Water-supplied trap seal primer valves shall conform to ASSE 1018. The quality of reclaimed or graywater supplied to trap seal primer valves shall be in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of the trap seal primer valve. The discharge pipe from the trap seal primer valve shall connect to the trap above the trap seal on the inlet side of the trap.

P3201.2.1.3 Waste-water-supplied trap primer device.

A waste-water-supplied trap primer device shall supply water to the trap. Waste-water-supplied trap primer devices shall conform to ASSE 1044. The discharge pipe from the trap seal primer device shall connect to the trap above the trap seal on the inlet side of the trap.

P3201.2.1.4 Barrier-type trap seal protection device.

A barrier-type trap seal protection device shall protect the floor drain trap seal from evaporation. Barrier-type floor drain trap seal protection devices shall conform to ASSE 1072. The devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

P3201.3 Trap setting and protection.

Traps shall be set level with respect to their water seals and shall be protected from freezing. Trap seals shall be protected from siphonage, aspiration or back pressure by an approved system of venting (see Section P3101).

P3201.4 Building traps.

Building traps shall be prohibited.

P3201.5 Prohibited trap designs.

The following types of traps are prohibited:

1.	Bell traps.

2.	Separate fixture traps with interior partitions, except those lavatory traps made of plastic, stainless steel or other corrosion-resistant material.

3.	“S” traps.

4.	Drum traps.

5.	Trap designs with moving parts.

P3201.6 Number of fixtures per trap.

Each plumbing fixture shall be separately trapped by a water seal trap. The vertical distance from the fixture outlet to the trap weir shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) and the horizontal distance shall not exceed 30 inches (762 mm) measured from the center line of the fixture outlet to the centerline of the inlet of the trap. The height of a clothes washer standpipe above a trap shall conform to Section P2706.1.2. Fixtures shall not be double trapped.

Exceptions:

1.	Fixtures that have integral traps.

2.	A single trap shall be permitted to serve two or three like fixtures limited to kitchen sinks, laundry tubs and lavatories. Such fixtures shall be adjacent to each other and located in the same room with a continuous waste arrangement. The trap shall be installed at the center fixture where three fixtures are installed. Common trapped fixture outlets shall be not more than 30 inches (762 mm) apart.

3.	Connection of a laundry tray waste line into a standpipe for the automatic clothes-washer drain shall be permitted in accordance with Section P2706.1.2.1.

P3201.7 Size of fixture traps.

Trap sizes for plumbing fixtures shall be as indicated in Table P3201.7. Where the tailpiece of a plumbing fixture is larger than that indicated in Table P3201.7, the trap size shall be the same nominal size as the fixture tailpiece. A trap shall not be larger than the drainage pipe into which the trap discharges.

TABLE P3201.7

SIZE OF TRAPS FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES

PLUMBING FIXTURE	TRAP SIZE
MINIMUM
(inches)

Bathtub (with or without shower head and/or
whirlpool attachments)
	11/2
Bidet	11/4
Clothes washer standpipe	2
Dishwasher (on separate trap)	11/2
Floor drain	2
Kitchen sink (one or two traps, with or
without dishwasher and food waste disposer)
	11/2
Laundry tub (one or more compartments)	11/2
Lavatory	11/4
Shower (based on the total flow rate through
showerheads and bodysprays)
	
Flow rate:	
 5.7 gpm and less	11/2
 More than 5.7 gpm up to 12.3 gpm	2
 More than 12.3 gpm up to 25.8 gpm	3
 More than 25.8 gpm up to 55.6 gpm	4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-33]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 33
STORM DRAINAGE
SECTION P3301
GENERAL
P3301.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and installation of storm drainage.

SECTION P3302
SUBSOIL DRAINS
P3302.1 Subsoil drains.

Subsoil drains shall be open-jointed, horizontally split or perforated pipe conforming to one of the standards listed in Table P3302.1. Such drains shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter. Where the building is subject to backwater, the subsoil drain shall be protected by an accessibly located backwater valve. Subsoil drains shall discharge to a trapped area drain, sump, dry well or approved location above ground. The subsoil sump shall not be required to have either a gas-tight cover or a vent. The sump and pumping system shall comply with Section P3303.

TABLE P3302.1

SUBSOIL DRAIN PIPE

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Cast-iron pipe	ASTM A74; ASTM A888; CISPI 301
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe	ASTM F405; CSA B182.1; CSA B182.6; CSA B182.8
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
Plastic pipe (type sewer pipe, SDR 35, PS25, PS50 or PS100)
	ASTM D2729; ASTM D3034; ASTM F891;
CSA B182.2; CSA B182.4

Stainless steel drainage systems, Type 316L	ASME A112.3.1
Vitrified clay pipe	ASTM C4; ASTM C700
SECTION P3303
SUMPS AND PUMPING SYSTEMS
P3303.1 Pumping system.

The sump pump, pit and discharge piping shall conform to Sections P3303.1.1 through P3303.1.4.

P3303.1.1 Pump capacity and head.

The sump pump shall be of a capacity and head appropriate to anticipated use requirements.

P3303.1.2 Sump pit.

The sump pit shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) in diameter and 24 inches (610 mm) deep, unless otherwise approved. The pit shall be accessible and located so that all drainage flows into the pit by gravity. The sump pit shall be constructed of tile, steel, plastic, cast-iron, concrete or other approved material, with a removable cover adequate to support anticipated loads in the area of use. The pit floor shall be solid and provide permanent support for the pump.

P3303.1.3 Electrical.

Electrical outlets shall meet the requirements of Chapter 34.

P3303.1.4 Piping.

Discharge piping shall meet the requirements of Sections P3002.1, P3002.2, P3002.3 and P3003. Discharge piping shall include an accessible full flow check valve. Pipe and fittings shall be the same size as, or larger than, the pump discharge tapping.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-34]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 34
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION E3401
GENERAL
E3401.1 Applicability.

Electrical systems, equipment and components for buildings under the scope of this code shall comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 70, National Electrical Code.

E3401.2 Scope.

Reserved.

E3401.3 Not covered.

Reserved.

E3401.4 Additions and alterations.

Any addition or alteration to an existing electrical system shall be made in conformity to the provisions of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building and NFPA 70, National Electrical Code.

SECTION E3402
BUILDING STRUCTURE PROTECTION

RESERVED

SECTION E3403
INSPECTION AND APPROVAL

RESERVED

SECTION E3404
GENERAL EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS

RESERVED

SECTION E3405
EQUIPMENT LOCATION AND CLEARANCES

RESERVED

SECTION E3406
ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS AND CONNECTIONS

RESERVED

SECTION E3407
CONDUCTOR AND TERMINAL IDENTIFICATION

RESERVED

SECTION E3408
GFCI PROTECTION
E3408.1

NFPA 70-20: National Electric Code, Article 210 (Branch Circuits), Section 210.8, Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel, is amended to read as follows:

210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel shall be provided as required in 210.8(A) through (F). The ground-fault circuit-interrupter shall be installed in a readily accessible location.

Items (A) through (E) unchanged.

(F) Outdoor Outlets. All outdoor outlets for dwellings, other than those covered in 210.8(A)(3), Exception to (3) that are supplied by single-phase branch circuits rated 150 volts to ground or less, 50 amperes or less, shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection for personnel.

Exception No. 1: Ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection shall not be required on lighting outlets other than those covered in 210.8(C).

Exception No. 2: GFCI protection shall not be required for listed and labeled HVAC equipment.

Informational Note: See UL 60335-2-40, Household And Similar Electrical Appliances – Safety – Part 2-40: Particular Requirements for Electrical Heat Pumps, Air-Conditioners and Dehumidifiers or UL 1995, Heating and Cooling Equipment for product safety standards.(1)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-35]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 35
ELECTRICAL DEFINITIONS

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-36]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 36
SERVICES

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-37]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 37
BRANCH CIRCUIT AND FEEDER REQUIREMENTS

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-38]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 38
WIRING METHODS

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-39]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 39
POWER AND LIGHTING DISTRIBUTION

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-4]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 4
FOUNDATIONS
SECTION R401
GENERAL
R401.1 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF.

Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:

1.	In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.

2.	Where interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).

3.	Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44 and, as applicable, Section R322 in flood hazard areas.

TABLE R401.1

FOUNDATION UPLIFT LIGHT STEEL & WOOD FRAME BUILDINGS IN EXPOSURE B (plf)5, 6

Roof
Angle
		Bldg Width	Minimum
Building Length
	Vasd as determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3 / Velocity Pressure
100	110	120	130	140	150
15	18	22	26	30	34
45	3 Stories3	20	12	173	276	389	512	644	787
25	14	73	165	265	374	492	618
30	19	0	81	174	275	384	502
35	25	17	48	104	200	305	417
40	35	33	69	109	152	240	349
2 Stories2	20	12	64	126	195	270	350	437
25	15	17	66	129	198	272	352
30	22	38	62	90	146	217	294
35	35	56	86	118	154	192	252
40	40	74	108	146	186	230	277
1 Story1	20	12	33	46	61	94	132	173
25	22	57	75	96	118	142	167
30	18	79	103	129	157	187	219
35	16	100	128	159	192	229	267
40	16	120	152	188	226	268	312
30	3 Stories3	20	12	92	177	271	373	483	601
25	17	0	63	143	230	324	425
30	25	0	23	52	125	209	300
35	35	13	44	78	115	154	206
40	40	28	64	102	145	190	239
2 Stories2	20	13	1	50	103	162	224	292
25	23	16	35	57	84	139	199
30	30	36	60	87	116	148	181
35	35	54	83	115	150	187	227
40	36	71	104	141	181	224	270
1 Story1	20	20	32	46	60	76	93	112
25	15	56	74	95	117	140	166
30	13	78	102	127	155	185	217
35	14	99	127	157	190	226	264
40	16	118	150	185	223	264	308
20	3 Stories3	20	12	113	203	301	408	523	647
25	14	45	130	222	322	431	547
30	17	4	85	177	277	385	501
35	19	20	58	154	257	369	489
40	21	35	72	141	249	367	493
2 Stories2	20	12	43	100	163	231	304	384
25	13	22	79	143	214	289	371
30	15	42	72	141	217	298	386
35	15	61	92	150	232	321	417
40	16	78	114	164	254	352	457
1 Story1	20	12	38	57	94	135	179	226
25	12	62	82	122	171	223	280
30	12	85	110	154	212	275	342
35	14	107	136	190	257	330	409
40	16	126	160	227	304	388	478

TABLE R401.1—continued

FOUNDATION UPLIFT LIGHT STEEL & WOOD FRAME BUILDINGS IN EXPOSURE C (plf)5, 6

Roof
Angle
		Bldg Width	Minimum
Building Length4
	Vasd as determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3 / Velocity Pressure
100	110	120	130	140	150
21	26	31	36	42	48
45	3 Stories3	20	12	370	515	673	845	1031	1231
25	13	249	377	518	670	836	1013
30	17	159	278	408	550	703	867
35	21	89	203	328	463	610	767
40	26	102	153	262	394	537	691
2 Stories2	20	12	184	271	368	472	585	706
25	13	119	200	288	385	489	601
30	18	85	147	233	326	426	533
35	24	113	155	200	284	383	489
40	36	139	187	240	297	358	457
1 Story1	20	12	58	95	140	189	243	300
25	16	92	118	147	178	224	281
30	19	124	157	193	233	275	321
35	17	154	193	236	283	334	388
40	16	182	227	277	331	389	452
30	3 Stories3	20	12	256	376	507	650	804	970
25	15	130	232	344	466	598	740
30	21	47	127	228	337	455	582
35	31	72	116	163	241	351	469
40	40	96	146	200	259	323	392
2 Stories2	20	12	95	163	238	320	408	502
25	18	53	85	151	223	301	385
30	30	83	117	154	195	239	304
35	35	110	150	195	244	296	353
40	37	135	182	233	289	350	415
1 Story1	20	20	58	76	97	119	143	169
25	16	91	117	145	176	210	245
30	13	123	156	191	230	272	317
35	14	152	191	234	280	330	384
40	16	179	224	273	327	384	446
20	3 Stories3	20	12	285	411	549	698	860	1034
25	13	207	325	455	595	748	911
30	15	162	280	409	549	701	863
35	17	138	260	393	538	695	863
40	18	124	252	392	545	709	886
2 Stories2	20	12	152	233	320	416	519	630
25	12	133	215	306	404	511	625
30	13	130	219	316	422	536	658
35	14	138	235	341	456	581	715
40	16	150	257	373	500	636	783
1 Story1	20	12	88	136	188	245	307	373
25	12	114	172	235	303	377	457
30	12	146	214	288	370	457	552
35	14	180	259	346	441	543	653
40	16	215	306	406	515	632	758

Notes:

1.	Based on 1st floor height = 10 ft. or 11 ft. floor to floor in multistory.

2.	Based on 2nd floor height = 8 ft. or 9 ft. floor to floor in multistory.

3.	Based on 3rd floor height = 8 ft.

4.	Building length shall be equal to or greater than that shown in tables.

5.	Roof and floor framing shall span in the same direction.

6.	Includes provision for 2 foot roof overhang.

R401.2 Requirements.

Foundations shall be capable of resisting all loads from roof uplift and building overturn. Foundation uplift for light-frame wood or steel buildings shall be calculated or determined from Table R401.1. Masonry buildings within the dimensional scope of Table R401.1 shall be assumed to be of adequate weight so as not to require uplift resistance greater than that provided by the structure and any normal foundation. Foundation construction shall also be capable of accommodating all gravity loads in accordance with Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting soil. Fill soils that support footings and foundations shall be designed, installed and tested in accordance with accepted engineering practice. Gravel fill used as footings for wood and precast concrete foundations shall comply with Section R403.

R401.3 Drainage.

Surface drainage shall be diverted to a storm sewer conveyance or other approved point of collection that does not create a hazard. Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from foundation walls. The grade shall fall a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) within the first 10 feet (3048 mm).

Exception: Where lot lines, walls, slopes or other physical barriers prohibit 6 inches (152 mm) of fall within 10 feet (3048 mm), drains or swales shall be constructed to ensure drainage away from the structure. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building.

R401.4 Soil tests.

Where quantifiable data created by accepted soil science methodologies indicate expansive, compressible, shifting or other questionable soil characteristics are likely to be present, the building official shall determine whether to require a soil test to determine the soil’s characteristics at a particular location. This test shall be done by an approved agency using an approved method.

R401.4.1 Geotechnical evaluation.

In lieu of a complete geotechnical evaluation, the load-bearing values in Table R401.4.1 shall be assumed.

TABLE R401.4.1

PRESUMPTIVE LOAD-BEARING VALUES OF FOUNDATION MATERIALSa

CLASS OF MATERIAL	LOAD-BEARING
PRESSURE
(pounds per
square foot)

Crystalline bedrock	12,000
Sedimentary and foliated rock	4,000
Sandy gravel and/or gravel (GW and GP)	3,000
Sand, silty sand, clayey sand, silty gravel
and clayey gravel (SW, SP, SM, SC, GM
and GC)	2,000
Clay, sandy, silty clay, clayey silt, silt and
sandy siltclay (CL, ML, MH and CH)
	1,500b

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

a.	Where soil tests are required by Section R401.4, the allowable bearing capacities of the soil shall be part of the recommendations.

b.	Where the building official determines that in-place soils with an allowable bearing capacity of less than 1,500 psf are likely to be present at the site, the allowable bearing capacity shall be determined by a soils investigation.

R401.4.2 Compressible or shifting soil.

Instead of a complete geotechnical evaluation, where top or subsoils are compressible or shifting, they shall be removed to a depth and width sufficient to ensure stable moisture content in each active zone and shall not be used as fill or stabilized within each active zone by chemical, dewatering or presaturation.

SECTION R402
MATERIALS
R402.1 Wood foundations.

Wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

R402.1.1 Fasteners.

Fasteners used below grade to attach plywood to the exterior side of exterior basement or crawl-space wall studs, or fasteners used in knee wall construction, shall be of Type 304 or 316 stainless steel. Fasteners used above grade to attach plywood and all lumber-to-lumber fasteners except those used in knee wall construction shall be of Type 304 or 316 stainless steel, silicon bronze, copper, hot-dipped galvanized (zinc coated) steel nails, or hot-tumbled galvanized (zinc coated) steel nails. Electro-galvanized steel nails and galvanized (zinc coated) steel staples shall not be permitted.

R402.1.2 Wood treatment.

All lumber and plywood shall be pressure-preservative treated and dried after treatment in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Special Requirement 4.2) and shall bear the label of an accredited agency. Where lumber and/or plywood is cut or drilled after treatment, the treated surface shall be field treated with copper naphthenate, the concentration of which shall contain a minimum of 2-percent copper metal, by repeated brushing, dipping or soaking until the wood absorbs no more preservative.

R402.2 Concrete.

Concrete shall have a minimum specified compressive strength of f′c, as shown in Table R402.2. Concrete subject to moderate or severe weathering as indicated in Table R301.2(1) shall be air entrained as specified in Table R402.2. The maximum weight of fly ash, other pozzolans, silica fume, slag or blended cements that is included in concrete mixtures for garage floor slabs and for exterior porches, carport slabs and steps that will be exposed to deicing chemicals shall not exceed the percentages of the total weight of cementitious materials specified in Section 19.3.3.4 of ACI 318. Materials used to produce concrete and testing thereof shall comply with the applicable standards listed in Chapters 19 and 20 of ACI 318 or ACI 332.

TABLE R402.2

MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE

TYPE OR LOCATION OF CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION	MINIMUM SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTHa (f'c)
Weathering Potentialb
Negligible	Moderate	Severe
Basement walls, foundations and other concrete not exposed to the weather	2,500	2,500	2,500c
Basement slabs and interior slabs on grade, except garage floor slabs	2,500	2,500	2,500c
Basement walls, foundation walls, exterior walls and other vertical concrete
work exposed to the weather
	2,500	3,000d	3,000d
Porches, carport slabs and steps exposed to the weather, and garage floor
slabs
	2,500	3,000d, e, f	3,500d, e, f

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Strength at 28 days psi.

b.	See Table R301.2(1) for weathering potential.

c.	Concrete in these locations that is subject to freezing and thawing during construction shall be air-entrained concrete in accordance with Footnote d.

d.	Concrete shall be air-entrained. Total air content (percent by volume of concrete) shall be not less than 5 percent or more than 7 percent.

e.	See Section R402.2 for maximum cementitious materials content.

f.	For garage floors with a steel-troweled finish, reduction of the total air content (percent by volume of concrete) to not less than 3 percent is permitted if the specified compressive strength of the concrete is increased to not less than 4,000 psi.

R402.2.1 Materials for concrete.

Materials for concrete shall comply with the requirements of Section R608.5.1.

R402.3 Precast concrete.

Precast concrete foundations shall be designed in accordance with Section R404.5 and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the manufacturer’s instructions.

R402.3.1 Precast concrete foundation materials.

Materials used to produce precast concrete foundations shall meet the following requirements.

1.	All concrete used in the manufacture of precast concrete foundations shall have a minimum compressive strength of 5,000 psi (34 470 kPa) at 28 days. Concrete exposed to a freezing and thawing environment shall be air entrained with a minimum total air content of 5 percent.

2.	Structural reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of ASTM A615, A706 or A996. The minimum yield strength of reinforcing steel shall be 40,000 psi (Grade 40) (276 MPa). Steel reinforcement for precast concrete foundation walls shall have a minimum concrete cover of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm).

3.	Panel-to-panel connections shall be made with Grade II steel fasteners.

4.	The use of nonstructural fibers shall conform to ASTM C1116.

5.	Grout used for bedding precast foundations placed upon concrete footings shall meet ASTM C1107.

R402.4 Masonry.

Masonry systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with this chapter and shall have a minimum specified compressive strength of 1,500 psi (10.3 MPa).

SECTION R403
FOOTINGS
R403.1 General.

All exterior walls shall be supported on continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings, crushed stone footings, wood foundations, or other approved structural systems which shall be of sufficient design to accommodate all loads according to Section R301 and to transmit the resulting loads to the soil within the limitations as determined from the character of the soil. Footings shall be supported on undisturbed natural soils or engineered fill. Concrete footing shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section R403 or in accordance with ACI 332.

TABLE R403.1(1)

MINIMUM WIDTH AND THICKNESS FOR CONCRETE FOOTINGS FOR LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION (inches)a, b

ROOF LIVE
LOAD
	STORY AND TYPE
OF STRUCTURE WITH
LIGHT FRAME	LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL
(psf)

1500	2000	2500	3000	3500	4000
20 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	16 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	22 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	25 × 8	19 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
30 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	17 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	23 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	26 × 8	20 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
50 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	16 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	21 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	25 × 7	19 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	17 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	22 × 6	17 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	28 × 9	21 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
70 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	18 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	24 × 7	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	16 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	21 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	27 × 9	20 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	25 × 7	18 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	30 × 10	23 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6 N/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.9 N/m2.

a.	Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.

b.	Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every 2 feet of adjustment to the width of the house, add or subtract 2 inches of footing width and 1 inch of footing thickness (but not less than 6 inches thick).

TABLE R403.1(2)

MINIMUM WIDTH AND THICKNESS FOR CONCRETE FOOTINGS FOR LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION WITH BRICK VENEER (inches)a, b

ROOF LIVE
LOAD
	STORY AND TYPE OF
STRUCTURE
WITH BRICK VENEER	LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL
(psf)

1500	2000	2500	3000	3500	4000
20 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	21 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	26 × 8	20 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	26 × 8	19 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	32 × 11	24 × 7	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
30 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	16 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	22 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	16 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	22 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	27 × 9	21 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	21 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	27 × 8	20 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	33 × 11	24 × 7	20 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
50 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	24 × 7	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	24 × 7	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	29 × 10	22 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	27 × 7	18 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	29 × 9	22 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	35 × 12	26 × 8	21 × 6	17 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6
70 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	26 × 8	20 × 6	16× 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on grade	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	26 × 8	19 × 6	15× 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	32 × 11	24 × 7	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	26 × 8	19 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	31 × 11	23 × 7	19 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—plus basement	37 × 13	28 × 9	22 × 6	18 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6 N/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.9 N/m2.

a.	Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.

b.	Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every 2 feet of adjustment to the width of the house, add or subtract 2 inches of footing width and 1 inch of footing thickness (but not less than 6 inches thick).

TABLE R403.1(3)

MINIMUM WIDTH AND THICKNESS FOR CONCRETE FOOTINGS WITH CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE OR FULLY GROUTED MASONRY WALL CONSTRUCTION (inches)a, b

ROOF LIVE
LOAD
	STORY AND TYPE
OF STRUCTURE WITH CMU
	LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL
(psf)

1500	2000	2500	3000	3500	4000
20 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	25 × 8	19 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	23 × 7	18 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	29 × 9	22 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	35 × 12	26 × 8	21 × 6	17 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	32 × 11	24 × 7	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	38 × 14	28 × 9	23 × 6	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6
3 story—plus basement	43 × 17	33 × 11	26 × 8	22 × 6	19 × 6	16 × 6
30 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	20 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	26 × 8	20 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	24 × 7	18 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	30 × 10	22 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	36 × 13	27 × 8	21 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	33 × 12	25 × 7	20 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	39 × 14	29 × 9	23 × 7	19 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6
3 story—plus basement	44 × 17	33 × 12	27× 8	22 × 6	19 × 6	17 × 6
50 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	17 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	22 × 6	17 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	28× 9	21 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	27 × 8	20 × 6	16 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	32 × 11	24 × 7	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—plus basement	38 × 14	28 × 9	23 × 6	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	35 × 13	27 × 8	21 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	41 × 15	31 × 10	24 × 7	20 × 6	17 × 6	15 × 6
3 story—plus basement	47 × 18	35 × 12	28 × 9	23 × 7	20 × 6	17 × 6
70 psf	1 story—slab-on-grade	19 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—with crawl space	25 × 7	18 × 6	15 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
1 story—plus basement	30 × 10	23 × 6	18 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—slab-on-grade	29 × 9	22 × 6	17 × 6	14 × 6	12 × 6	12 × 6
2 story—with crawl space	34 × 12	26 × 8	21 × 6	17 × 6	15 × 6	13 × 6
2 story—plus basement	40 × 15	30 × 10	24 × 7	20 × 6	17 × 6	15 × 6
3 story—slab-on-grade	38 × 14	28 × 9	23 × 6	19 × 6	16 × 6	14 × 6
3 story—with crawl space	43 × 16	32 × 11	26 × 8	21 × 6	18 × 6	16 × 6
3 story—plus basement	49 × 19	37 × 13	29 × 10	24 × 7	21 × 6	18 × 6

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6 N/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.9 N/m2.

a.	Interpolation allowed. Extrapolation is not allowed.

b.	Based on 32-foot-wide house with load-bearing center wall that carries half of the tributary attic, and floor framing. For every 2 feet of adjustment to the width of the house add or subtract 2 inches of footing width and 1 inch of footing thickness (but not less than 6 inches thick).

FIGURE 403.1(1)

CONCRETE AND MASONRY FOUNDATION DETAILS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254.

FIGURE R403.1(2)

PERMANENT WOOD FOUNDATION BASEMENT WALL SECTION

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254 mm.

FIGURE R403.1(3)

PERMANENT WOOD FOUNDATION CRAWL SPACE SECTION

R403.1.1 Minimum size.

The minimum width, W, and thickness, T, for concrete footings shall be in accordance with Tables R403.1(1) through R403.1(3) and Figure R403.1(1) as applicable. Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings shall also be required to provide adequate resistance to uplift and overturn of the building as determined from Table R401.1 and Section R403.1.2 or as calculated using engineered design in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building. The footing width shall be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Footing projections, P, shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. Footing thickness and projection for fireplaces shall be in accordance with Section R1001.2. The size of footings supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).

R403.1.2 Resistance to uplift.

Uplift resistance of common foundations are given in Table R403.1.2. Uplift resistance of these foundations may be increased by increasing the size of the concrete footing. When determining the modified uplift resistance the added weight shall be reduced by multiplying by a factor of 0.6. Other foundation systems shall be engineered in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building.

TABLE R403.1.2

FOUNDATION UPLIFT (ASD) DESIGN DETAILS

FOOTING	TYPE	T
(inches)
	W
(inches)
	SLAB/WALL1	RESISTANCE
(plf)
	NOTES
A	Mono	20	12	6	502	3
Mono	20	16	6	585	3
B	Mono Interior	20	12	13	796	3
Mono Interior	20	16	13	879	3
C	12″ Stem/Joist	10	20	228	436	1, 2, 3
D	Mono	20	12	6	502	—
Mono	20	16	6	585	—
E	Mono Interior	20	12	13	796	—
Mono Interior	20	16	13	879	—
F	Stem/Joist	10	20	—	208	2, 3
G	Stem/Slab	10	20	6	460	3
H	Stem/Slab	10	12	6	377	3
Stem/Slab	10	20	6	460	3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

1.	Tributary width of 31/2" slab or weight of stemwall and bond beam.

2.	First floor dead load multiplied by 0.6 may also be included.

3.	All footing dowel bars shall be same size as wall steel, shall have a standard 90-degree hook, and shall be embedded a minimum of 6 inches. Dowel bars shall lap vertical wall reinforcement a minimum of 25 inches.

R403.1.3

Reserved.

R403.1.4 Minimum depth.

Exterior footings shall be placed not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below the finished grade of ground surface. Where applicable, the depth of footings shall also conform to Section R403.1.4.1.

R403.1.4.1 Frost protection.

Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:

1.	Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.(1).

2.	Constructed in accordance with Section R403.3.

3.	Constructed in accordance with ASCE 32.

4.	Erected on solid rock.

Exceptions:

1.	Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 600 square feet (56 m2) or less, of light-frame construction, with an eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less shall not be required.

2.	Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 400 square feet (37 m2) or less, of other than light-frame construction, with an eave height of 10 feet (3048 mm) or less shall not be required.

3.	Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below the frost line.

Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is permanent.

R403.1.5 Slope.

The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or where the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).

R403.1.6 Foundation anchorage.

Wood sill plates and wood walls supported directly on continuous foundations shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this section.

Cold-formed steel framing shall be anchored directly to the foundation or fastened to wood sill plates in accordance with AISI S230. Wood sill plates supporting cold-formed steel framing shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with this section.

Wood sole plates at all exterior walls on monolithic slabs, wood sole plates of braced wall panels at building interiors on monolithic slabs and all wood sill plates shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with the AWC WFCM. Sill plates and sole plates shall be protected against decay and termites where required by Sections R317 and R318.

R403.1.7 Footings on or adjacent to slopes.

The placement of buildings and structures on or adjacent to slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3-percent slope) shall conform to Sections R403.1.7.1 through R403.1.7.4.

R403.1.7.1 Building clearances from ascending slopes.

In general, buildings below slopes shall be set a sufficient distance from the slope to provide protection from slope drainage, erosion and shallow failures. Except as provided in Section R403.1.7.4 and Figure R403.1.7.1, the following criteria will be assumed to provide this protection. Where the existing slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100- percent slope), the toe of the slope shall be assumed to be at the intersection of a horizontal plane drawn from the top of the foundation and a plane drawn tangent to the slope at an angle of 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal. Where a retaining wall is constructed at the toe of the slope, the height of the slope shall be measured from the top of the wall to the top of the slope.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R403.1.7.1

FOUNDATION CLEARANCE FROM SLOPES

R403.1.7.2 Footing setback from descending slope surfaces.

Footings on or adjacent to slope surfaces shall be founded in material with an embedment and setback from the slope surface sufficient to provide vertical and lateral support for the footing without detrimental settlement. Except as provided for in Section R403.1.7.4 and Figure R403.1.7.1, the following setback is deemed adequate to meet the criteria. Where the slope is steeper than one unit vertical in one unit horizontal (100-percent slope), the required setback shall be measured from an imaginary plane 45 degrees (0.79 rad) to the horizontal, projected upward from the toe of the slope.

R403.1.7.3 Foundation elevation.

On graded sites, the top of any exterior foundation shall extend above the elevation of the street gutter at point of discharge or the inlet of an approved drainage device a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) plus 2 percent. Alternate elevations are permitted subject to the approval of the building official, provided it can be demonstrated that required drainage to the point of discharge and away from the structure is provided at all locations on the site.

R403.1.7.4 Alternate setbacks and clearances.

Alternate setbacks and clearances are permitted, subject to the approval of the building official. The building official is permitted to require an investigation and recommendation of a qualified engineer to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied. Such an investigation shall include consideration of material, height of slope, slope gradient, load intensity and erosion characteristics of slope material.

R403.1.8 Foundations on expansive soils.

Foundation and floor slabs for buildings located on expansive soils shall be designed in accordance with Section 1808.6 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

Exception: Slab-on-ground and other foundation systems which have performed adequately in soil conditions similar to those encountered at the building site are permitted subject to the approval of the building official.

R403.1.8.1 Expansive soils classifications.

Soils meeting all four of the following provisions shall be considered expansive, except that tests to show compliance with Items 1, 2 and 3 shall not be required if the test prescribed in Item 4 is conducted:

1.	Plasticity Index (PI) of 15 or greater, determined in accordance with ASTM D4318.

2.	More than 10 percent of the soil particles pass a No. 200 sieve (75 µm), determined in accordance with ASTM D422.

3.	More than 10 percent of the soil particles are less than 5 micrometers in size, determined in accordance with ASTM D422.

4.	Expansion Index greater than 20, determined in accordance with ASTM D4829.

R403.2 Footings for wood foundations.

Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Gravel shall be washed and well graded. The maximum size stone shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Gravel shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Sand shall be coarse, not smaller than 1/16-inch (1.6 mm) grains and shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Crushed stone shall have a maximum size of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm).

R403.3 Frost-protected shallow foundations.

For buildings where the monthly mean temperature of the building is maintained at a minimum of 64°F (18°C), footings are not required to extend below the frost line when protected from frost by insulation in accordance with Figure R403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1). Foundations protected from frost in accordance with Figure R403.3(1) and Table R403.3(1) shall not be used for unheated spaces such as porches, utility rooms, garages and carports, and shall not be attached to basements or crawl spaces that are not maintained at a minimum monthly mean temperature of 64°F (18°C).

Materials used below grade for the purpose of insulating footings against frost shall be labeled as complying with ASTM C578.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	See Table R403.3(1) for required dimensions and R-values for vertical and horizontal insulation and minimum footing depth.

FIGURE R403.3(1)

INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS IN HEATED BUILDINGS

TABLE R403.3(1)

MINIMUM FOOTING DEPTH AND INSULATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS IN HEATED BUILDINGSa

AIR FREEZING
INDEX
(°F-days)b	MINIMUM FOOTING
DEPTH, D
(inches)	VERTICAL
INSULATION
R-VALUEc, d	HORIZONTAL INSULATION
R-VALUEc, e
	HORIZONTAL INSULATION DIMENSIONS
PER FIGURE R403.3(1) (inches)

Along walls	At corners	A	B	C
1,500 or less	12	4.5	Not required	Not required	Not required	Not required	Not required
2,000	14	5.6	Not required	Not required	Not required	Not required	Not required
2,500	16	6.7	1.7	4.9	12	24	40
3,000	16	7.8	6.5	8.6	12	24	40
3,500	16	9.0	8.0	11.2	24	30	60
4,000	16	10.1	10.5	13.1	24	36	60

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, °C = [(°F) - 32]/1.8.

a.	Insulation requirements are for protection against frost damage in heated buildings. Greater values may be required to meet energy conservation standards.

b.	See Figure R403.3(2) or Table R403.3(2) for Air Freezing Index values.

c.	Insulation materials shall provide the stated minimum R-values under long-term exposure to moist, below-ground conditions in freezing climates. The following R-values shall be used to determine insulation thicknesses required for this application: Type II expanded polystyrene-2.4R per inch; Type IV extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch; Type VI extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch; Type IX expanded polystyrene-3.2R per inch; Type X extruded polystyrene-4.5R per inch.

d.	Vertical insulation shall be expanded polystyrene insulation or extruded polystyrene insulation.

e.	Horizontal insulation shall be expanded polystyrene insulation or extruded polystyrene insulation.

For SI: °C = [(°F) -32]/1.8.

Note: The air-freezing index is defined as cumulative degree days below 32°F. It is used as a measure of the combined magnitude and duration of air temperature below freezing. The index was computed over a 12-month period (July-June) for each of the 3,044 stations used in the above analysis. Dates from the 1951-80 period were fitted to a Weibull probability distribution to produce an estimate of the 100-year return period.

FIGURE R403.3(2)

AIR-FREEZING INDEX AN ESTIMATE OF THE 100-YEAR RETURN PERIOD

TABLE R403.3(2)

AIR-FREEZING INDEX FOR US LOCATIONS BY COUNTY

STATE	AIR-FREEZING INDEX
1500 or less	2000	2500	3000	3500	4000
Alabama	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Alaska	Ketchikan
Gateway,
Prince of Wales-
Outer Ketchikan
(CA), Sitka,
Wrangell-
Petersburg (CA)	—	Aleutians West (CA),
Haines, Juneau,
Skagway-Hoonah-
Angoon (CA), Yakutat
	—	—	All counties
not listed

Arizona	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Arkansas	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
California	All counties
not listed
	Nevada, Sierra	—	—	—	—
Colorado	All counties
not listed
	Archuleta, Custer,
Fremont, Huerfano,
Las Animas, Ouray,
Pitkin, San Miguel
	Clear Creek, Conejos,
Costilla, Dolores, Eagle,
La Plata, Park, Routt,
San Juan, Summit
	Alamosa, Grand,
Jackson, Larimer,
Moffat,
Rio Blanco,
Rio Grande	Chaffee, Gunnison,
Lake, Saguache
	Hinsdale,
Mineral

Connecticut	All counties
not listed
	Hartford,
Litchfield
	—	—	—	—
Delaware	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
District of
Columbia
	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Florida	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Georgia	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Hawaii	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Idaho	All counties
not listed
	Adams, Bannock, Blaine,
Clearwater, Idaho,
Lincoln, Oneida, Power,
Valley, Washington
	Bingham,
Bonneville, Camas,
Caribou, Elmore,
Franklin, Jefferson,
Madison, Teton	Bear Lake, Butte,
Custer, Fremont,
Lemhi	Clark	—
Illinois	All counties
not listed
	Boone, Bureau, Cook,
Dekalb, DuPage, Fulton,
Grundy, Henderson,
Henry, Iroquois,
Jo Daviess, Kane,
Kankakee, Kendall,
Knox, La Salle, Lake,
Lee, Livingston,
Marshall, Mason,
McHenry, McLean,
Mercer, Peoria, Putnam,
Rock Island,
Stark, Tazewell, Warren,
Whiteside, Will,
Woodford	Carroll, Ogle,
Stephenson,
Winnebago	—	—	—
Indiana	All counties
not listed
	Allen, Benton, Cass,
Fountain, Fulton,
Howard, Jasper,
Kosciusko, La Porte,
Lake, Marshall, Miami,
Newton, Porter, Pulaski,
Starke, Steuben, Tippecanoe,
Tipton, Wabash,
Warren, White	—	—	—	—
Iowa	Appanoose,
Davis,
Fremont, Lee,
Van Buren
	All counties
not listed
	Allamakee, Black
Hawk, Boone, Bremer,
Buchanan, Buena Vista,
Butler, Calhoun,
Cerro Gordo, Cherokee,
Chickasaw, Clay,
Clayton, Delaware,
Dubuque, Fayette,
Floyd, Franklin,
Grundy, Hamilton,
Hancock, Hardin,
Humboldt, Ida,
Jackson, Jasper, Jones,
Linn, Marshall,
Palo Alto, Plymouth,
Pocahontas, Poweshiek,
Sac, Sioux, Story,
Tama, Webster,
Winnebago, Woodbury,
Worth, Wright
	Dickinson,
Emmet, Howard,
Kossuth, Lyon,
Mitchell,
O'Brien, Osceola,
Winneshiek
	—	—
Kansas	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Kentucky	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Louisiana	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Maine	York	Knox, Lincoln,
Sagadahoc
	Androscoggin,
Cumberland, Hancock,
Kennebec, Waldo,
Washington
	Aroostook,
Franklin, Oxford,
Penobscot,
Piscataquis,
Somerset	—	—
Maryland	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Massachusetts	All counties
not listed
	Berkshire, Franklin,
Hampden,
Worcester	—	—	—	—
Michigan	Berrien,
Branch, Cass,
Kalamazoo,
Macomb, Ottawa,
St. Clair,
St. Joseph
	All counties
not listed
	Alger, Charlevoix,
Cheboygan, Chippewa,
Crawford, Delta,
Emmet, Iosco,
Kalkaska, Lake, Luce,
Mackinac, Menominee,
Missaukee,
Montmorency,
Ogemaw, Osceola,
Otsego, Roscommon,
Schoolcraft, Wexford	Baraga,
Dickinson, Iron,
Keweenaw,
Marquette
	Gogebic,
Houghton,
Ontonagon	—
Minnesota	—	—	Houston, Winona	All counties
not listed
	Aitkin,
Big Stone,
Carlton,
Crow Wing,
Douglas, Itasca,
Kanabec, Lake,
Morrison, Pine,
Pope, Stearns,
Stevens, Swift,
Todd, Wadena
	Becker,
Beltrami, Cass,
Clay, Clearwater,
Grant, Hubbard,
Kittson,
Koochiching,
Lake of the Woods,
Mahnomen,
Marshall, Norman,
Otter Tail,
Pennington, Polk,
Red Lake, Roseau,
St. Louis, Traverse,
Wilkin

Mississippi	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Missouri	All counties
not listed
	Atchison, Mercer,
Nodaway, Putnam
	—	—	—	—
Montana	Mineral	Broadwater,
Golden Valley,
Granite, Lake,
Lincoln,
Missoula,
Ravalli, Sanders,
Sweet Grass	Big Horn, Carbon,
Jefferson,
Judith Basin,
Lewis and Clark,
Meagher,
Musselshell,
Powder River,
Powell, Silver Bow,
Stillwater,
Westland
	Carter, Cascade,
Deer Lodge,
Falcon, Fergus,
Flathead, Gallanting,
Glacier, Madison,
Park, Petroleum,
Ponder, Rosebud,
Teton, Treasure,
Yellowstone	Beaverhead,
Blaine,
Chouteau, Custer,
Dawson, Garfield,
Liberty, McCone,
Prairie, Toole,
Wibaux	Daniels, Hill,
Phillips, Richland,
Roosevelt,
Sheridan, Valley

Nebraska	Adams, Banner,
Chase, Cheyenne,
Clay, Deuel, Dundy,
Fillmore, Franklin,
Frontier, Furnas,
Gage, Garden,
Gosper, Harlan,
Hayes, Hitchcock,
Jefferson, Kimball,
Morrill, Nemaha,
Nuckolls, Pawnee,
Perkins, Phelps,
Red Willow,
Richardson, Saline,
Scotts Bluff, Seward,
Thayer, Webster
	All counties
not listed
	Boyd, Burt, Cedar,
Cuming, Dakota,
Dixon, Dodge,
Knox, Thurston
	—	—	—
Nevada	All counties
not listed
	Elko, Eureka,
Nye, Washoe,
White Pine	—	—	—	—
New
Hampshire
	—	All counties
not listed
	—	—	—	Carroll, Coos,
Grafton

New Jersey	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
New Mexico	All counties
not listed
	Rio Arriba	Colfax, Mora, Taos	—	—	—
New York	Albany, Bronx,
Cayuga, Columbia,
Cortland, Dutchess,
Genessee, Kings,
Livingston, Monroe,
Nassau, New York,
Niagara, Onondaga,
Ontario, Orange,
Orleans, Putnam,
Queens, Richmond,
Rockland, Seneca,
Suffolk, Wayne,
Westchester, Yates	All counties
not listed
	Clinton, Essex,
Franklin, Hamilton,
Herkimer,
Jefferson, Lewis,
St. Lawrence,
Warren
	—	—	—
North
Carolina
	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
North
Dakota
	—	—	—	Billings,
Bowman
	Adams, Dickey,
Golden Valley,
Hettinger, LaMoure,
Oliver, Ransom,
Sargent, Sioux,
Slope, Stark
	All counties
not listed

Ohio	All counties not
listed
	Ashland, Crawford,
Defiance, Holmes,
Huron, Knox,
Licking, Morrow,
Paulding, Putnam,
Richland, Seneca,
Williams	—	—	—	—
Oklahoma	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Oregon	All counties
not listed
	Baker, Crook, Grant,
Harney
	—	—	—	—
Pennsylvania	All counties
not listed
	Berks, Blair,
Bradford, Cambria,
Cameron, Centre,
Clarion, Clearfield,
Clinton, Crawford,
Elk, Forest,
Huntingdon,
Indiana, Jefferson,
Lackawanna,
Lycoming, McKean,
Pike, Potter,
Susquehanna, Tioga,
Venango, Warren,
Wayne, Wyoming
	—	—	—	—
Rhode Island	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
South
Carolina
	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
South Dakota	—	Bennett, Custer,
Fall River,
Lawrence, Mellette,
Shannon, Todd,
Tripp	Bon Homme,
Charles Mix,
Davison, Douglas,
Gregory, Jackson,
Jones, Lyman	All counties
not listed
	Beadle, Brookings,
Brown, Campbell,
Codington, Corson,
Day, Deuel,
Edmunds, Faulk,
Grant, Hamlin,
Kingsbury,
Marshall,
McPherson,
Perkins, Roberts,
Spink, Walworth	—
Tennessee	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Texas	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Utah	All counties
not listed
	Box Elder,
Morgan, Weber
	Garfield, Salt Lake,
Summit
	Carbon, Daggett,
Duchesne, Rich,
Sanpete, Uintah,
Wasatch
	—	—
Vermont	—	Bennington,
Grand Isle,
Rutland, Windham	Addison,
Chittenden,
Franklin, Orange,
Washington,
Windsor	Caledonia, Essex,
Lamoille, Orleans
	—	—
Virginia	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Washington	All counties
not listed
	Chelan, Douglas,
Ferry, Okanogan
	—	—	—	—
West
Virginia
	All counties	—	—	—	—	—
Wisconsin	—	Kenosha,
Kewaunee, Racine,
Sheboygan,
Walworth
	All counties
not listed
	Ashland, Barron,
Burnett, Chippewa,
Clark, Dunn,
Eau Claire,
Florence, Forest,
Iron, Jackson,
La Crosse,
Langlade,
Marathon, Monroe,
Pepin, Polk,
Portage, Price, Rust,
St. Croix, Taylor,
Trempealeau,
Vilas, Wood
	Bayfield, Douglas,
Lincoln, Oneida,
Sawyer, Washburn	—
Wyoming	Goshen, Platte	Converse, Crook,
Laramie, Niobrara
	Campbell, Carbon,
Hot Springs,
Johnson, Natrona,
Sheridan, Uinta,
Weston	Albany, Big Horn,
Park, Washakie
	Fremont, Teton	Lincoln,
Sublette,
Sweetwater

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	See Table R403.3(1) for required dimensions and R-values for vertical and horizontal insulation.

FIGURE R403.3(3)

INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS ADJACENT TO UNHEATED SLAB-ON-GROUND STRUCTURE

FIGURE R403.3(4)

INSULATION PLACEMENT FOR FROST-PROTECTED FOOTINGS ADJACENT TO HEATED STRUCTURE

R403.3.1 Foundations adjoining frost-protected shallow foundations.

Foundations that adjoin frost-protected shallow foundations shall be protected from frost in accordance with Section R403.1.4.

R403.3.1.1 Attachment to unheated slab-on-ground structure.

Vertical wall insulation and horizontal insulation of frost-protected shallow foundations that adjoin a slab-on-ground foundation that does not have a monthly mean temperature maintained at a minimum of 64°F (18°C) shall be in accordance with Figure R403.3(3) and Table R403.3(1). Vertical wall insulation shall extend between the frost-protected shallow foundation and the adjoining slab foundation. Required horizontal insulation shall be continuous under the adjoining slab foundation and through any foundation walls adjoining the frost- protected shallow foundation. Where insulation passes through a foundation wall, it shall be either of a type complying with this section and having bearing capacity equal to or greater than the structural loads imposed by the building, or the building shall be designed and constructed using beams, lintels, cantilevers or other means of transferring building loads such that the structural loads of the building do not bear on the insulation.

R403.3.1.2 Attachment to heated structure.

Where a frost-protected shallow foundation abuts a structure that has a monthly mean temperature maintained at a minimum of 64°F (18°C), horizontal insulation and vertical wall insulation shall not be required between the frost-protected shallow foundation and the adjoining structure. Where the frost-protected shallow foundation abuts the heated structure, the horizontal insulation and vertical wall insulation shall extend along the adjoining foundation in accordance with Figure R403.3(4) a distance of not less than Dimension A in Table R403.3(1).

Exception: Where the frost-protected shallow foundation abuts the heated structure to form an inside corner, vertical insulation extending along the adjoining foundation is not required.

R403.3.2 Protection of horizontal insulation below ground.

Horizontal insulation placed less than 12 inches (305 mm) below the ground surface or that portion of horizontal insulation extending outward more than 24 inches (610 mm) from the foundation edge shall be protected against damage by use of a concrete slab or asphalt paving on the ground surface directly above the insulation or by cementitious board, plywood rated for below-ground use, or other approved materials placed below ground, directly above the top surface of the insulation.

R403.3.3 Drainage.

Final grade shall be sloped in accordance with Section R401.3. In other than Group I Soils, as detailed in Table R405.1, gravel or crushed stone beneath horizontal insulation below ground shall drain to daylight or into an approved sewer system.

R403.3.4 Termite protection.

The use of foam plastic in areas of “very heavy” termite infestation probability shall be in accordance with Section R318.4.

R403.4 Footings for precast concrete foundations.

Footings for precast concrete foundations shall comply with Section R403.4.

TABLE R403.4

MINIMUM DEPTH OF CRUSHED STONE FOOTINGSa (D), (inches)

NUMBER
OF
STORIES	UNIFORM
WALL
LOAD	LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL (psf)
1500	2000	3000	4000
MH, CH, CL, ML	SC, GC, SM, GM, SP, SW	GP, GW	
Wall width (inches)	Wall width (inches)	Wall width (inches)	Wall width (inches)
6	8	10	12	6	8	10	12	6	8	10	12	6	8	10	12
Conventional light-frame construction
1-story	1100 plf	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
2-story	1800 plf	8	6	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
3-story	2900 plf	16	14	12	10	10	8	6	6	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
4-inch brick veneer over light-frame or 8-inch hollow concrete masonry
1-story	1500 plf	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
2-story	2700 plf	14	12	10	8	10	8	6	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
3-story	4000 plf	22	22	20	18	16	14	12	10	10	8	6	4	6	4	4	4
8-inch solid or fully grouted masonry
1-story	2000 plf	10	8	6	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4	6	4	4	4
2-story	3600 plf	20	18	16	16	14	12	10	8	8	6	4	4	6	4	4	4
3-story	5300 plf	32	30	28	26	22	22	20	18	14	12	10	8	10	8	6	4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 plf = 14.6 N/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.9 N/m2.

a.	Linear interpolation of stone depth between wall widths is permitted within each Load-Bearing Value of Soil (psf).

FIGURE R403.4(1)

BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE WITH PRECAST FOUNDATION WALL BEARING ON CRUSHED STONE

FIGURE R403.4(2)

BASEMENT OR CRAWL SPACE WITH PRECAST FOUNDATION WALL ON SPREAD FOOTING

R403.4.1 Crushed stone footings.

Clean crushed stone shall be free from organic, clayey or silty soils. Crushed stone shall be angular in nature and meet ASTM C33, with the maximum size stone not to exceed 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) and the minimum stone size not to be smaller than 1/16 inch (1.6 mm). Crushed stone footings for precast foundations shall be installed in accordance with Figure R403.4(1) and Table R403.4. Crushed stone footings shall be consolidated using a vibratory plate in a maximum of 8-inch (203 mm) lifts.

R403.4.2 Concrete footings.

Concrete footings shall be installed in accordance with Section R403.1 and Figure R403.4(2).

SECTION R404
FOUNDATION AND RETAINING WALLS
R404.1 Concrete and masonry foundation walls.

Concrete foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section R404.1.3. Masonry foundation walls shall be selected and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Section R404.1.2.

R404.1.1 Design required.

Concrete or masonry foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice where either of the following conditions exists:

1.	Walls are subject to hydrostatic pressure from ground water.

2.	Walls supporting more than 48 inches (1219 mm) of unbalanced backfill that do not have permanent lateral support at the top or bottom.

TABLE R404.1.1(1)

PLAIN MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLSf

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM
UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTc
(feet)
	PLAIN MASONRYa MINIMUM NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (inches)
Soil classesb
GW, GP, SW
and SP
	GM, GC, SM,
SM-SC and ML
	SC, MH, ML-CL
and inorganic CL

5	4	6 solidd or 8	6 solidd or 8	6 solidd or 8
5	6 solidd or 8	8	10
6	4	6 solidd or 8	6 solidd or 8	6 solidd or 8
5	6 solidd or 8	8	10
6	8	10	12
7	4	6 solidd or 8	8	8
5	6 solidd or 8	10	10
6	10	12	10 solidd
7	12	10 solidd	12 solidd
8	4	6 solidd or 8	6 solidd or 8	8
5	6 solidd or 8	10	12
6	10	12	12 solidd
7	12	12 solidd	Footnote e
8	10 groutd	12 groutd	Footnote e
9	4	6 groutd or 8 solidd or 12	6 groutd or 8 solidd	8 groutd or 10 solidd
5	6 groutd or 10 solidd	8 groutd or 12 solidd	8 groutd
6	8 groutd or 12 solidd	10 groutd	10 groutd
7	10 groutd	10 groutd	12 grout
8	10 groutd	12 grout	Footnote e
9	12 grout	Footnote e	Footnote e

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 Pa.

a.	Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond. Ungrouted hollow masonry units are permitted except where otherwise indicated.

b.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

c.	Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.

d.	Solid indicates solid masonry unit; grout indicates grouted hollow units.

e.	Wall construction shall be in accordance with either Table R404.1.1(2), Table R404.1.1(3), Table R404.1.1(4), or a design shall be provided.

f.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.1(2)

8-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d ≥ 5 INCHESa, c, f

MAXIMUM
UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT	HEIGHT OF
UNBALANCED
BACKFILLe	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)b, c
Soil classes and lateral soil loadd (psf per foot below grade)
GW, GP, SW and SP soils
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML soils
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils
60

6 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
6 feet 8 inches	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
6 feet	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#5 at 48
7 feet 4 inches	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
8 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
6 feet	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#5 at 48
7 feet	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
8 feet	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 32
8 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6 feet	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7 feet	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
8 feet 8 inches	#6 at 48	#6 at 32	#6 at 24
9 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6 feet	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7 feet	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
8 feet	#6 at 48	#6 at 40	#6 at 24
9 feet 4 inches	#6 at 40	#6 at 24	#6 at 16
10 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#4 at 48
5 feet	#4 at 48	#4 at 48	#5 at 48
6 feet	#4 at 48	#5 at 48	#6 at 48
7 feet	#5 at 48	#6 at 48	#6 at 32
8 feet	#6 at 48	#6 at 32	#6 at 24
9 feet	#6 at 40	#6 at 24	#6 at 16
10 feet	#6 at 32	#6 at 16	#6 at 16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/mm.

a.	Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond.

b.	Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall shall be permitted provided the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.

c.	Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 minimum. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be not less than 5 inches.

d.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.

e.	Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.

f.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.1(3)

10-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d ≥ 6.75 INCHESa, c, f

MAXIMUM
UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT	HEIGHT OF
UNBALANCED
BACKFILLe	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)b, c
Soil classes and later soil loadd (psf per foot below grade)
GW, GP, SW and SP soils
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML soils
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils
60

6 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet 8 inches	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet 4 inches	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
8 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
8 feet	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#6 at 48
8 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
8 feet 8 inches	#5 at 56	#6 at 48	#6 at 32
9 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#6 at 56
8 feet	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#6 at 40
9 feet 4 inches	#6 at 56	#6 at 40	#6 at 24
10 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
5 feet	#4 at 56	#4 at 56	#4 at 56
6 feet	#4 at 56	#5 at 56	#5 at 56
7 feet	#5 at 56	#6 at 56	#6 at 48
8 feet	#5 at 56	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
9 feet	#6 at 56	#6 at 40	#6 at 24
10 feet	#6 at 48	#6 at 32	#6 at 24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/mm.

a.	Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond.

b.	Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall shall be permitted provided the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.

c.	Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 minimum. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be not less than 6.75 inches.

d.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.

e.	Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground level. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and is in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.

f.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.1(4)

12-INCH MASONRY FOUNDATION WALLS WITH REINFORCING WHERE d ≥ 8.75 INCHESa, c, f

MAXIMUM
UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT	HEIGHT OF
UNBALANCED
BACKFILLe	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT AND SPACING (INCHES)b, c
Soil classes and lateral soil loadd (psf per foot below grade)
GW, GP, SW and SP soils
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML soils
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL soils
60

6 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet 8 inches	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet 4 inches	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8 feet	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#6 at 64
8 feet 8 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8 feet 8 inches	#5 at 72	#7 at 72	#6 at 48
9 feet 4 inches	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#6 at 72
8 feet	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#6 at 56
9 feet 4 inches	#6 at 72	#6 at 48	#6 at 40
10 feet	4 feet (or less)	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
5 feet	#4 at 72	#4 at 72	#4 at 72
6 feet	#4 at 72	#5 at 72	#5 at 72
7 feet	#4 at 72	#6 at 72	#6 at 72
8 feet	#5 at 72	#6 at 72	#6 at 48
9 feet	#6 at 72	#6 at 56	#6 at 40
10 feet	#6 at 64	#6 at 40	#6 at 32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.157 kPa/mm.

a.	Mortar shall be Type M or S and masonry shall be laid in running bond.

b.	Alternative reinforcing bar sizes and spacings having an equivalent cross-sectional area of reinforcement per lineal foot of wall shall be permitted provided the spacing of the reinforcement does not exceed 72 inches.

c.	Vertical reinforcement shall be Grade 60 minimum. The distance, d, from the face of the soil side of the wall to the center of vertical reinforcement shall be not less than 8.75 inches.

d.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System and design lateral soil loads are for moist conditions without hydrostatic pressure. Refer to Table R405.1.

e.	Unbalanced backfill height is the difference in height between the exterior finish ground level and the lower of the top of the concrete footing that supports the foundation wall or the interior finish ground levels. Where an interior concrete slab-on-grade is provided and in contact with the interior surface of the foundation wall, measurement of the unbalanced backfill height is permitted to be measured from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the interior concrete slab is permitted.

f.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

R404.1.2 Design of masonry foundation walls.

Masonry foundation walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section or in accordance with the provisions of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5. When TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5 or the provisions of this section are used to design masonry foundation walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having authority.

TABLE R404.1.2(1)

MINIMUM HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT FOR CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSa, b

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	LOCATION OF HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT
≤ 8	One No. 4 bar within 12 inches of the top of the wall story and one No. 4 bar near mid-height of the wall story.
> 8	One No. 4 bar within 12 inches of the top of the wall story and one No. 4 bar near third points in the wall story.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Horizontal reinforcement requirements are for reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi and concrete with a minimum concrete compressive strength of 2,500 psi.

b.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for foundation walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

TABLE R404.1.2(2)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, g, h, i, j, k

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTf
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	6 @ 39	6 @ 48
6	5 @ 39	6 @ 48	6 @ 35
7	6 @ 48	6 @ 34	6 @ 25
8	6 @ 39	6 @ 25	6 @ 18
9	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	5 @ 37	6 @ 48
6	5 @ 36	6 @ 44	6 @ 32
7	6 @ 47	6 @ 30	6 @ 22
8	6 @ 34	6 @ 22	6 @ 16
9	6 @ 27	6 @ 17	DR
10	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	5 @ 35	6 @ 48
6	6 @ 48	6 @ 41	6 @ 30
7	6 @ 43	6 @ 28	6 @ 20
8	6 @ 31	6 @ 20	DR
9	6 @ 24	6 @ 15	DR
10	6 @ 19	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NR = Not required.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.	NR indicates no vertical wall reinforcement is required, except for 6-inch-nominal walls formed with stay-in-place forming systems in which case vertical reinforcement shall be No. 4@48 inches on center.

h.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.	See Table R608.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.

j.	DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.

k.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(3)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 8-INCH (203 mm) NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, f, h, i, j

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTg
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	6 @ 37
7	NR	6 @ 36	6 @ 35
8	6 @ 41	6 @ 35	6 @ 26
9	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	6 @ 35
7	NR	6 @ 35	6 @ 32
8	6 @ 36	6 @ 32	6 @ 23
9	6 @ 35	6 @ 25	6 @ 18
10	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	6 @ 35
7	NR	6 @ 35	6 @ 29
8	6 @ 35	6 @ 29	6 @ 21
9	6 @ 34	6 @ 22	6 @ 16
10	6 @ 27	6 @ 17	6 @ 13

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NR = Not required.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi, concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

f.	Interpolation is not permitted.

g.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.	See Table R608.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.

j.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(4)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 10-INCH NOMINAL FLAT CONCRETE BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, f, h, i, j

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTg
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	NR
7	NR	NR	NR
8	6 @ 48	6 @ 35	6 @ 28
9	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	NR
7	NR	NR	6 @ 31
8	NR	6 @ 31	6 @ 28
9	6 @ 37	6 @ 28	6 @ 24
10	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	NR
7	NR	NR	6 @ 28
8	NR	6 @ 28	6 @ 28
9	6 @ 33	6 @ 28	6 @ 21
10	6 @ 28	6 @ 23	6 @ 17

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NR = Not required.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

f.	Interpolation is not permitted.

g.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.	See Table R608.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.

j.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(5)

MINIMUM VERTICAL WALL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH WAFFLE-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, g, h, i, j

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTf
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 46	6 @ 39
5	4 @ 45	5 @ 46	6 @ 47
6	5 @ 45	6 @ 40	DR
7	6 @ 44	DR	DR
8	6 @ 32	DR	DR
9	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 46	4 @ 37
5	4 @ 42	5 @ 43	6 @ 44
6	5 @ 41	6 @ 37	DR
7	6 @ 39	DR	DR
> 8	DRi	DR	DR
10	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 46	4 @ 35
5	4 @ 40	5 @ 40	6 @ 41
6	5 @ 38	6 @ 34	DR
7	6 @ 36	DR	DR
> 8	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

h.	See Table R608.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of waffle-grid walls.

i.	DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.

j.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(6)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 8-INCH WAFFLE-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, f, h, i, j, k

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTg
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	5 @ 48	5 @ 46
6	5 @ 48	5 @ 43	6 @ 45
7	5 @ 46	6 @ 43	6 @ 31
8	6 @ 48	6 @ 32	6 @ 23
9	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	5 @ 47	5 @ 46
6	5 @ 46	5 @ 39	6 @ 41
7	5 @ 42	6 @ 38	6 @ 28
8	6 @ 44	6 @ 28	6 @ 20
9	6 @ 34	6 @ 21	DR
10	4	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	5 @ 46	5 @ 44
6	5 @ 46	5 @ 37	6 @ 38
7	5 @ 38	6 @ 35	6 @ 25
8	6 @ 39	6 @ 25	DR
9	6 @ 30	DR	DR
10	6 @ 24	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NR = Not required.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 (420 MPa) and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	NR indicates no vertical reinforcement is required.

e.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

f.	Interpolation shall not be permitted.

g.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.	See Section R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

i.	See Table R608.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of waffle-grid walls.

j.	DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.

k.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(7)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH (152 mm) SCREEN-GRID BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, g, h, i, j

MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)	MAXIMUM UNBALANCED
BACKFILL HEIGHTf
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

8	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 48	5 @ 43
5	4 @ 48	5 @ 48	5 @ 37
6	5 @ 48	6 @ 45	6 @ 32
7	6 @ 48	DR	DR
8	6 @ 36	DR	DR
9	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 48	4 @ 41
5	4 @ 48	5 @ 48	6 @ 48
6	5 @ 45	6 @ 41	DR
7	6 @ 43	DR	DR
> 8	DR	DR	DR
10	4	4 @ 48	4 @ 48	4 @ 39
5	4 @ 44	5 @ 44	6 @ 46
6	5 @ 42	6 @ 38	DR
7	6 @ 40	DR	DR
> 8	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi, concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi and vertical reinforcement being located at the centerline of the wall. See Section R404.1.3.3.7.2.

c.	Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches (i.e., 12, 24, 36 and 48) that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the basement wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

g.	See Sections R404.1.3.2 for minimum reinforcement required for basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

h.	See Table R608.3 for thicknesses and dimensions of screen-grid walls.

i.	DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.

j.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(8)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-, 8-, 10- AND 12-INCH NOMINAL FLAT BASEMENT WALLSb, c, d, e, f, h, i, k, n, o

MAXIMUM
UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT
(feet)
	MAXIMUM
UNBALANCED
BACKFILL
HEIGHTg
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)
Soil classesa and design lateral soil (psf per foot of depth)
GW, GP, SW, SP
30
	GM, GC, SM, SM-SC and ML
45
	SC, ML-CL and inorganic CL
60

Minimum nominal wall thickness (inches)
6	8	10	12	6	8	10	12	6	8	10	12
5	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
6	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NRl	NR	NR	4 @ 35	NRl	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	NR	NR	5 @ 48	NR	NR	NR	5 @ 36	NR	NR	NR
7	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	5 @ 47	NR	NR	NR
6	NR	NR	NR	NR	5 @ 42	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 43	5 @ 48	NRl	NR
7	5 @ 46	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 42	5 @ 46	NRl	NR	6 @ 34	6 @ 48	NR	NR
8	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	4 @ 38	NRl	NR	NR	5 @ 43	NR	NR	NR
6	4 @ 37	NRl	NR	NR	5 @ 37	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 37	5 @ 43	NRl	NR
7	5 @ 40	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 37	5 @ 41	NRl	NR	6 @ 34	6 @ 43	NR	NR
8	6 @ 43	5 @ 47	NRl	NR	6 @ 34	6 @ 43	NR	NR	6 @ 27	6 @ 32	6 @ 44	NR
9	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	4 @ 35	NRl	NR	NR	5 @ 40	NR	NR	NR
6	4 @ 34	NRl	NR	NR	6 @ 48	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 36	6 @ 39	NRl	NR
7	5 @ 36	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 34	5 @ 37	NR	NR	6 @ 33	6 @ 38	5 @ 37	NRl
8	6 @ 38	5 @ 41	NRl	NR	6 @ 33	6 @ 38	5 @ 37	NRl	6 @ 24	6 @ 29	6 @ 39	4 @ 48m
9	6 @ 34	6 @ 46	NR	NR	6 @ 26	6 @ 30	6 @ 41	NR	6 @ 19	6 @ 23	6 @ 30	6 @ 39
10	4	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR	NR
5	NR	NR	NR	NR	4 @ 33	NRl	NR	NR	5 @ 38	NR	NR	NR
6	5 @ 48	NRl	NR	NR	6 @ 45	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 34	5 @ 37	NR	NR
7	6 @ 47	NR	NR	NR	6 @ 34	6 @ 48	NR	NR	6 @ 30	6 @ 35	6 @ 48	NRl
8	6 @ 34	5 @ 38	NR	NR	6 @ 30	6 @ 34	6 @ 47	NRl	6 @ 22	6 @ 26	6 @ 35	6 @ 45m
9	6 @ 34	6 @ 41	4 @ 48	NRl	6 @ 23	6 @ 27	6 @ 35	4 @ 48m	DR	6 @ 22	6 @ 27	6 @ 34
10	6 @ 28	6 @ 33	6 @ 45	NR	DRj	6 @ 23	6 @ 29	6 @ 38	DR	6 @ 22	6 @ 22	6 @ 28

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per square foot per foot = 0.1571 kPa2/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

NR = Not required.

a.	Soil classes are in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification System. Refer to Table R405.1.

b.	Table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi.

c.	Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R404.1.3.3.7.6 and Table R404.1.2(9).

d.	NR indicates no vertical wall reinforcement is required, except for 6-inch nominal walls formed with stay-in-place forming systems in which case vertical reinforcement shall be No. 4@48 inches on center.

e.	Allowable deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the unsupported height of the basement wall in inches.

f.	Interpolation is not permitted.

g.	Where walls will retain 4 feet or more of unbalanced backfill, they shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling.

h.	Vertical reinforcement shall be located to provide a cover of 11/4 inches measured from the inside face of the wall. The center of the steel shall not vary from the specified location by more than the greater of 10 percent of the wall thickness or 3/8 inch.

i.	Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the inside face of the wall shall be not less than 3/4 inch. Concrete cover for reinforcement measured from the outside face of the wall shall be not less than 11/2 inches for No. 5 bars and smaller, and not less than 2 inches for larger bars.

j.	DR means design is required in accordance with the applicable building code, or where there is no code, in accordance with ACI 318.

k.	Concrete shall have a specified compressive strength, f′c, of not less than 2,500 psi at 28 days, unless a higher strength is required by Footnote l or m.

l.	The minimum thickness is permitted to be reduced 2 inches, provided the minimum specified compressive strength of concrete, f ′c, is 4,000 psi.

m.	A plain concrete wall with a minimum nominal thickness of 12 inches is permitted, provided minimum specified compressive strength of concrete, f ′c, is 3,500 psi.

n.	See Table R608.3 for tolerance from nominal thickness permitted for flat walls.

o.	The use of this table shall be prohibited for soil classifications not shown.

TABLE R404.1.2(9)

MINIMUM SPACING FOR ALTERNATE BAR SIZE AND/OR ALTERNATE GRADE OF STEELa, b, c

BAR SPACING FROM
APPLICABLE TABLE IN
SECTION R404.1.3.2
(inches)
	BAR SIZE FROM APPLICABLE TABLE IN SECTION R404.1.3.2
#4	#5	#6
Alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel desired
Grade 60	Grade 40	Grade 60	Grade 40	Grade 60	Grade 40
#5	#6	#4	#5	#6	#4	#6	#4	#5	#6	#4	#5	#4	#5	#6
Maximum spacing for alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel (inches)
8	12	18	5	8	12	5	11	3	5	8	4	6	2	4	5
9	14	20	6	9	13	6	13	4	6	9	4	6	3	4	6
10	16	22	7	10	15	6	14	4	7	9	5	7	3	5	7
11	17	24	7	11	16	7	16	5	7	10	5	8	3	5	7
12	19	26	8	12	18	8	17	5	8	11	5	8	4	6	8
13	20	29	9	13	19	8	18	6	9	12	6	9	4	6	9
14	22	31	9	14	21	9	20	6	9	13	6	10	4	7	9
15	23	33	10	16	22	10	21	6	10	14	7	11	5	7	10
16	25	35	11	17	23	10	23	7	11	15	7	11	5	8	11
17	26	37	11	18	25	11	24	7	11	16	8	12	5	8	11
18	28	40	12	19	26	12	26	8	12	17	8	13	5	8	12
19	29	42	13	20	28	12	27	8	13	18	9	13	6	9	13
20	31	44	13	21	29	13	28	9	13	19	9	14	6	9	13
21	33	46	14	22	31	14	30	9	14	20	10	15	6	10	14
22	34	48	15	23	32	14	31	9	15	21	10	16	7	10	15
23	36	48	15	24	34	15	33	10	15	22	10	16	7	11	15
24	37	48	16	25	35	15	34	10	16	23	11	17	7	11	16
25	39	48	17	26	37	16	35	11	17	24	11	18	8	12	17
26	40	48	17	27	38	17	37	11	17	25	12	18	8	12	17
27	42	48	18	28	40	17	38	12	18	26	12	19	8	13	18
28	43	48	19	29	41	18	40	12	19	26	13	20	8	13	19
29	45	48	19	30	43	19	41	12	19	27	13	20	9	14	19
30	47	48	20	31	44	19	43	13	20	28	14	21	9	14	20
31	48	48	21	32	45	20	44	13	21	29	14	22	9	15	21
32	48	48	21	33	47	21	45	14	21	30	15	23	10	15	21
33	48	48	22	34	48	21	47	14	22	31	15	23	10	16	22
34	48	48	23	35	48	22	48	15	23	32	15	24	10	16	23
35	48	48	23	36	48	23	48	15	23	33	16	25	11	16	23
36	48	48	24	37	48	23	48	15	24	34	16	25	11	17	24
37	48	48	25	38	48	24	48	16	25	35	17	26	11	17	25
38	48	48	25	39	48	25	48	16	25	36	17	27	12	18	25
39	48	48	26	40	48	25	48	17	26	37	18	27	12	18	26
40	48	48	27	41	48	26	48	17	27	38	18	28	12	19	27
41	48	48	27	42	48	26	48	18	27	39	19	29	12	19	27
42	48	48	28	43	48	27	48	18	28	40	19	30	13	20	28
43	48	48	29	44	48	28	48	18	29	41	20	30	13	20	29
44	48	48	29	45	48	28	48	19	29	42	20	31	13	21	29
45	48	48	30	47	48	29	48	19	30	43	20	32	14	21	30
46	48	48	31	48	48	30	48	20	31	44	21	32	14	22	31
47	48	48	31	48	48	30	48	20	31	44	21	33	14	22	31
48	48	48	32	48	48	31	48	21	32	45	22	34	15	23	32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	This table is for use with tables in Section R404.1.3.2 that specify the minimum bar size and maximum spacing of vertical wall reinforcement for foundation walls and above-grade walls. Reinforcement specified in tables in Section R404.1.3.2 is based on Grade 60 steel reinforcement.

b.	Bar spacing shall not exceed 48 inches on center and shall be not less than one-half the nominal wall thickness.

c.	For Grade 50 steel bars (ASTM A996, Type R), use spacing for Grade 40 bars or interpolate between Grades 40 and 60.

R404.1.2.1 Masonry foundation walls.

Concrete masonry and clay masonry foundation walls shall be constructed as set forth in Table R404.1.1(1), R404.1.1(2), R404.1.1(3) or R404.1.1(4) and shall also comply with applicable provisions of Section R606. Rubble stone masonry foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with Sections R404.1.8 and R606.4.2.

R404.1.3 Concrete foundation walls.

Concrete foundation walls that support light-frame walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. Concrete foundation walls that support above-grade concrete walls that are within the applicability limits of Section R608.2 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section, ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. Concrete foundation walls that support above-grade concrete walls that are not within the applicability limits of Section R608.2 shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of ACI 318, ACI 332 or PCA 100. When ACI 318, ACI 332, PCA 100 or the provisions of this section are used to design concrete foundation walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having authority.

R404.1.3.1 Concrete cross-section.

Concrete walls constructed in accordance with this code shall comply with the shapes and minimum concrete cross-sectional dimensions required by Table R608.3. Other types of forming systems resulting in concrete walls not in compliance with this section and Table R608.3 shall be designed in accordance with ACI 318.

R404.1.3.2 Reinforcement for foundation walls.

Concrete foundation walls shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom. Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Table R404.1.2(1). Vertical reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Table R404.1.2(2), R404.1.2(3), R404.1.2(4), R404.1.2(5), R404.1.2(6), R404.1.2(7) or R404.1.2(8). Vertical reinforcement for flat basement walls retaining 4 feet (1219 mm) or more of unbalanced backfill is permitted to be determined in accordance with Table R404.1.2(9). For basement walls supporting above-grade concrete walls, vertical reinforcement shall be the greater of that required by Tables R404.1.2(2) through R404.1.2(8) or by Section R608.6 for the above-grade wall.

R404.1.3.2.1 Concrete foundation stem walls supporting above-grade concrete walls.

Foundation stem walls that support above-grade concrete walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section.

1.	Stem walls not laterally supported at top. Concrete stem walls that are not monolithic with slabs-on-ground or are not otherwise laterally supported by slabs-on-ground shall comply with this section. Where unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is less than or equal to 18 inches (457 mm), the stem wall and above-grade wall it supports shall be provided with vertical reinforcement in accordance with Section R608.6 and Table R608.6(1), R608.6(2) or R608.6(3) for above-grade walls. Where unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches (457 mm), the stem wall and above-grade wall it supports shall be provided with vertical reinforcement in accordance with Section R608.6 and Table R608.6(4).

2.	Stem walls laterally supported at top. Concrete stem walls that are monolithic with slabs-on-ground or are otherwise laterally supported by slabs-on-ground shall be vertically reinforced in accordance with Section R608.6 and Table R608.6(1), R608.6(2) or R608.6(3) for above-grade walls. Where the unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches (457 mm), the connection between the stem wall and the slab-on-ground, and the portion of the slab-on-ground providing lateral support for the wall shall be designed in accordance with PCA 100 or with accepted engineering practice. Where the unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 18 inches (457 mm), the minimum nominal thickness of the wall shall be 6 inches (152 mm).

R404.1.3.2.2 Concrete foundation stem walls supporting light-frame above-grade walls.

Concrete foundation stem walls that support light-frame above-grade walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section.

1.	Stem walls not laterally supported at top. Concrete stem walls that are not monolithic with slabs-on-ground or are not otherwise laterally supported by slabs-on-ground and retain 48 inches (1219 mm) or less of unbalanced fill, measured from the top of the wall, shall be constructed in accordance with Section R404.1.3. Foundation stem walls that retain more than 48 inches (1219 mm) of unbalanced fill, measured from the top of the wall, shall be designed in accordance with Sections R404.1.4 and R404.4.

2.	Stem walls laterally supported at top. Concrete stem walls that are monolithic with slabs-on-ground or are otherwise laterally supported by slabs-on-ground shall be constructed in accordance with Section R404.1.3. Where the unbalanced backfill retained by the stem wall is greater than 48 inches (1219 mm), the connection between the stem wall and the slab-on-ground, and the portion of the slab-on-ground providing lateral support for the wall, shall be designed in accordance with PCA 100 or in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

R404.1.3.3 Concrete, materials for concrete, and forms.

Materials used in concrete, the concrete itself and forms shall conform to requirements of this section or ACI 318.

R404.1.3.3.1 Compressive strength.

The minimum specified compressive strength of concrete, f'c, shall comply with Section R402.2 and shall be not less than 2,500 psi (17.2 MPa) at 28 days.

R404.1.3.3.2 Concrete mixing and delivery.

Mixing and delivery of concrete shall comply with ASTM C94 or ASTM C685.

R404.1.3.3.3 Maximum aggregate size.

The nominal maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not exceed one-fifth the narrowest distance between sides of forms, or three-fourths the clear spacing between reinforcing bars or between a bar and the side of the form.

Exception: When approved, these limitations shall not apply where removable forms are used and workability and methods of consolidation permit concrete to be placed without honeycombs or voids.

R404.1.3.3.4 Proportioning and slump of concrete.

Proportions of materials for concrete shall be established to provide workability and consistency to permit concrete to be worked readily into forms and around reinforcement under conditions of placement to be employed, without segregation or excessive bleeding. Slump of concrete placed in removable forms shall not exceed 6 inches (152 mm).

Exception: When approved, the slump is permitted to exceed 6 inches (152 mm) for concrete mixtures that are resistant to segregation, and are in accordance with the form manufacturer’s recommendations.

Slump of concrete placed in stay-in-place forms shall exceed 6 inches (152 mm). Slump of concrete shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C143.

R404.1.3.3.5 Consolidation of concrete.

Concrete shall be consolidated by suitable means during placement and shall be worked around embedded items and reinforcement and into corners of forms. Where stay-in-place forms are used, concrete shall be consolidated by internal vibration.

Exception: When approved for concrete to be placed in stay-in-place forms, self-consolidating concrete mixtures with slumps equal to or greater than 8 inches (203 mm) that are specifically designed for placement without internal vibration need not be internally vibrated.

R404.1.3.3.6 Form materials and form ties.

Forms shall be made of wood, steel, aluminum, plastic, a composite of cement and foam insulation, a composite of cement and wood chips, or other approved material suitable for supporting and containing concrete. Forms shall provide sufficient strength to contain concrete during the concrete placement operation.

Form ties shall be steel, solid plastic, foam plastic, a composite of cement and wood chips, a composite of cement and foam plastic, or other suitable material capable of resisting the forces created by fluid pressure of fresh concrete.

R404.1.3.3.6.1 Stay-in-place forms.

Stay-in-place concrete forms shall comply with this section.

1.	Surface burning characteristics. The flame-spread index and smoke-developed index of forming material, other than foam plastic, left exposed on the interior shall comply with Section R302. The surface burning characteristics of foam plastic used in insulating concrete forms shall comply with Section R316.3.

2.	Interior covering. Stay-in-place forms constructed of rigid foam plastic shall be protected on the interior of the building as required by Section R316. Where gypsum board is used to protect the foam plastic, it shall be installed with a mechanical fastening system. Use of adhesives in addition to mechanical fasteners is permitted.

3.	Exterior wall covering. Stay-in-place forms constructed of rigid foam plastics shall be protected from sunlight and physical damage by the application of an approved exterior wall covering complying with this code. Exterior surfaces of other stay-in-place forming systems shall be protected in accordance with this code.

4.	Termite protection. In areas where the probability of termite infestation is “very heavy” as indicated by Table R301.2(1) or Figure R301.2(6), foam plastic insulation shall be permitted below grade on foundation walls in accordance with Section R318.8.

5.	Flat ICF wall system forms shall conform to ASTM E2634.

R404.1.3.3.7 Reinforcement.
R404.1.3.3.7.1 Steel reinforcement.

Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of ASTM A615, A706, or A996. ASTM A996 bars produced from rail steel shall be Type R. The minimum yield strength of reinforcing steel shall be 40,000 psi (Grade 40) (276 MPa).

R404.1.3.3.7.2 Location of reinforcement in wall.

The center of vertical reinforcement in basement walls determined from Tables R404.1.2(2) through R404.1.2(7) shall be located at the centerline of the wall. Vertical reinforcement in basement walls determined from Table R404.1.2(8) shall be located to provide a maximum cover of 11/4 inches (32 mm) measured from the inside face of the wall. Regardless of the table used to determine vertical wall reinforcement, the center of the steel shall not vary from the specified location by more than the greater of 10 percent of the wall thickness and 3/8 inch (10 mm). Horizontal and vertical reinforcement shall be located in foundation walls to provide the minimum cover required by Section R404.1.3.3.7.4.

R404.1.3.3.7.3 Wall openings.

Vertical wall reinforcement required by Section R404.1.3.2 that is interrupted by wall openings shall have additional vertical reinforcement of the same size placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of each side of the opening.

R404.1.3.3.7.4 Support and cover.

Reinforcement shall be secured in the proper location in the forms with tie wire or other bar support system to prevent displacement during the concrete placement operation. Steel reinforcement in concrete cast against the earth shall have a minimum cover of 3 inches (75 mm). Minimum cover for reinforcement in concrete cast in removable forms that will be exposed to the earth or weather shall be 11/2 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars and smaller, and 2 inches (50 mm) for No. 6 bars and larger. For concrete cast in removable forms that will not be exposed to the earth or weather, and for concrete cast in stay-in-place forms, minimum cover shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm). The minus tolerance for cover shall not exceed the smaller of one-third the required cover or 3/8 inch (10 mm).

R404.1.3.3.7.5 Lap splices.

Vertical and horizontal wall reinforcement shall be the longest lengths practical. Where splices are necessary in reinforcement, the length of lap splice shall be in accordance with Table R608.5.4.(1) and Figure R608.5.4(1). The maximum gap between noncontact parallel bars at a lap splice shall not exceed the smaller of one-fifth the required lap length and 6 inches (152 mm) [See Figure R608.5.4(1)].

R404.1.3.3.7.6 Alternate grade of reinforcement and spacing.

Where tables in Section R404.1.3.2 specify vertical wall reinforcement based on minimum bar size and maximum spacing, which are based on Grade 60 (414 MPa) steel reinforcement, different size bars or bars made from a different grade of steel are permitted provided an equivalent area of steel per linear foot of wall is provided. Use of Table R404.1.2(9) is permitted to determine the maximum bar spacing for different bar sizes than specified in the tables or bars made from a different grade of steel. Bars shall not be spaced less than one-half the wall thickness, or more than 48 inches (1219 mm) on center.

R404.1.3.3.7.7 Standard hooks.

Where reinforcement is required by this code to terminate with a standard hook, the hook shall comply with Section R608.5.4.5 and Figure R608.5.4(3).

R404.1.3.3.7.8 Construction joint reinforcement.

Construction joints in foundation walls shall be made and located to not impair the strength of the wall. Construction joints in plain concrete walls, including walls required to have not less than No. 4 bars at 48 inches (1219 mm) on center by Section R404.1.3.2, shall be located at points of lateral support, and a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall extend across the construction joint at a spacing not to exceed 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Construction joint reinforcement shall have a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) embedment on both sides of the joint. Construction joints in reinforced concrete walls shall be located in the middle third of the span between lateral supports, or located and constructed as required for joints in plain concrete walls.

Exception: Use of vertical wall reinforcement required by this code is permitted in lieu of construction joint reinforcement provided the spacing does not exceed 24 inches (610 mm), or the combination of wall reinforcement and No.4 bars described above does not exceed 24 inches (610 mm).

R404.1.3.3.8 Exterior wall coverings.

Requirements for installation of masonry veneer, stucco and other wall coverings on the exterior of concrete walls and other construction details not covered in this section shall comply with the requirements of this code.

R404.1.3.4 Requirements for Seismic Design Category C.

Reserved.

R404.1.4 Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2.

Reserved.

R404.1.4.1 Masonry foundation walls.

Reserved.

R404.1.4.2 Concrete foundation walls.

Reserved.

R404.1.5 Foundation wall thickness based on walls supported.

The thickness of masonry or concrete foundation walls shall be not less than that required by Section R404.1.5.1 or R404.1.5.2, respectively.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

FIGURE R404.1.5(1)

FOUNDATION WALL CLAY MASONRY CURTAIN WALL WITH CONCRETE MASONRY PIERS

R404.1.5.1 Masonry wall thickness.

Masonry foundation walls shall be not less than the thickness of the wall supported, except that masonry foundation walls of at least 8-inch (203 mm) nominal thickness shall be permitted under brick veneered frame walls and under 10-inch-wide (254 mm) cavity walls where the total height of the wall supported, including gables, is not more than 20 feet (6096 mm), provided the requirements of Section R404.1.1 are met.

R404.1.5.2 Concrete wall thickness.

The thickness of concrete foundation walls shall be equal to or greater than the thickness of the wall in the story above. Concrete foundation walls with corbels, brackets or other projections built into the wall for support of masonry veneer or other purposes are not within the scope of the tables in this section.

Where a concrete foundation wall is reduced in thickness to provide a shelf for the support of masonry veneer, the reduced thickness shall be equal to or greater than the thickness of the wall in the story above. Vertical reinforcement for the foundation wall shall be based on Table R404.1.2(8) and located in the wall as required by Section R404.1.3.3.7.2 where that table is used. Vertical reinforcement shall be based on the thickness of the thinner portion of the wall.

Exception: Where the height of the reduced thickness portion measured to the underside of the floor assembly or sill plate above is less than or equal to 24 inches (610 mm) and the reduction in thickness does not exceed 4 inches (102 mm), the vertical reinforcement is permitted to be based on the thicker portion of the wall.

R404.1.5.3 Pier and curtain wall foundations.

Use of pier and curtain wall foundations shall be permitted to support light-frame construction not more than two stories in height, provided the following requirements are met:

1.	All load-bearing walls shall be placed on continuous concrete footings placed integrally with the exterior wall footings.

2.	The minimum actual thickness of a load-bearing masonry wall shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal or 33/8 inches (92 mm) actual thickness, and shall be bonded integrally with piers spaced in accordance with Section R606.6.4.

3.	Piers shall be constructed in accordance with Sections R606.7 and R606.7.1, and shall be bonded into the load-bearing masonry wall in accordance with Section R606.13.1 or R606.13.1.1.

4.	The maximum height of a 4-inch (102 mm) load-bearing masonry foundation wall supporting wood-frame walls and floors shall be not more than 4 feet (1219 mm).

5.	Anchorage shall be in accordance with Section R403.1.6, Figure R404.1.5(1), or as specified by engineered design accepted by the building official.

6.	The unbalanced fill for 4-inch (102 mm) foundation walls shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for solid masonry or 12 inches (305 mm) for hollow masonry.

7.	Reserved.

R404.1.6 Height above finished grade.

Concrete and masonry foundation walls shall extend above the finished grade adjacent to the foundation at all points a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) where masonry veneer is used and a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) elsewhere.

R404.1.7 Backfill placement.

Backfill shall not be placed against the wall until the wall has sufficient strength and has been anchored to the floor above, or has been sufficiently braced to prevent damage by the backfill.

Exception: Bracing is not required for walls supporting less than 4 feet (1219 mm) of unbalanced backfill.

R404.1.8 Rubble stone masonry.

Rubble stone masonry foundation walls shall have a minimum thickness of 16 inches (406 mm), shall not support an unbalanced backfill exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm) in height, shall not support a soil pressure greater than 30 pounds per square foot per foot (4.71 kPa/m).

R404.1.9 Isolated masonry piers.

Isolated masonry piers shall be constructed in accordance with this section and the general masonry construction requirements of Section R606. Hollow masonry piers shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 8 inches (203 mm), with a nominal height not exceeding four times the nominal thickness and a nominal length not exceeding three times the nominal thickness. Where hollow masonry units are solidly filled with concrete or grout, piers shall be permitted to have a nominal height not exceeding ten times the nominal thickness. Footings for isolated masonry piers shall be sized in accordance with Section R403.1.1.

R404.1.9.1 Pier cap.

Hollow masonry piers shall be capped with 4 inches (102 mm) of solid masonry or concrete, a masonry cap block, or shall have cavities of the top course filled with concrete or grout. Where required, termite protection for the pier cap shall be provided in accordance with Section R318.

R404.1.9.2 Masonry piers supporting floor girders.

Masonry piers supporting wood girders sized in accordance with Section R602.3 shall be permitted in accordance with this section. Piers supporting girders for interior bearing walls shall have a minimum nominal dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) and a maximum height of 10 feet (3048 mm) from top of footing to bottom of sill plate or girder. Piers supporting girders for exterior bearing walls shall have a minimum nominal dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) and a maximum height of 4 feet (1220 mm) from top of footing to bottom of sill plate or girder. Girders and sill plates shall be anchored to the pier or footing in accordance with Section R403.1.6 or Figure R404.1.5(1). Floor girder bearing shall be in accordance with Section R502.2.

R404.1.9.3 Masonry piers supporting braced wall panels.

Masonry piers supporting braced wall panels shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

R404.1.9.4 Seismic design of masonry piers.

Reserved.

R404.1.9.5 Masonry piers in flood hazard areas.

Masonry piers for dwellings in flood hazard areas shall be designed in accordance with Section R322.

R404.2 Wood foundation walls.

Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Sections R404.2.1 through R404.2.6 and with the details shown in Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3).

R404.2.1 Identification.

Load-bearing lumber shall be identified by the grade mark of a lumber grading or inspection agency which has been approved by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certificate of inspection issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted. Wood structural panels shall conform to DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2 and shall be identified by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.

R404.2.2 Stud size.

The studs used in foundation walls shall be 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) members. When spaced 16 inches (406 mm) on center, a wood species with an Fb value of not less than 1,250 pounds per square inch (8619 kPa) as listed in ANSI AWC NDS shall be used. When spaced 12 inches (305 mm) on center, an Fb of not less than 875 psi (6033 kPa) shall be required.

R404.2.3 Height of backfill.

For wood foundations that are not designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF, the height of backfill against a foundation wall shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm). When the height of fill is more than 12 inches (305 mm) above the interior grade of a crawl space or floor of a basement, the thickness of the plywood sheathing shall meet the requirements of Table R404.2.3.

TABLE R404.2.3

PLYWOOD GRADE AND THICKNESS FOR WOOD FOUNDATION CONSTRUCTION (30 pcf equivalent-fluid weight soil pressure)

HEIGHT OF FILL
(inches)
	STUD SPACING
(inches)
	FACE GRAIN ACROSS STUDS	FACE GRAIN PARALLEL TO STUDS
Gradea	Minimum thickness
(inches)
	Span rating	Gradea	Minimum thickness
(inches)b, c
	Span rating
24	12	B	15/32	32/16	A	15/32	32/16
B	15/32c	32/16
16	B	15/32	32/16	A	15/32c	32/16
B	19/32c (4, 5 ply)	40/20
36	12	B	15/32	32/16	A	15/32	32/16
B	15/32c (4, 5 ply)	32/16
B	19/32 (4, 5 ply)	40/20
16	B	15/32c	32/16	A	19/32	40/20
B	23/32	48/24
48	12	B	15/32	32/16	A	15/32c	32/16
B	19/32c (4, 5 ply)	40/20
16	B	19/32	40/20	A	19/32c	40/20
A	23/32	48/24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per cubic foot = 0.1572 kN/m3.

a.	Plywood shall be of the following minimum grades in accordance with DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2:

1.	DOC PS 1 Plywood grades marked:

1.1.	Structural I C-D (Exposure 1).

1.2.	C-D (Exposure 1).

2.	DOC PS 2 Plywood grades marked:

2.1.	Structural I Sheathing (Exposure 1).

2.2.	Sheathing (Exposure 1).

3.	Where a major portion of the wall is exposed above ground and a better appearance is desired, the following plywood grades marked exterior are suitable:

3.1.	Structural I A-C, Structural I B-C or Structural I C-C (Plugged) in accordance with DOC PS 1.

3.2.	A-C Group 1, B-C Group 1, C-C (Plugged) Group 1 or MDO Group 1 in accordance with DOC PS 1.

3.3.	Single Floor in accordance with DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 2.

b.	Minimum thickness 15/32 inch, except crawl space sheathing shall have not less than 3/8 inch for face grain across studs 16 inches on center and maximum 2-foot depth of unequal fill.

c.	For this fill height, thickness and grade combination, panels that are continuous over less than three spans (across less than three stud spacings) require blocking 16 inches above the bottom plate. Offset adjacent blocks and fasten through studs with two 16d corrosion-resistant nails at each end.

R404.2.4 Backfilling.

Wood foundation walls shall not be backfilled until the basement floor and first floor have been constructed or the walls have been braced. For crawl space construction, backfill or bracing shall be installed on the interior of the walls prior to placing backfill on the exterior.

R404.2.5 Drainage and dampproofing.

Wood foundation basements shall be drained and dampproofed in accordance with Sections R405 and R406, respectively.

R404.2.6 Fastening.

Wood structural panel foundation wall sheathing shall be attached to framing in accordance with Sections R402.1.1 and R602.3.

R404.3 Wood sill plates.

Wood sill plates shall be a minimum of 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) nominal lumber. Sill plate anchorage shall be in accordance with Section R403.1.6 .

R404.4 Retaining walls.

Retaining walls that are not laterally supported at the top and that retain in excess of 48 inches (1219 mm) of unbalanced fill, or retaining walls exceeding 24 inches (610 mm) in height that resist lateral loads in addition to soil, shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice to ensure stability against overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure and water uplift. Retaining walls shall be designed for a safety factor of 1.5 against lateral sliding and overturning. This section shall not apply to foundation walls supporting buildings.

R404.5 Precast concrete foundation walls.
R404.5.1 Design.

Precast concrete foundation walls shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The design and manufacture of precast concrete foundation wall panels shall comply with the materials requirements of Section R402.3 or ACI 318. The panel design drawings shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed in accordance with Section 107 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

R404.5.2 Precast concrete foundation design drawings.

Precast concrete foundation wall design drawings shall be submitted to the building official and approved prior to installation. Drawings shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

1.	Design loading as applicable.

2.	Footing design and material.

3.	Concentrated loads and their points of application.

4.	Soil bearing capacity.

5.	Maximum allowable total uniform load.

6.	Reserved.

7.	Basic wind speed.

R404.5.3 Identification.

Precast concrete foundation wall panels shall be identified by a certificate of inspection label issued by an approved third-party inspection agency.

SECTION R405
FOUNDATION DRAINAGE
R405.1 Concrete or masonry foundations.

Drains shall be provided around concrete or masonry foundations that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable spaces located below grade. Drainage tiles, gravel or crushed stone drains, perforated pipe or other approved systems or materials shall be installed at or below the top of the footing or below the bottom of the slab and shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved drainage system. Gravel or crushed stone drains shall extend not less than 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the outside edge of the footing and 6 inches (152 mm) above the top of the footing and be covered with an approved filter membrane material. The top of open joints of drain tiles shall be protected with strips of building paper. Except where otherwise recommended by the drain manufacturer, perforated drains shall be surrounded with an approved filter membrane or the filter membrane shall cover the washed gravel or crushed rock covering the drain. Drainage tiles or perforated pipe shall be placed on a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of washed gravel or crushed rock not less than one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of the same material.

Exception: A drainage system is not required where the foundation is installed on well-drained ground or sand-gravel mixture soils according to the Unified Soil Classification System, Group I soils, as detailed in Table R405.1.

TABLE R405.1

PROPERTIES OF SOILS CLASSIFIED ACCORDING TO THE UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

SOIL
GROUP
	UNIFIED SOIL
CLASSIFICATION
SYSTEM SYMBOL	SOIL DESCRIPTION	DRAINAGE
CHARACTERISTICSa
	FROST HEAVE
POTENTIAL
	VOLUME CHANGE
POTENTIAL
EXPANSIONb
Group I	GW	Well-graded gravels, gravel sand mixtures, little or no
fines
	Good	Low	Low
GP	Poorly graded gravels or gravel sand mixtures, little or
no fines
	Good	Low	Low
SW	Well-graded sands, gravelly sands, little or no fines	Good	Low	Low
SP	Poorly graded sands or gravelly sands, little or no fines	Good	Low	Low
GM	Silty gravels, gravel-sand-silt mixtures	Good	Medium	Low
SM	Silty sand, sand-silt mixtures	Good	Medium	Low
Group II	GC	Clayey gravels, gravel-sand-clay mixtures	Medium	Medium	Low
SC	Clayey sands, sand-clay mixture	Medium	Medium	Low
ML	Inorganic silts and very fine sands, rock flour, silty or
clayey fine sands or clayey silts with slight plasticity
	Medium	High	Low
CL	Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticity, gravelly
clays, sandy clays, silty clays, lean clays
	Medium	Medium	Medium
to Low

Group III	CH	Inorganic clays of high plasticity, fat clays	Poor	Medium	High
MH	Inorganic silts, micaceous or diatomaceous fine sandy
or silty soils, elastic silts
	Poor	High	High
Group IV	OL	Organic silts and organic silty clays of low plasticity	Poor	Medium	Medium
OH	Organic clays of medium to high plasticity, organic
silts
	Unsatisfactory	Medium	High
Pt	Peat and other highly organic soils	Unsatisfactory	Medium	High

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	The percolation rate for good drainage is over 4 inches per hour, medium drainage is 2 inches to 4 inches per hour, and poor is less than 2 inches per hour.

b.	Soils with a low potential expansion typically have a plasticity index (PI) of 0 to 15, soils with a medium potential expansion have a PI of 10 to 35 and soils with a high potential expansion have a PI greater than 20.

R405.1.1 Precast concrete foundation.

Precast concrete walls that retain earth and enclose habitable or useable space located below-grade that rest on crushed stone footings shall have a perforated drainage pipe installed below the base of the wall on either the interior or exterior side of the wall, not less than 1 foot (305 mm) beyond the edge of the wall. If the exterior drainage pipe is used, an approved filter membrane material shall cover the pipe. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system or to daylight.

R405.2 Wood foundations.

Wood foundations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade shall be adequately drained in accordance with Sections R405.2.1 through R405.2.3.

R405.2.1 Base.

A porous layer of gravel, crushed stone or coarse sand shall be placed to a minimum thickness of 4 inches (102 mm) under the basement floor. Provision shall be made for automatic draining of this layer and the gravel or crushed stone wall footings.

R405.2.2 Vapor retarder.

A 6-mil-thick (0.15 mm) polyethylene vapor retarder shall be applied over the porous layer with the basement floor constructed over the polyethylene.

R405.2.3 Drainage system.

In other than Group I soils, a sump shall be provided to drain the porous layer and footings. The sump shall be not less than 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square (0.0129 m2), shall extend not less than 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the basement floor and shall be capable of positive gravity or mechanical drainage to remove any accumulated water. The drainage system shall discharge into an approved sewer system or to daylight.

SECTION R406
FOUNDATION WATERPROOFING AND
DAMPPROOFING
R406.1 Concrete and masonry foundation dampproofing.

Except where required by Section R406.2 to be waterproofed, foundation walls that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be dampproofed from the higher of (a) the top of the footing or (b) 6 inches (152 mm) below the top of the basement floor, to the finished grade. Masonry walls shall have not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) portland cement parging applied to the exterior of the wall. The parging shall be dampproofed in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Bituminous coating.

2.	Three pounds per square yard (1.63 kg/m2) of acrylic modified cement.

3.	One-eighth-inch (3.2 mm) coat of surface-bonding cement complying with ASTM C887.

4.	Any material permitted for waterproofing in Section R406.2.

5.	Other approved methods or materials.

Exception: Parging of unit masonry walls is not required where a material is approved for direct application to the masonry.

Concrete walls shall be dampproofed by applying any one of the listed dampproofing materials or any one of the waterproofing materials listed in Section R406.2 to the exterior of the wall.

R406.2 Concrete and masonry foundation waterproofing.

In areas where a high water table or other severe soil-water conditions are known to exist, exterior foundation walls that retain earth and enclose interior spaces and floors below grade shall be waterproofed from the higher of (a) the top of the footing or (b) 6 inches (152 mm) below the top of the basement floor, to the finished grade. Walls shall be waterproofed in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Two-ply hot-mopped felts.

2.	Fifty-five-pound (25 kg) roll roofing.

3.	Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyvinyl chloride.

4.	Six-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene.

5.	Forty-mil (1 mm) polymer-modified asphalt.

6.	Sixty-mil (1.5 mm) flexible polymer cement.

7.	One-eighth-inch (3 mm) cement-based, fiber-reinforced, waterproof coating.

8.	Sixty-mil (1.5 mm) solvent-free liquid-applied synthetic rubber.

Exception: Organic-solvent-based products such as hydrocarbons, chlorinated hydrocarbons, ketones and esters shall not be used for ICF walls with expanded polystyrene form material. Use of plastic roofing cements, acrylic coatings, latex coatings, mortars and pargings to seal ICF walls is permitted. Cold-setting asphalt or hot asphalt shall conform to Type C of ASTM D449. Hot asphalt shall be applied at a temperature of less than 200°F (93°C).

All joints in membrane waterproofing shall be lapped and sealed with an adhesive compatible with the membrane.

R406.3 Dampproofing for wood foundations.

Wood foundations enclosing habitable or usable spaces located below grade shall be dampproofed in accordance with Sections R406.3.1 through R406.3.4.

R406.3.1 Panel joint sealed.

Plywood panel joints in the foundation walls shall be sealed full length with a caulking compound capable of producing a moistureproof seal under the conditions of temperature and moisture content at which it will be applied and used.

R406.3.2 Below-grade moisture barrier.

A 6-mil-thick (0.15 mm) polyethylene film shall be applied over the below-grade portion of exterior foundation walls prior to backfilling. Joints in the polyethylene film shall be lapped 6 inches (152 mm) and sealed with adhesive. The top edge of the polyethylene film shall be bonded to the sheathing to form a seal. Film areas at grade level shall be protected from mechanical damage and exposure by a pressure-preservative treated lumber or plywood strip attached to the wall several inches above finished grade level and extending approximately 9 inches (229 mm) below grade. The joint between the strip and the wall shall be caulked full length prior to fastening the strip to the wall. Where approved, other coverings appropriate to the architectural treatment shall be permitted to be used. The polyethylene film shall extend down to the bottom of the wood footing plate but shall not overlap or extend into the gravel or crushed stone footing.

R406.3.3 Porous fill.

The space between the excavation and the foundation wall shall be backfilled with the same material used for footings, up to a height of 1 foot (305 mm) above the footing for well-drained sites, or one-half the total back-fill height for poorly drained sites. The porous fill shall be covered with strips of 30-pound (13.6 kg) asphalt paper or 6-mil (0.15 mm) polyethylene to permit water seepage while avoiding infiltration of fine soils.

R406.3.4 Backfill.

The remainder of the excavated area shall be backfilled with the same type of soil as was removed during the excavation.

R406.4 Precast concrete foundation system dampproofing.

Except where required by Section R406.2 to be waterproofed, precast concrete foundation walls enclosing habitable or useable spaces located below grade shall be dampproofed in accordance with Section R406.1.

R406.4.1 Panel joints sealed.

Precast concrete foundation panel joints shall be sealed full height with a sealant meeting ASTM C920, Type S or M, Grade NS, Class 25, Use NT, M or A. Joint sealant shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

SECTION R407
COLUMNS
R407.1 Wood column protection.

Wood columns shall be protected against decay as set forth in Section R317.

R407.2 Steel column protection.

All surfaces (inside and outside) of steel columns shall be given a shop coat of rust-inhibitive paint, except for corrosion-resistant steel and steel treated with coatings to provide corrosion resistance.

R407.3 Structural requirements.

The columns shall be restrained to prevent lateral displacement at the bottom end. Wood columns shall be not less in nominal size than 4 inches by 4 inches (102 mm by 102 mm). Steel columns shall be not less than 3-inch-diameter (76 mm) Schedule 40 pipe manufactured in accordance with ASTM A53 Grade B or approved equivalent.

Exception: Columns not more than 48 inches (1219 mm) in height on a pier or footing are exempt from the bottom end lateral displacement requirement within under-floor areas enclosed by a continuous foundation.

SECTION R408
UNDER-FLOOR SPACE
R408.1 Moisture control.

The under-floor space between the bottom of the floor joists and the earth under any building (except space occupied by a basement) shall comply with Section R408.2 or Section R408.3.

R408.2 Openings for under-floor ventilation.

Ventilation openings through foundation or exterior walls surrounding the under-floor space shall be provided in accordance with this section. The minimum net area of ventilation openings shall be not less than 1 square foot (0.0929 m2) for each 150 square feet (14 m2) of under-floor area. One ventilation opening shall be within 3 feet (915 mm) of each external corner of the underfloor space. Ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with any of the following materials provided that the least dimension of the covering shall not exceed 1/4 inch (6.4 mm), and operational louvers are permitted:

1.	Perforated sheet metal plates not less than 0.070 inch (1.8 mm) thick.

2.	Expanded sheet metal plates not less than 0.047 inch (1.2 mm) thick.

3.	Cast-iron grill or grating.

4.	Extruded load-bearing brick vents.

5.	Hardware cloth of 0.035 inch (0.89 mm) wire or heavier.

6.	Corrosion-resistant wire mesh, with the least dimension being 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) thick.

Exceptions:

1.	The total area of ventilation openings shall be permitted to be reduced to 1/1,500 of the under-floor area where the ground surface is covered with an approved Class I vapor retarder material.

2.	Where the ground surface is covered with an approved class 1 vapor retarder material, ventilation openings are not required to be within 3 feet (915 mm) of each external corner of the underfloor space provided the openings are placed to provide cross ventilation of the space.

R408.3 Unvented crawl space.

For unvented under-floor spaces the following items shall be provided:

1.	Exposed earth shall be covered with a continuous Class I vapor retarder. Joints of the vapor retarder shall overlap by 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be sealed or taped. The edges of the vapor retarder shall extend not less than 6 inches (152 mm) up the stem wall and shall be attached and sealed to the stem wall or insulation.

2.	One of the following shall be provided for the under-floor space:

2.1.	Continuously operated mechanical exhaust ventilation at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute (0.47 L/s) for each 50 square feet (4.7 m2) of crawl space floor area, including an air pathway to the common area (such as a duct or transfer grille), and perimeter walls insulated in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

2.2.	Conditioned air supply sized to deliver at a rate equal to 1 cubic foot per minute (0.47 L/s) for each 50 square feet (4.7 m2) of under-floor area, including a return air pathway to the common area (such as a duct or transfer grille), and perimeter walls insulated in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

2.3.	Plenum in existing structures complying with Section M1601.5, if under-floor space is used as a plenum.

2.4.	Dehumidification sized in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications

R408.4 Access.

Access shall be provided to all under-floor spaces. Access openings through the floor shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches (457 mm by 610 mm). Openings through a perimeter wall shall be not less than 16 inches by 24 inches (407 mm by 610 mm). Where any portion of the through-wall access is below grade, an areaway not less than 16 inches by 24 inches (407 mm by 610 mm) shall be provided. The bottom of the areaway shall be below the threshold of the access opening. Through wall access openings shall not be located under a door to the residence. See Section M1305.1.4 for access requirements where mechanical equipment is located under floors.

R408.5 Removal of debris.

The under-floor grade shall be cleaned of all vegetation and organic material. All wood forms used for placing concrete shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose. All construction materials shall be removed before a building is occupied or used for any purpose.

R408.6 Finished grade.

The finished grade of under-floor surface shall be permitted to be located at the bottom of the footings; however, where there is evidence that the groundwater table can rise to within 6 inches (152 mm) of the finished floor at the building perimeter or where there is evidence that the surface water does not readily drain from the building site, the grade in the under-floor space shall be as high as the outside finished grade, unless an approved drainage system is provided.

R408.7 Flood resistance.

For buildings located in flood hazard areas as established in Table R301.2(1):

1.	Walls enclosing the under-floor space shall be provided with flood openings in accordance with Section R322.2.2.

2.	The finished ground level of the under-floor space shall be equal to or higher than the outside finished ground level on at least one side.

Exception: Under-floor spaces that meet the requirements of FEMA TB 11-1.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-40]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 40
DEVICES AND LUMINAIRES

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-41]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 41
APPLIANCE INSTALLATION

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-42]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 42
SWIMMING POOLS [ELECTRICAL PROVISIONS]

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-43]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 43
CLASS 2 REMOTE-CONTROL,
SIGNALING AND POWER-LIMITED CIRCUITS

RESERVED

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-44]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 44
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES
SECTION R4401
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
EXTERIOR WALL COVERING
R4401.1

Refer to Chapter 14 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4402
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP STRUCTURES
R4402.1

Refer to Chapter 15 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4403
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
GENERAL
R4403.1

Refer to Chapter 16 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4404
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
FOUNDATIONS AND RETAINING WALLS
R4404.1

Refer to Chapter 18 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4405
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
CONCRETE
R4405.1

Refer to Chapter 19 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION 4406
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
LIGHT METAL ALLOYS
R4406.1 Aluminum.

Refer to Chapter 20 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION 4407
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
MASONRY
R4407.1

Refer to Chapter 21 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION 4408
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
STEEL
R4408.1

Refer to Chapter 22 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION 4409
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
WOOD
R4409.1

Refer to Chapter 23 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4410
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
GLASS AND GLAZING
R4410.1

Refer to Chapter 24 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4411
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
GYPSUM BOARD AND PLASTER
R4411.1

Refer to Chapter 25 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

SECTION R4412
HIGH-VELOCITY HURRICANE ZONES —
PLASTICS
R4412.1

Refer to Chapter 26 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-45]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 45
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION R4501
GENERAL
R4501.1 Definitions, general.
R4501.1.1 Tense, gender and number.

For the purpose of this code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in this section. Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. Words in the feminine and neuter gender include the masculine. The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.

R4501.1.2 Words not defined.

Words not defined herein shall have the meanings stated in the Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; or Florida Fire Prevention Code. Words not defined in the Florida Building Code shall have the meanings stated in Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language Unabridged.

R4501.2 Definitions.

ABOVEGROUND/ONGROUND POOL. See “Swimming Pool.”

ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. The individual official, board, department or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city or other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of the swimming pool code as adopted or amended.

APPROVED. Accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or cited in this code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and power of the administrative authority.

APPROVED SAFETY COVER. A manually or power-applied safety pool cover that meets all of the performance standards of ASTM International in compliance with ASTM F1346.

APPROVED TESTING AGENCY. An organization primarily established for the purpose of testing to approved standards and approved by the administrative authority.

BACKWASH PIPING. See “Filter waste discharge piping.”

BARRIER. A fence, dwelling wall or nondwelling wall or any combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool, especially access from the residence or from the yard outside the barrier.

BODY FEED. Filter aid fed into a diatomite-type filter throughout the filtering cycle.

CARTRIDGE FILTER. A filter using cartridge-type filter elements.

CHEMICAL PIPING. Piping which conveys concentrated chemical solutions from a feeding apparatus to the circulation piping.

CIRCULATION PIPING SYSTEM. Piping between the pool structure and the mechanical equipment. Usually includes suction piping, face piping and return piping.

COMBINATION VALVE. A multipart valve intended to perform more than one function.

DESIGN HEAD. Total head requirement of the circulation system at the design rate of flow.

DIATOMITE (DIATOMACEOUS EARTH). A type of filter aid.

DIATOMITE-TYPE FILTER. A filter designed to be used with filter aid.

DIRECT ACCESS FROM THE HOME. Means any opening which discharges into the “perimeter” of the pool or any opening in an exterior dwelling wall, or interior wall (for indoor pools) which faces the pool.

EXIT ALARM. A device that makes audible, continuous alarm sounds when any door or window which permits access from the residence to any pool that is without an intervening enclosure is opened or left ajar.

FACE PIPING. Piping, with all valves and fittings, which is used to connect the filter system together as a unit.

FILTER. Any apparatus by which water is clarified.

FILTER AID. A nonpermanent type of filter medium or aid such as diatomite, alum, etc.

FILTER CARTRIDGE. A disposable or renewable filter element which generally employs no filter aid.

FILTER ELEMENT. That part of a filter which retains the filter medium.

FILTER MEDIUM. Fine material which entraps the suspended particles and removes them from the water.

FILTER RATE. Average rate of flow per square foot of filter area.

FILTER ROCK. Specially graded rock and gravel used to support filter sand.

FILTER SAND. A specially graded type of permanent filter medium.

FILTER SEPTUM. That part of the filter element in a diatomite-type filter upon which a cake of diatomite or other nonpermanent filter aid may be deposited.

FILTER WASTE DISCHARGE PIPING. Piping that conducts waste water from a filter to a drainage system. Connection to drainage system is made through an air gap or other approved methods.

FRESH WATER. Those waters having a specific conductivity less than a solution containing 6,000 ppm of sodium chloride.

HIGH RATE SAND FILTER. A sand filter designed for flows in excess of 5 gpm per square foot.

HOT TUB. See “Swimming pool.”

INGROUND POOL. See “Swimming pool.”

INLET FITTING. Fitting or fixture through which circulated water enters the pool.

MAIN SUCTION OUTLET. Outlet at the deep portion of the pool through which the main flow of water leaves the pool when being drained or circulated.

MEDICALLY FRAIL ELDERLY PERSON. Any person who is at least 65 years of age and has a medical problem that affects balance, vision, or judgment, including but not limited to a heart condition, diabetes, or Alzheimer’s disease or any related disorder.

MESH SAFETY BARRIER. A combination of materials, including fabric, posts, and other hardware to form a barrier around a swimming pool.

POOL. See “Swimming pool.”

POOL DEPTHS. The distance between the floor of pool and the maximum operating water level.

POOL PERIMETER. The limits of the pool deck, its surrounding area including yard area on same property, and any dwelling or nondwelling wall or any combination thereof which completely surrounds the pool.

POOL PLUMBING. All chemical, circulation, filter waste discharge piping, deck drainage and water filling system.

PORTABLE POOL. A prefabricated pool which may be erected at the point of intended use and which may be subsequently disassembled and reerected at a new location. Generally installed on the surface of the ground and without excavation.

PRECOAT. In a diatomite-type filter, the initial coating or filter aid placed on the filter septum at the start of the filter cycle.

RAPID SAND FILTER. A filter designed to be used with sand as the filter medium and for flows not to exceed 5 gpm per square feet.

RECEPTOR. An approved plumbing fixture or device of such material, shape and capacity as to adequately receive the discharge from indirect waste piping, so constructed and located as to be readily cleaned.

RESIDENTIAL. Situated on the premises of a detached one-family or two-family dwelling or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories high.

RETURN PIPING. That portion of the circulation piping which extends from the outlet side of the filters to the pool.

SALINE WATER. Those waters having a specific conductivity in excess of a solution containing 6,000 ppm of sodium chloride.

SEPARATION TANK. A device used to clarify filter rinse or waste water. Sometimes called a reclamation tank.

SKIM FILTER. A surface skimmer combined with a vacuum diatomite filter.

SPA, NONPORTABLE. See “Swimming pool.”

SPA, PORTABLE. Nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls and water heating and water circulating equipment are an integral part of the product and which is cord-connected and not permanently electrically wired.

SUCTION PIPING. That portion of the circulation piping located between the pool structure and the inlet side of the pump and usually includes main outlet piping, skimmer piping, vacuum piping and surge tank piping.

SURFACE SKIMMER. A device generally located in the pool wall which skims the pool surface by drawing pool water over a self-adjusting weir.

SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.

SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool.

SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. Any structure, located in a residential area, that is intended for swimming or recreational bathing and contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) deep including but not limited to inground, aboveground, and onground swimming pools, hot tubs, and nonportable spas.

SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC. A water-tight structure of concrete, masonry, fiberglass, stainless steel or plastic which is located either indoors or outdoors, used for bathing or swimming by humans, and filled with a filtered and disinfected water supply, together with buildings, appurtenances and equipment used in connection therewith. A public swimming pool or public pool shall mean a conventional pool, spatype pool, wading pool, special purpose pool or water recreation attraction, to which admission may be gained with or without payment of a fee and includes, pools operated by or serving camps, churches, cities, counties, day care centers, group home facilities for eight or more clients, health spas, institutions, parks, state agencies, schools, subdivisions, or the cooperative living-type projects of five or more living units, such as apartments, boarding houses, hotels, mobile home parks, motels, recreational vehicle parks and townhouses.

SWIMMING POOL, RESIDENTIAL. See “Swimming pool, private.”

TURNOVER TIME. The time in hours required for the circulation system to filter and recirculate a volume of water equal to the pool volume.

VACUUM FITTING. A fitting in the pool which is used as a convenient outlet for connecting the underwater suction cleaning equipment.

VACUUM PIPING. The piping from the suction side of a pump connected to a vacuum fitting located at the pool and below the water level.

WASTE PIPING. See “Filter waste discharge piping.”

WIDTH AND/OR LENGTH. Actual water dimension taken from wall to wall at the maximum operating water level.

YOUNG CHILD. Any person under the age of 6 years.

R4501.3 Mechanical requirements.

Unless otherwise specified in this code, all piping, equipment and materials used in the process piping system of swimming pools that are built in place shall conform to the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

R4501.4 Approvals.
R4501.4.1 Compliance.

All materials, piping, valves, equipment or appliances entering into the construction of swimming pools or portions thereof shall be of a type complying with this code or of a type recommended and approved by a nationally recognized testing agency or conforming to other recognized standards acceptable to the administrative authority.

R4501.4.2 Items not covered.

For any items not specifically covered in these requirements, the administrative authority is hereby authorized to require that all equipment, materials, methods of construction and design features shall be proven to function adequately, effectively and without excessive maintenance and operational difficulties.

R4501.4.2.1. Flood hazard areas.

Pools installed in flood hazard areas established in Section R322 shall comply with Section R322.2.4 (A Zones) or R322.3.3.1 in coastal high-hazard areas (V Zones).

R4501.4.3 Applicant responsibility.

It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide such data, tests or other adequate proof that the device, material or product will satisfactorily perform the function for which it is intended, before such item shall be approved or accepted for tests.

R4501.5 Alternate materials and methods of construction.
R4501.5.1 Approval and authorization.

The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, method of construction, appliance or equipment, provided any such alternate has been first approved and its use authorized by the administrative authority.

R4501.5.2 Required tests.

When there is insufficient evidence to substantiate claims for alternates, the administrative authority may require tests, as proof of compliance, to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the applicant.

R4501.6 Engineering design.
R4501.6.1 Conformance standard.

Design, construction and workmanship shall be in conformity with the requirements of ANSI/APSP/ICC3; ANSI/APSP/ICC 4; ANSI/APSP/ICC 5; ANSI/APSP/ICC 6; and ANSI/APSP/ICC 7.

R4501.6.2 Required equipment.

Every swimming pool shall be equipped complete with approved mechanical equipment consisting of filter, pump, piping valves and component parts.

Exception: Pools with a supply of fresh water equivalent to the volume of the pool in the specified turnover time will be allowed.

R4501.6.3 Water velocity.

Pool piping shall be designed so the water velocity will not exceed 10 feet per second (3048 mm/s) for pressure piping and 8 feet per second (2438 mm/s) for suction piping, except that the water velocity shall not exceed 8 feet per second (2438 mm/s) in copper tubing. Main suction outlet velocity must comply with ANSI/APSP/ICC 7.

Exception: Jet inlet fittings shall not be deemed subject to this requirement.

R4501.6.4 Piping to heater.

Water flow through the heater, any bypass plumbing installed, any back-siphoning protection, and the use of heat sinks shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

R4501.6.5 Piping installation.

All piping materials shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s installation standards.

Exception: Primer and glue on exposed aboveground piping not required to be colored.

R4501.6.6 Entrapment protection.

Entrapment protection for suction outlets shall be installed in accordance with requirements of ANSI/APSP/ICC 7.

R4501.7 Pumps.
R4501.7.1 Strainer.

Pool circulating pumps shall be equipped on the inlet side with an approved-type hair and lint strainer when used with a pressure filter.

R4501.7.2 Installation.

Pumps shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer recommendations.

R4501.7.3 Capacity.

Pumps shall have design capacity at the following heads:

1.	Pressure Diatomaceous Earth—At least 60 feet (18 288 mm).

2.	Vacuum Diatomaceous Earth—20-inch (508 mm) vacuum on the suction side and 40-foot (12 192 mm) total head.

3.	Rapid Sand—At least 45 feet (13 716 mm).

4.	High Rate Sand—At least 60 feet (18 288 mm).

R4501.7.4 Materials.

Pump impellers, shafts, wear rings and other working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials.

R4501.8 Valves.
R4501.8.1 General.

Valves shall be made of materials that are approved in the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Valves located under concrete slabs shall be set in a pit having a least dimension of five pipe diameters with a minimum of at least 10 inches (254 mm) and fitted with a suitable cover. All valves shall be located where they will be readily accessible for maintenance and removal.

R4501.8.2 Full-way (gate) valves.

Full-way valves shall be installed to insure proper functioning of the filtration and piping system. When the pump is located below the overflow rim of the pool, a valve shall be installed on the discharge outlet and the suction line.

R4501.8.3 Check valves.

Where check valves are installed they shall be of the swing, spring or vertical check patterns.

R4501.8.4 Combination valves.

Combination valves shall be installed per manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R4501.9 Water supply.

Unless an approved type of filling system is installed, any water supply which in the judgment of the administrative authority may be used to fill the pool, shall be equipped with backflow protection. No over the rim fill spout shall be accepted unless located under a diving board, or properly guarded.

R4501.10 Waste water disposal.
R4501.10.1 Connection limitations.

Direct or indirect connections shall not be made between any storm drain, sewer, drainage system, seepage pit underground leaching pit, or subsoil drainage line, and any line connected to a swimming pool unless approved by the administrative authority.

R4501.10.2 Disposal through public sewer.

When the waste water from a swimming pool is to be disposed of through a public sewer, a 3-inch (76 mm) P-trap shall be installed on the lower terminus of the building drain and the tall piece from the trap shall extend a minimum of 3-inches (76 mm) above finished grade and below finished floor grade. This trap need not be vented. The connection between the filter waste discharge piping and the P-trap shall be made by means of an indirect connection.

R4501.10.3 Deviations.

Plans and specifications for any deviation from the above manner of installation shall first be approved by the administrative authority before any portion of any such system is installed. When waste water disposal is to seepage pit installation, it shall be installed in accordance with the approval granted by the administrative authority.

R4501.11 Separation tank.

A separation tank of an approved type may be used in lieu of the aforementioned means of waste water disposal when connected as a reclamation system.

R4501.12 Tests.
R4501.12.1 Pressure test.

All pool piping shall be tested and proved tight to the satisfaction of the administrative authority, under a static water or air pressure test of not less than 35 pounds per square inch (psi) (241 kPa) for 15 minutes.

Exception: Circulating pumps need not be tested as required in this section.

R4501.12.2 Drain and waste piping.

All drain and waste piping shall be tested by filling with water to the point of overflow and all joints shall be tight.

R4501.13 Drain piping.
R4501.13.1 Slope to discharge.

Drain piping serving gravity overflow gutter drains and deck drains shall be installed to provide continuous grade to point of discharge.

R4501.13.2 Joints and connections.

Joints and connections shall be made as required by the Florida Building Code, Plumbing.

R4501.14 Water heating equipment.
R4501.14.1 Labels.

Swimming pool water heating equipment shall conform to the design, construction and installation requirements in accordance with accepted engineering practices and shall bear the label of a recognized testing agency, and shall include a consideration of combustion air, venting and gas supply requirements for water heaters.

R4501.14.2 Water retention.

If a heater is not equipped or designed for an approved permanent bypass or antisiphon device, an approved permanent bypass or antisiphon device shall be installed to provide a positive means of retaining water in the heater when the pump is not in operation.

R4501.14.3 Pit drainage.

When the heater is installed in a pit, the pit shall be provided with approved drainage facilities.

R4501.14.4 Connections.

All water heating equipment shall be installed with flanges or a union connection adjacent to the heater.

R4501.14.5 Relief valve.

When water heating equipment which is installed in a closed system has a valve between the appliance and the pool, a pressure relief valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the water heating equipment. For units up to and including 200,000 Btu/hour input, the relief valve shall be rated by the American Gas Association.

R4501.15 Gas piping.

Gas piping shall comply with the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas.

R4501.16 Electrical.

Electrical equipment wiring and installation, including the bonding and grounding of pool components shall comply with Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building. Outlets supplying pool pump motors connected to single-phase 120-volt through 240-volt branch circuits, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, and outlets supplying other electrical equipment and underwater luminaires operating at voltages greater than the Low Voltage Contact Limit, connected to single-phase, 120 volt through 240 volt branch circuits, rated 15 or 20 amperes, whether by receptacle or by direct connection, shall be provided with ground-fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel.

R4501.17 Residential swimming barrier requirement.

Residential swimming pools shall comply with Sections R4501.17.1 through R4501.17.3.

Exception: A swimming pool with an approved safety pool cover complying with ASTM F1346.

R4501.17.1 Outdoor swimming pools.

Outdoor swimming pools shall be provided with a barrier complying with R4501.17.1.1 through R4501.17.1.14.

R4501.17.1.1

The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade the barrier may be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102 mm).

R4501.17.1.2

The barrier may not have any gaps, openings, indentations, protrusions, or structural components that could allow a young child to crawl under, squeeze through, or climb over the barrier as herein described below. One end of a removable child barrier shall not be removable without the aid of tools. Openings in any barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.

R4501.17.1.3

Solid barriers which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

R4501.17.1.4

Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width.

R4501.17.1.5

Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 13/4 inches (44 mm) in width.

R4501.17.1.6

Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 21/4-inch square (57 mm) unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or bottom which reduce the openings to no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

R4501.17.1.7

Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 13/4 inches (44 mm).

R4501.17.1.8

Access gates, when provided, shall be self-closing and shall comply with the requirements of Sections R4501.17.1.1 through R4501.17.1.7 and shall be equipped with a self-latching locking device located on the pool side of the gate. Where the device release is located no less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the device release mechanism may be located on either side of the gate and so placed that it cannot be reached by a young child over the top or through any opening or gap from the outside. Gates that provide access to the swimming pool must open outward away from the pool. The gates and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism.

R4501.17.1.9

Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one of the following shall apply:

1.	All doors and windows providing direct access from the home to the pool shall be equipped with an exit alarm complying with UL 2017 that has a minimum sound pressure rating of 85 dBA at 10 feet (3048 mm). Any deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold of the access. Separate alarms are not required for each door or window if sensors wired to a central alarm sound when contact is broken at any opening.

Exceptions:

a.	Screened or protected windows having a bottom sill height of 48 inches (1219 mm) or more measured from the interior finished floor at the pool access level.

b.	Windows facing the pool on floor above the first story.

c.	Screened or protected pass-through kitchen windows 42 inches (1067 mm) or higher with a counter beneath.

2.	All doors providing direct access from the home to the pool must be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching device with positive mechanical latching/locking installed a minimum of 54 inches (1372 mm) above the threshold, which is approved by the authority having jurisdiction.

3.	A swimming pool alarm that, when placed in a pool, sounds an alarm upon detection of an accidental or unauthorized entrance into the water. Such pool alarm must meet and be independently certified to ASTM Standard F2208, titled “Standard Safety Specification for Residential Pool Alarms,” which includes surface motion, pressure, sonar, laser, and infrared alarms. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “swimming pool alarm” does not include any swimming protection alarm device designed for individual use, such as an alarm attached to a child that sounds when the child exceeds a certain distance or becomes submerged in water.

R4501.17.1.10

Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Sections R4501.17.1.1 through R4501.17.1.9 and Sections R4501.17.1.12 through R4501.17.1.14. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.

R4501.17.1.11

Standard screen enclosures which meet the requirements of Section R4501.17 may be utilized as part of or all of the “barrier” and shall be considered a “nondwelling” wall. Removable child barriers shall have one end of the barrier nonremovable without the aid of tools.

R4501.17.1.12

The barrier must be placed around the perimeter of the pool and must be separate from any fence, wall, or other enclosure surrounding the yard unless the fence, wall, or other enclosure or portion thereof is situated on the perimeter of the pool, is being used as part of the barrier, and meets the barrier requirements of this section.

R4501.17.1.13

Removable child barriers must be placed sufficiently away from the water’s edge to prevent a young child or medically frail elderly person who may manage to penetrate the barrier from immediately falling into the water. Sufficiently away from the water’s edge shall mean no less than 20 inches (508 mm) from the barrier to the water’s edge. Dwelling or nondwelling walls including screen enclosures, when used as part or all of the “barrier” and meeting the other barrier requirements, may be as close to the water’s edge as permitted by this code.

R4501.17.1.14

A wall of a dwelling may serve as part of the barrier if it does not contain any door or window that opens to provide direct access from the home to the swimming pool.

R4501.17.1.14.1 Adjacent waterways.

Permanent natural or permanent man-made features such as bulkheads, canals, lakes, navigable waterways, etc., adjacent to a public or private swimming pool or spa may be permitted as a barrier when approved by the authority having jurisdiction. When evaluating such barrier features, the authority may perform on-site inspections and review evidence such as surveys, aerial photographs, water management agency standards and specifications, and any other similar documentation to verify, at a minimum, the following:

1.	The barrier feature is not subject to natural changes, deviations, or alterations and is capable of providing an equivalent level of protection as that provided by the code.

2.	The barrier feature clearly impedes, prohibits or restricts access to the swimming pool or spa.

R4501.17.1.15

A mesh safety barrier meeting the requirements of Section R4501.17, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and complying with ASTM F2286, shall be considered a barrier as defined in this section. Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Section R4501.17.1.8. Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of above-ground/on-ground private swimming pools.

R4501.17.2 Indoor swimming pools.

All walls surrounding indoor swimming pools shall comply with Section R4501.17.1.9.

R4501.17.3 Prohibited locations.

A barrier may not be located in a way that allows any permanent structure, equipment, or window that opens to provide access from the home to the swimming pool.

R4501.18 Ladders and steps.

All pools whether public or private shall be provided with a ladder or steps in the shallow end where water depth exceeds 24 inches (610 mm). In private pools where water depth exceeds 5 feet (1524 mm), there shall be ladders, stairs or underwater benches/swimouts in the deep end. Where manufactured diving equipment is to be used, benches or swimouts shall be recessed or located in a corner.

Exception: In private pools having more than one shallow end, only one set of steps are required. A bench, swim-out or ladder may be used at all additional shallow ends in lieu of an additional set of steps.

R4501.19 Final inspection.

Final electrical, and barrier code, inspection shall be completed prior to filling the pool with water.

Exception: Vinyl liner and fiberglass pools are required to be filled with water upon installation.

R4501.20 Filters.

Components shall have sufficient capacity to provide a complete turnover of pool water in 12 hours or less.

R4501.20.1 Sand filters.
R4501.20.1.1 Approved types.

Rapid sand filters (flow up to 5 gpm per square foot) shall be constructed in accordance with approved standards. Where high rate sand filters (flow in excess of 5 gpm per square foot) are used, they shall be of an approved type. The circulation system and backwash piping shall be adequate for proper backwashing of said filter and shall provide backwash flow rates of at least 12 gpm per square foot or rapid sand filters or 15 gpm per square foot or high rate sand filters.

R4501.20.1.2 Instructions.

Every filter system shall be provided with written operating instructions.

R4501.20.1.3 Filter system equipment.

On pressure-type filters, a means shall be provided to permit the release of internal pressure. A filter incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have lids which provide a slow and safe release of pressure as part of its design. A separation tank used in conjunction with a filter tank shall have as part of its design a manual means of air release or a lid which provides a slow and safe release of pressure as it is opened.

R4501.20.2 Diatomite-type filters.
R4501.20.2.1 Design.

Diatomite-type filters shall be designed for operation under either pressure or vacuum. The design capacity for both pressure and vacuum filters shall not exceed 2 gpm per square foot of effective filter area.

R4501.20.2.2 Filter aid.

Provision shall be made to introduce filter aid into the filter in such a way as to evenly precoat the filter septum.

R4501.21 Pool fittings.
R4501.21.1 Approved type.

Pool fittings shall be of an approved type and design as to be appropriate for the specific application.

R4501.21.2 Skimmers.

Approved surface skimmers are required and shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Skimmers shall be installed on the basis of one per 800 square feet (74 m2) of surface area or fraction thereof, and shall be designed for a flow rate of at least 25 gallons per minute (gpm) (1.6 L/s) per skimmer.

R4501.21.3 Main outlet.

An approved main outlet, when provided, shall be located on a wall or floor at or near the deepest point in the pool for emptying or circulation, or both, of the water in the pool.

R4501.21.4 Hydrostatic relief device.

In areas of anticipated water table an approved hydrostatic relief device shall be installed.

Exception: Plastic liner pools (where there is no structural bottom to the pool).

R4501.21.5 Inlet fittings.

Approved manufactured inlet fittings for the return of recirculated pool water shall be provided on the basis of at least one per 300 square feet (28 m2) of surface area. Such inlet fittings shall be designed and constructed to insure an adequate seal to the pool structure and shall incorporate a convenient means of sealing for pressure testing of the pool circulation piping. Where more than one inlet is required, the shortest distance between any two required inlets shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm).

R4501.22 Equipment foundations and enclosures.

All pool motors and equipment shall be installed in compliance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. All heating and electrical equipment, unless approved for outdoor installation, shall be adequately protected against the weather or installed within a building.

R4501.23 Accessibility and clearances.

Equipment shall be so installed as to provide ready accessibility for cleaning, operating, maintenance and servicing.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-46]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 46
REFERENCED STANDARDS

This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title, and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.4.

AAF

Aluminum Association of Florida, Inc.
3203 Lawton Road
OrlandoFlorida32803

AAF—20

Guide to Aluminum Construction in High Wind Areas 2020

R301.2.1.1.1

AAMA Standards by FGIA

Fenestration & Glazing Industry Alliance
1900 E. Golf Road, Suite 1250
SchaumburgIL60173

AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440—08, 11 or 17

North American Fenestration Standards/Specifications for Windows, Doors and Skylights

R308.6.9, R609.3

450—10 or

Voluntary Performance Rating Method for Mulled Fenestration Assemblies

R609.8

450—20

Performance Rating Method for Mulled Combination Assemblies, Composite Units, and Other Mulled Fenestration Systems

R609.8

506—16

Voluntary Specifications for Hurricane Impact and Cycle Testing of Fenestration Products

R301.2.1.2, R609.6.1

711—13, 20 or 22

Voluntary Specification for Self-Adhering Flashing Used for Installation of Exterior Wall Fenestration Products

R703.4, R905.1.1.1, R905.1.1.2

712—20

Voluntary Specification for Mechanically Attached Flexible Flashing

R703.4

714—15 or 19

Voluntary Specification for Liquid Applied Flashing Used to Create a Water-resistive Seal around Exterior Wall Openings in Buildings

R703.4

800—16

Voluntary Specifications and Test Methods for Sealants

R703.4

812—04(2010) or 19

Voluntary Practice for Assessment of Frame Deflection When Using One Component Polyurethane Foams for Air-Sealing Rough Openings of Fenestration Installations

R703.4

2502—19

Comparative Analysis Procedure for Window and Door Protocols

R609.3.1

AAMA/NSA 2100—19

Specifications for Sunrooms

R301.2.1.1.1

FMA/AAMA 100—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Windows with Flanges or Mounting

R703.4

FMA/AAMA 200—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Windows with Frontal Flanges for Surface Barrier Masonry

R703.4

FMA/WDMA 250—10

Standard Practice for the Installation of Non-Frontal Flange Windows with Mounting Flanges for Surface Barrier Masonry for Extreme Wind/Water Conditions

R703.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 300—12

Standard Practice for the Installation of Exterior Doors in Wood Frame Construction for Extreme Wind/Water Exposure

R703.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 400—13

Standard Practice for the Installation of Exterior Doors in Surface Barrier Masonry Construction for Extreme Wind/Weather Exposure

R703.4

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710—20

Guidelines for the Full Frame Replacement of Windows without Removal of External Brick Veneer

R703.4

ACCA

Air Conditioning Contractors of America
2800 Shirlington Road, Suite 300
ArlingtonVA22206

Manual D—2016

Residential Duct Systems

M1601.1, M1602.2

Manual J—2016

Residential Load Calculation

M1401.3

Manual S—14

Residential Equipment Selection

N1103.6, M1401.3

ACI

American Concrete Institute
38800 Country Club Drive
Farmington HillsMI48331

318—19

Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete

R301.2.2.2.4, R402.2, Table R404.1.2(1), Table R404.1.2(2), Table R404.1.2(5), Table R404.1.2(6), Table R404.1.2(7), Table R404.1.2(8), R404.1.3, R404.1.3.1, R404.1.3.3, R404.1.3.4, R404.1.4.2, R404.5.1, R608.1, R608.1.1, R608.1.2, R608.2, R608.5.1, R608.6.1, R608.8.2, R608.9.2, R608.9.3

332—20

Residential Code Requirements for Structural Concrete

R402.2, R403.1, R404.1.3, R404.1.4.2, R506.1, R506.2.4.2, R608.1, R608.5

AISI

American Iron and Steel Institute
25 Massachusetts Avenue, NW Suite 800
WashingtonDC20001

AISI S100—16/S1-18

North American Specification for the Design of Cold-formed Steel Structural Members, with Supplement 1, dated 2018

R608.9.2, R608.9.3

AISI S220—20

North American Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Nonstructural Members, 2020

R702.3.3

AISI S230—19

Standard for Cold-formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method for One- and Two-family Dwellings, 2019

R301.1.1, R301.2.1.1, R301.2.2.3.1, R301.2.2.3.5, R403.1.6, R505.1, R603.1, R608.9.2, R608.9.3, Figure 608.9(11), R608.10, R804.1

AISI S240—20

North American Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Structural Framing, 2020

R702.3.3

AMCA

Air Movement and Control Association
300 West University
Arlington HeightsIL60004

ANSI/AMCA 210-ANSI/ASHRAE 51—16

Laboratory Methods of Testing Fans for Aerodynamic Performance Rating

Table M1506.2

ANSI

American National Standards Institute
25 West 43rd Street, Fourth Floor
New YorkNY10036

A108.1A—17

Installation of Ceramic Tile in the Wet-set Method, with Portland Cement Mortar

R702.4.1

A108.1B—17

Installation of Ceramic Tile, Quarry Tile on a Cured Portland Cement Mortar Setting Bed with Dry-set or Latex Portland Mortar

R702.4.1

A108.4—19

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Organic Adhesives or Water-Cleanable Tile-setting Epoxy Adhesive

R702.4.1

A108.5—2020

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Dry-set Portland Cement Mortar or Latex Portland Cement Mortar

R702.4.1

A108.6—19

Installation of Ceramic Tile with Chemical-resistant, Water-cleanable Tile-setting and -grouting Epoxy

R702.4.1

A108.11—10

Interior Installation of Cementitious Backer Units

R702.4.1

A118.1—18

American National Standard Specifications for Dry-set Portland Cement Mortar

R702.4.1

A118.3—20

American National Standard Specifications for Chemical-resistant, Water-cleanable Tile-setting and -grouting Epoxy, and Water-cleanable Tile-setting Epoxy Adhesive

R702.4.1

A118.4—18

American National Standard Specifications for Latex-Portland Cement Mortar

R606.2.11

A118.10—14

Specification for Load-bearing, Bonded, Waterproof Membranes for Thin-set Ceramic Tile and Dimension Stone Installation

P2709.2, P2709.2.4

A136.1—20

American National Standard Specifications for Organic Adhesives for Installation of Ceramic Tile

R702.4.1

A137.1—19

American National Standard Specifications for Ceramic Tile

R702.4.1

LC1/CSA 6.26—18

Fuel Gas Piping Systems Using Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing (CSST)

G2411.2, G2411.3, G2414.5.3, G2414.5.4, G2414.5.5

LC4/CSA 6.32—12

Press-connect Metallic Fittings for Use in Fuel Gas Distribution Systems

G2414.10.2

ANSI/NGWA-01—14

Water Well Construction Standard

P2602.1

Z21.1/CSA 1.1—2016

Household Cooking Gas Appliances

G2447.1

Z21.5.1/CSA 7.1—17

Gas Clothes Dryers—Volume I—Type I Clothes Dryers

G2438.1

Z21.8—94 (R2017)

Installation of Domestic Gas Conversion Burners

G2443.1

Z21.10.1/CSA 4.1—2012

Gas Water Heaters—Volume I—Storage Water Heaters with Input Ratings of 75,000 Btu per hour or Less

G2448.1

Z21.10.3/CSA 4.3—2017

Gas Water Heaters—Volume III—Storage Water Heaters with Input Ratings above 75,000 Btu per hour, Circulating and Instantaneous

G2448.1

Z21.11.2—2016

Gas-fired Room Heaters—Volume II—Unvented Room Heaters

G2445.1

Z21.13/CSA 4.9—2017

Gas-fired Low-pressure Steam and Hot Water Boilers

G2452.1

Z21.15/CSA 9.1—09(R2014)

Manually Operated Gas Valves for Appliances, Appliance Connector Valves and Hose End Valves

Table G2420.1.1

Z21.22—99 (R2003)

Relief Valves for Hot Water Supply Systems—with Addenda Z21.22a—2000 (R2003) and 21.22b—2001 (R2003)

P2804.2, P2804.7

Z21.24/CGA 6.10—2015

Connectors for Gas Appliances

G2422.1

Z21.40.1/CSA 2.91—96 (R2017)

Gas-fired, Heat-activated Air-conditioning and Heat Pump Appliances

G2449.1

Z21.40.2/CSA 2.92—96 (R2017)

Air-conditioning and Heat Pump Appliances (Thermal Combustion)

G2449.1

Z21.42—2014

Gas-fired Illuminating Appliances

G2450.1

Z21.47/CSA 2.3—2016

Gas-fired Central Furnaces

G2442.1

Z21.50/CSA 2.22—2016

Vented Decorative Gas Fireplaces

G2434.1

Z21.54— 2014

Gas Hose Connectors for Portable Outdoor Gas-fired Appliances

G2422.1

Z21.56/CSA 4.7—17

Gas-fired Pool Heaters

G2441.1

Z21.58—95/CSA 1.6—2015

Outdoor Cooking Gas Appliances

G2447.1

Z21.60/CSA 2.26—2017

Decorative Gas Appliances for Installation in Solid Fuel-burning Fireplaces

G2432.1

Z21.69/CSA 6.16—2015

Connectors for Movable Gas Appliances

G2422.1.5

Z21.75/CSA 6.27—2016

Connectors for Outdoor Gas Appliances and Manufactured Homes

G2422.1

Z21.80—11(R2016)

Line Pressure Regulators

G2421.1

Z21.84—2017

Manually Lighted, Natural Gas Decorative Gas Appliances for Installation in Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances

G2432.1, G2432.2

Z21.86—2016

Vented Gas-fired Vented Space Heating Appliances

G2436.1, G2437.1, G2446.1

Z21.88/CSA 2.33—2016

Vented Gas Fireplace Heaters

G2435, G2435.1

Z21.91—2017

Ventless Firebox Enclosures for Gas-fired Unvented Decorative Room Heaters

G2445.7.1

ANSI Z21.93/CSA 6.30—2017

Excess Flow Valves for Natural Gas and LP Propane Gas with Pressures up to 5 psig

G2421.4

Z21.97—2014

Outdoor Decorative Gas Appliances

G2454.1

Z83.8/CSA 2.6—2016

Gas Unit Heaters, Gas Packaged Heaters, Gas Utility Heaters and Gas-fired Duct Furnaces

G2444.1

Z83.19—01 (R2014)

Gas-fired High-intensity Infrared Heaters

G2451.1

Z83.20—2016

Gas-fired Low-intensity Infrared Heaters Outdoor Decorative Appliances

G2451.1

Z97.1—2014

Safety Glazing Materials Used in Buildings—Safety Performance Specifications and Methods of Test

R308.1.1, R308.3.1

APA

APA—The Engineered Wood Association
7011 South 19th
TacomaWA98466

ANSI 117—2020

Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood Species

R502.1.3, R602.1.3, R802.1.2

ANSI/A190.1—2022

Product Standard for Structural Glued-laminated Timber

R502.1.3, R602.1.3, R802.1.2

ANSI/APA PRP 210—2019

Standard for Performance-rated Engineered Wood Siding

R604.1, Table R703.3(1), R703.3.3

ANSI/APA PRG 320—2019

Standard for Performance-rated Cross Laminated Timber

R502.1.6, R602.1.6, R802.1.6

ANSI/APA PRR 410—2021

Standard for Performance-rated Engineered Wood Rim Boards

R502.1.7, R602.1.7, R802.1.7

ANSI/APA PRS 610.1—2018

Standard for Performance-Rated Structural Insulated Panels in Wall Applications

R602.1.11, R610.3, R610.4

APA E30—19

Engineered Wood Construction Guide

R803.2.2, R803.2.3

APSP (PHTA Standards)

Pool & Hot Tub Alliance
2111 Eisenhower Avenue, Suite 500
AlexandriaVA22314

ANSI/APSP/ICC 3—2014

American National Standard for Permanently Installed Residential Spas and Swim Spas

R4501.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 4—2012(R2022)

American National Standard for Above-ground/On-ground Residential Swimming Pools

R4501.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 5—2012(R2022)

American National Standard for Residential In-ground Swimming Pools

R4501.6.1

ANSI/APSP/ICC 6—2013

American National Standard for Residential Portable Spas and Swim Spas

R4501.6.1

ANSI/PHTA/ICC 7—2020

American National Standard for Suction Entrapment Avoidance in Swimming Pools, Wading Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs and Catch Basins

R4501.6.1, R4501.6.3, R4501.6.6

ASCE/SEI

American Society of Civil Engineers
Structural Engineering Institute
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
RestonVA20191

7—22

Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures

R301.2.1.1, R301.2.1.2, R301.2.1.2.1, R301.2.1.5, R301.2.1.5.1, Table R301.2(2), R301.2.1.6, R322.3.3, R324.4.1.2, Table R608.6(1), Table R608.6(2), Table R608.6(3), Table R608.6(4), Table R608.7(1A), Table R608.7(1B), Table R608.7(1C), R608.9.2, R608.9.3, R609.2, R609.4, R609.11.1, Table R905.4.4.1, R905.17.1, Table R908.8.1

24—2014

Flood-resistant Design and Construction

R301.2.4, R301.2.4.1, R322.1, R322.1.1, R322.1.6, R322.2.2, R322.3.3, R322.3.3.1

32—01

Design and Construction of Frost-protected Shallow Foundations

R403.1.4.1

ASHRAE

American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.
1791 Tullie Circle, NE
AtlantaGA30329

ASHRAE—2021

ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals

P3001.2, P3101.4

34—2019

Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants

M1411.1

ASME

American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Three Park Avenue
New YorkNY10016-5990

ASME/A17.1—2019/B44-19/CSA B44—2016

Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators

R321.1

A18.1—2020

Safety Standard for Platforms and Stairway Chair Lifts

R321.2

A112.1.2—2022

Air Gaps in Plumbing Systems

P2717.1, Table P2902.3, P2902.3.1

A112.1.3—2000 (Reaffirmed 2019)

Air Gap Fittings for Use with Plumbing Fixtures, Appliances and Appurtenances

Table P2701.1, P2717.1, Table P2902.3, P2902.3.1

A112.3.1—2007 (R2022)

Stainless Steel Drainage Systems for Sanitary, DWV, Storm and Vacuum Applications Above and Below Ground

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

A112.3.4—2018/CSA B45.9—18

Macerating Toilet Systems and Related Components

Table P2701.1, P3007.5

A112.4.1—(R2019)

Water Heater Relief Valve Drain Tubes

P2804.6.1

A112.4.2—2015/CSA B45.16—2015(R2020)

Water-closet Personal Hygiene Devices

P2722.5

A112.4.3—1999 (R2019)

Plastic Fittings for Connecting Water Closets to the Sanitary Drainage System

P3003.14

A112.4.4—2017

Plastic Push Fit Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Fittings

Table P3002.3, P3003.3.4. P3003.9.4

A112.4.14—2017

Manually Operated Valves for Use in Plumbing Systems

Table P2903.9.4

A112.6.1M—2017

Floor-affixed Supports for Off-the-floor Plumbing Fixtures for Public Use

Table P2701.1, P2702.4

A112.6.2—2022

Framing-affixed Supports for Off-the-floor Water Closets with Concealed Tanks

Table P2701.1, P2702.4

A112.6.3—2019

Floor and Trench Drains

Table P2701.1

A112.14.1—03(2022)

Backwater Valves

P3008.3

A112.18.1—2018/CSA B125.1—2018

Plumbing Supply Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2708.4, P2708.5, P2722.1, P2722.3, P2902.2, Table P2903.9.4

ASME A112.18.2—2020/CSA B125.2—2020

Plumbing Waste Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2702.2

A112.18.3M—2002 (R2022)

Performance Requirements for Backflow Protection Devices and Systems in Plumbing Fixture Fittings

P2708.5, P2722.3

A112.18.6—2017/CSA B125.6—17

Flexible Water Connectors

P2906.7

A112.19.1—2018/CSA B45.2—2018

Enameled Cast-iron and Enameled Steel Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2711.1

A112.19.2—2018/CSA B45.1—2018

Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2705.1, P2711.1, P2712.1, P2712.2, P2712.9

A112.19.3—2021/CSA B45.4—2021

Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2705.1, P2711.1, P2712.1

A112.19.5—2017/CSA B45.15—2017

Flush Valves and Spuds for Water-closets, Urinals and Tanks

Table P2701.1

A112.19.7/2012 CSA B45.10—2012(R2017)

Hydromassage Bathtub Systems

Table P2701.1

A112.19.12—2014(R2021)

Wall-mounted and Pedestal-mounted, Adjustable, Elevating, Tilting and Pivoting Lavatory, Sink and Shampoo Bowl Carrier Systems and Drain Waste Systems

Table P2701.1, P2711.4, P2714.2

A112.19.14—2013(R2018)

Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with Dual Flushing Device

P2712.1

A112.19.15—2012(R2017)

Bathtub/Whirlpool Bathtubs with Pressure-sealed Doors

Table P2701.1, P2713.2

A112.36.2m—1991(R2017)

Cleanouts

P3005.2.10.2

B1.20.1—2013(R2018)

Pipe Threads, General-purpose (Inch)

M2101.16.1, M2105.9.1, G2414.9, P3003.3.3, P3003.6.4, P3003.17.1, P3003.9.3

B16.3—2021

Malleable-iron-threaded Fittings, Classes 150 and 300

Table P2906.6

B16.4—2021

Gray-iron-threaded Fittings

Table P2906.6, Table P3002.3

B16.9—2018

Factory-made, Wrought-steel Buttwelding Fittings

Table P2906.6

B16.11—2021

Forged Fittings, Socket-welding and Threaded

Table P2906.6

B16.12—2009(R2019)

Cast-iron-threaded Drainage Fittings

Table P3002.3

B16.15—2018

Cast-alloy-threaded Fittings Classes 125 and 250

Table P2906.6, Table P3002.3

B16.18—2018

Cast-copper-alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings

Table P2906.6, Table P3002.3

B16.22—2018

Wrought-copper and Copper-alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings

Table P2906.6, Table P3002.3

B16.23—2021

Cast-copper-alloy Solder Joint Drainage Fittings (DWV)

Table P3002.3

B16.26—2018

Cast-copper-alloy Fittings for Flared Copper Tubes

Table P2906.6, Table P3002.3

B16.28—1994

Wrought-steel Buttwelding Short Radius Elbows and Returns

Table P2906.6

B16.29—2017

Wrought-copper and Wrought-copper-alloy Solder Joint Drainage Fittings (DWV)

Table P3002.3

B16.33—2012(R2017)

Manually Operated Metallic Gas Valves for Use in Gas Piping Systems up to 125 psig (Sizes 1/2 through 2)

Table G2420.1.1

B16.34—2020

Valves—Flanged, Threaded and Welding End

Table P2903.9.4

B16.44—2012(R2017)

Manually Operated Metallic Gas Valves for Use in Above-ground Piping Systems up to 5 psi

Table G2420.1.1

B16.51—2018

Copper and Copper Alloy Press-Connect Pressure Fittings

Table P2906.6

B18.6.1—81(2016)

Wood Screws (inch Series)

R904.5.2

B36.10M—2018

Welded and Seamless Wrought-steel Pipe

G2414.4.2

BPVC—2019

ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (2007 Edition)

M2001.1.1, G2452.1

CSD-1—2021

Controls and Safety Devices for Automatically Fired Boilers

M2001.1.1, G2452.1

ASSE 1016/ASME 112.1016/CSA B125.16—2020

Performance Requirements for Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower Combinations

Table P2701.1, P2708.4, P2722.2

ASSE

American Society of Sanitary Engineering
901 Canterbury, Suite A
WestlakeOH44145

1001—2017

Performance Requirements for Atmospheric-type Vacuum Breakers

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

ASSE 1002—2020/ASME A112.1002—2020/CSA B125.12—20

Anti-siphon Fill Valves

Table P2701.1, Table P2902.3, P2902.4.1

1003—2009

Performance Requirements for Water-pressure-reducing Valves for Domestic Water Distribution Systems

P2903.3.1

1008—2006

Performance Requirements for Plumbing Aspects of Residential Food Waste Disposer Units

Table P2701.1

1010—2004

Performance Requirements for Water Hammer Arresters

P2903.5

1011—17

Performance Requirements for Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

1012—2009

Performance Requirements for Backflow Preventers with Intermediate Atmospheric Vent

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.3, P2902.5.1, P2902.5.5.3

1013—2011

Performance Requirements for Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers and Reduced Pressure Principle Fire Protection Backflow Preventers

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.5, P2902.5.1, P2902.5.5.3

1015—2011

Performance Requirements for Double Check Backflow Prevention Assemblies and Double Check Fire Protection Backflow Prevention Assemblies

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.6

ASSE 1016/ASME 112.1016—2017/CSA B125.16—2017

Performance Requirements for Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower Combinations

Table P2701.1, P2708.4, P2722.2

1017—2009

Performance Requirements for Temperature-actuated Mixing Valves for Hot Water Distribution Systems

P2724.1, P2802.1, P2803.2

1018—2001

Performance Requirements for Trap Seal Primer Valves; Potable Water Supplied

P3201.2.1, P3201.2.1.1, P3201.2.1.2

1019—2011(R2016)

Performance Requirements for Freeze-resistant, Wall Hydrants, Vacuum Breaker, Draining Types

Table P2701.1, Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

1020—2004

Performance Requirements for Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.4

1023—2016

Performance Requirements for Hot Water Dispensers, Household-storage-type—Electrical

Table P2701.1

1024—2017

Performance Requirements for Dual Check Backflow Preventers, Anti-siphon-type, Residential Applications

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.7

1035—2008

Performance Requirements for Laboratory Faucet Backflow Preventers

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

ASSE 1037—2015/ASME A112.1037—2015/CSA B125.37—15

Pressurized Flushing Devices (Flushometer) for Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1

1044—2015

Performance Requirements for Trap Seal Primer Devices Drainage Types and Electronic Design Types

P3201.2.1.3

1047—2011

Performance Requirements for Reduced Pressure Detector Fire Protection Backflow Prevention Assemblies

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.5

1048—2011

Performance Requirements for Double Check Detector Fire Protection Backflow Prevention Assemblies

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.6

1050—2009

Performance Requirements for Stack Air Admittance Valves for Sanitary Drainage Systems

P3114.1

1051—2009

Performance Requirements for Individual and Branch-type Air Admittance Valves for Plumbing Drainage Systems

P3114.1

1052—2016

Performance Requirements for Hose Connection Backflow Preventers

Table P2701.1, Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

1056—2013

Performance Requirements for Spill-resistant Vacuum Breakers

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.4

1060—2017

Performance Requirements for Outdoor Enclosures for Fluid-conveying Components

P2902.6.1

1061—2015

Performance Requirements for Push Fit Fittings

Table P2906.6, Table P2906.21

1062—2017

Performance Requirements for Temperature-actuated, Flow Reduction (TAFR) Valves for Individual Supply Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2724.2

1066—1997

Performance Requirements for Individual Pressure Balancing In-line Valves for Individual Fixture Fittings

P2722.4

ASSE 1070—2020/ASME A112.1070—2020/CSA B125.70—2020

Performance Requirements for Water-temperature-limiting Devices

P2713.3, P2721.2, P2724.1

1072—07

Performance Requirements for Barrier-type Floor Drain Trap Seal Protection Devices

P3201.2.1.4

1081—2014

Performance Requirements for Backflow Preventers with Integral Pressure Reducing Boiler Feed Valve and Intermediate Atmospheric Vent Style for Domestic and Light Commercial Water

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.3, P2902.5.1

ASTM

ASTM International
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West ConshohockenPA19428

A36/A36M—14

Specification for Carbon Structural Steel

R608.5.2.2

A53/A53M—2018

Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-dipped, Zinc-coated Welded and Seamless

R407.3, Table M2101.1, G2414.4.2, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1)

A74—17

Specification for Cast-iron Soil Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, P3005.2.6, Table P3302.1

A90/A90M(2013)

Standard Test Method for Weight (Mass) of Coating on Iron and Steel Articles with Zinc or Zinc Alloy Coatings

R904.5.3

A106/A106M—2018

Specification for Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe for High-temperature Service

Table M2101.1, G2414.3.2

A126—04(2014)

Gray Iron Castings for Valves, Flanges and Pipe Fittings

Table P2903.9.4

A153/A153M—2016A

Specification for Zinc Coating (Hot Dip) on Iron and Steel Hardware

R317.3, Table R606.3.4.1, R703.6.3

A167—99 (2009)

Specification for Stainless and Heat-resisting Chromium-nickel Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip

Table R606.3.4.1

A240/A240M—17

Standard Specification for Chromium and Chromium-nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications

R904.5.3, Table R905.4.4

A254—2010(2018)

Specification for Copper Brazed Steel Tubing

Table M2101.1, M2202.1, G2414.5.1

A268/A268M— 2010(16)

Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded Ferritic and Martensitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service

G2414.5.2

A269/A269M— 2015A

Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded Austenitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service

M2202.1, G2414.5.2

A307—2014E1

Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts and Studs, 60,000 psi Tensile Strength

R608.5.2.2

A312/A312M—2016M

Specification for Seamless, Welded and Heavily Cold Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes

G2414.4.2, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.13.2, P2906.14

A539—99

Specification for Electric-resistance-welded Coiled Steel Tubing for Gas and Fuel Oil Lines

M2202.1

A615/A615M—2015aE1

Specification for Deformed and Plain Billet-steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement

R402.3.1, R404.1.3.3.7.1, R608.5.2.1

A641/A641M—14

Specification for Zinc-coated (Galvanized) Carbon Steel Wire

Table R606.3.4.1, R904.5.2

A653/A653M—2017

Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-iron Alloy-coated Galvanized) by the Hot-dip Process

R317.3.1, Table R606.3.4.1, R608.5.2.3, Table R905.4.4, M1601.1.1

A706/A706M—2016

Specification for Low-alloy Steel Deformed and Plain Bars for Concrete Reinforcement

R402.3.1, R404.1.3.3.7.1, R608.5.2.1

A755/A755M—2016E1

Specification for Steel Sheet, Metallic Coated by the Hot-dip Process and Prepainted by the Coil-coating Process for Exterior Exposed Building Products

Table R905.4.4

A778/A778M—16

Specification for Welded Unannealed Austenitic Stainless Steel Tubular Products

Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6

A792/A792M—10 (2015)

Specification for Steel Sheet, 55% Aluminum-zinc Alloy-coated by the Hot-dip Process

R608.5.2.3, Table R905.4.4

A875/A875M—13

Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-5%, Aluminum Alloy-coated by the Hot-dip Process

R608.5.2.3

A888—2018

Specification for Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste and Vent Piping Application

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

A924/A924M—2017A

Standard Specification for General Requirements for Steel Sheet, Metallic-coated by the Hot-Dip Process

Table R905.4.4

A996/A996M—16

Specifications for Rail-steel and Axle-steel Deformed Bars for Concrete Reinforcement

Table R404.1.2(9), R402.3, R404.1.3.3.7.1, R608.5.2.1, Table R608.5.4(2)

A1064/A1064M—16a

Carbon-Steel Wire and Welded Wire Reinforcement, Plain and Deformed, for Concrete

R506.2.4.2

B32—08 (R2014)

Specification for Solder Metal

P3003.6.3

B42—2015A

Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1)

B43—15

Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, Standard Sizes

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1)

B75/B75M —11

Specification for Seamless Copper Tube

Table M2101.1, Table P2905.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2

B88—2016

Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube

Table M2101.1, G2414.5.3, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Figure AP103.3(2), Figure AP103.3(3), Figure AP103.3(4)

B101—12

Specification for Lead-coated Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction

Table R905.4.4

B117—16

Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray Apparatus (Fog)

R904.5.2

B135/B135M—2017

Specification for Seamless Brass Tube

Table M2101.1

B209—14

Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-alloy Sheet and Plate

Table R905.4.4

B251/B251M—2017

Specification for General Requirements for Wrought Seamless Copper and Copper-alloy Tube

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2

B302—2017

Specification for Threadless Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P3002.1(1)

B306—13

Specification for Copper Drainage Tube (DWV)

Table M2101.1, Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2)

B370—12

Specification for Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction

Table R905.4.4, Table P2701.1

B447—12a

Specification for Welded Copper Tube

Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5

B695—2004 (2016)

Standard Specification for Coatings of Zinc Mechanically Deposited on Iron and Steel

R317.3.1, R317.3.3

B813—2016

Specification for Liquid and Paste Fluxes for Soldering Applications of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube

M2103.3, P2906.15, P3003.6.3

B828—2016

Practice for Making Capillary Joints by Soldering of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube and Fittings

M2103.3, P2906.15, P3003.6.3

C4—04(2018)

Specification for Clay Drain Tile and Perforated Clay Drain Tile

Table P3302.1

C5—2018

Specification for Quicklime for Structural Purposes

R702.2.1, AS104.4.6.1, AS109

C14—15a

Specification for Non-reinforced Concrete Sewer, Storm Drain and Culvert Pipe

Table P3002.2

C22/C22M—00 (2015)

Specification for Gypsum

R702.2.1, R702.3.1

C27—1998 (2018)

Specification for Standard Classification of Fireclay and High-alumina Refractory Brick

R1001.5

C28/C28M—2015

Specification for Gypsum Plasters

R702.2.1

C33M—2018

Specification for Concrete Aggregates

R403.4.1

C34—2017

Specification for Structural Clay Load-bearing Wall Tile

Table R301.2(1), R606.2.2

C35/C35M—(2014)

Specification for Inorganic Aggregates for Use in Gypsum Plaster

R702.2.1

C55—2017

Specification for Concrete Building Brick

R202, Table R301.2(1), R606.2.1

C56—13 (2017)

Standard Specification for Structural Clay Nonloadbearing Tile

R606.2.2

C59/C59M—00 (2015)

Specification for Gypsum Casting Plaster and Molding Plaster

R702.2.1

C61/C61M—00 (2015)

Specification for Gypsum Keene’s Cement

R702.2.1

C62—2017

Standard Specification for Building Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

R202, Table R301.2(1), R606.2.2

C73—2017

Specification for Calcium Silicate Face Brick (Sand Lime Brick)

R202, Table R301.2(1), R606.2.1

C76—2018A

Specification for Reinforced Concrete Culvert, Storm Drain and Sewer Pipe.

Table P3002.2

C90—2016A

Specification for Load-bearing Concrete Masonry Units

Table R301.2(1), R606.2.1

C91/C91M—2018

Specification for Masonry Cement

R702.2.2, R703.7.2

C94M—2017

Standard Specification for Ready-mixed Concrete

R404.1.3.3.2, R608.5.1.2

C126—2017

Standard Specification for Ceramic Glazed Structural Clay Facing Tile, Facing Brick, and Solid Masonry Units

R606.2.2

C129—2017

Specification for Nonload-bearing Concrete Masonry Units

Table R301.2(1)

C143/C143M—15A

Test Method for Slump of Hydraulic Cement Concrete

R404.1.3.3.4, R608.5.1.4

C145—85

Specification for Solid Load-bearing Concrete Masonry Units

R202, Table R301.2(1)

C150/C150M—2018

Specification for Portland Cement

R608.5.1.1, R702.2.2, R703.7.2

C199—1984 (2016)

Test Method for Pier Test for Refractory Mortar

R1001.5, R1001.8, R1003.12

C207—2018

Specification for Hydrated Lime for Masonry Purposes

Table R606.2.8

C208—2012(2017)E1

Specification for Cellulosic Fiber Insulating Board

R602.1.10, Table R906.2

C212—14

Standard Specification for Structural Clay Facing Tile

R602.2.2

C216—2017A

Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

R202, Table R301.2(1), R606.2.2

C270—14a

Specification for Mortar for Unit Masonry

R606.2.8, R606.2.10, R606.2.11

C315—2007 (2016)

Specification for Clay Flue Liners and Chimney Pots

R1001.8, R1003.11.1, Table R1003.14(1), G2425.12

C406/C406M—15

Specifications for Roofing Slate

R905.6.4

C411—2017

Test Method for Hot-surface Performance of High-temperature Thermal Insulation

M1601.3

C425—04 (2018)

Specification for Compression Joints for Vitrified Clay Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.2, P3003.10, P3003.13

C443—12(2017)

Specification for Joints for Concrete Pipe and Manholes, Using Rubber Gaskets

P3003.5, P3003.13

C475/C475M—2017

Specification for Joint Compound and Joint Tape for Finishing Gypsum Wallboard

R702.3.1

C476—19

Specification for Grout for Masonry

R606.2.12

C503/C503M—2015

Standard Specification for Marble Dimension Stone

R606.2.4

C514—04 (2014)

Specification for Nails for the Application of Gypsum Wallboard

R702.3.1

C552—2017E1

Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Thermal Insulation

Table R906.2

C557—2003 (2017)

Specification for Adhesives for Fastening Gypsum Wallboard to Wood Framing

R702.3.1

C564—14

Specification for Rubber Gaskets for Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings

P3003.4.2, P3003.4.3, P3003.13

C568/C568M—2015

Standard Specification for Limestone Dimension Stone

R606.2.4

C578—2018

Specification for Rigid, Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation

R316.8, R403.3, Table R703.8.4(2), Table R703.15.1, Table R703.15.2, Table R703.16.1, Table R703.16.2, Table R906.2

C587—2004(2018)

Specification for Gypsum Veneer Plaster

R702.2.1

C595/C595M—2018

Specification for Blended Hydraulic Cements

R608.5.1.1, R702.2.2, R703.7.2

C615/C615M—11

Standard Specification for Granite Dimension Stone

R606.2.4

C616/C615M—2015

Standard Specification for Quartz Dimension Stone

R606.2.4

C629/C629M—2015

Standard Specification for Slate Dimension Stone

R606.2.4

C631—09 (2014)

Specification for Bonding Compounds for Interior Gypsum Plastering

R702.2.1

C645—2018

Specification for Nonstructural Steel Framing Members

R702.3.3

C652—2017A

Specification for Hollow Brick (Hollow Masonry Units Made from Clay or Shale)

R202, Table R301.2(1), R606.2.2

C685/C685M—2017

Specification for Concrete Made by Volumetric Batching and Continuous Mixing

R404.1.3.3.2, R608.5.1.2

C700—2018

Specification for Vitrified Clay Pipe, Extra Strength, Standard Strength and Perforated

Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

C726—2017

Standard Specification for Mineral Roof Insulation Board

Table R906.2

C728—2017A

Standard Specification for Perlite Thermal Insulation Board

Table R906.2

C744—16

Standard Specification for Prefaced Concrete and Calcium Silicate Masonry Units

R606.2.1

C836/C836M—2018

Specification for High Solids Content, Cold Liquid-applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Separate Wearing Course

R905.15.2

C843—2017

Specification for Application of Gypsum Veneer Plaster

R702.2.1

C844—2015

Specification for Application of Gypsum Base to Receive Gypsum Veneer Plaster

R702.2.1

C847—2018

Specification for Metal Lath

R702.2.1, R702.2.2

C887—13

Specification for Packaged, Dry, Combined Materials for Surface Bonding Mortar

R406.1, R606.2.8, R606.2.9

C897—15

Specification for Aggregate for Job-mixed Portland Cement-based Plasters

R702.2.2

C920—2018

Standard Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants

R406.4.1, R703.4, E405.1, F303.6

C926—2018B

Specification for Application of Portland Cement-based Plaster

R202, R702.2.2, R702.2.2.1, R703.7, R703.7.4, R703.7.5, AS104.4.7, AS104.4.8, AS109

C933—2018

Specification for Welded Wire Lath

R702.2.1, R702.2.2

C946—2018

Standard Practice for Construction of Dry-Stacked, Surface-Bonded Walls

R606.2.9

C954—2018

Specification for Steel Drill Screws for the Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Steel Studs from 0.033 in (0.84 mm) or to 0.112 in. (2.84 mm) in Thickness

R702.3.5.1

C957/C957M—2017

Specification for High-solids Content, Cold Liquid-applied Elastomeric Waterproofing Membrane for Use with Integral Wearing Surface

R905.15.2

C1002—2018

Specification for Steel Self-Piercing Tapping Screws for Application of Gypsum Panel Products or Metal Plaster Bases to Wood Studs or Steel Studs

R702.3.1, R702.3.5.1

C1029—15

Specification for Spray-applied Rigid Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation

R905.14.2

C1032—2018

Specification for Woven Wire Plaster Base

R702.2.1, R702.2.2

C1047—2018

Specification for Accessories for Gypsum Wallboard and Gypsum Veneer Base

R702.2.1, R702.2.2, R702.3.1

C1063—2018B

Specification for Installation of Lathing and Furring to Receive Interior and Exterior Portland Cement-based Plaster

R702.2.2, R703.7, R703.7.1

C1088—2018

Standard Specification for Thin Veneer Brick Units Made from Clay or Shale

R606.2.2

C1107/C1107M—2017

Standard Specification for Packaged Dry, Hydraulic-cement Grout (Nonshrink)

R402.3.1

C1116/C116M—10 (Reapproved 2015)

Standard Specification for Fiber-reinforced Concrete and Shotcrete

R402.3.1, R506.2.4.2

C1157—17/C1157M—2017

Standard Performance Specification for Hydraulic Cement

R608.5.1.1, R703.7.2

C1167—2011 (2017)

Specification for Clay Roof Tiles

R905.3.4

C1173—2018

Specification for Flexible Transition Couplings for Underground Piping Systems

P3003.3.1, P3003.5, P3003.6.1, P3003.9.1, P3003.10, P3003.12.1, P3003.12.2, P3003.13

C1177/C1177M—17

Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Substrate for Use as Sheathing

R702.3.1, Table R906.2

C1178/C1178M—2018

Specification for Glass Mat Water-resistant Gypsum Backing Panel

R702.3.1, R702.3.7, Table R702.4.2

C1186—2008 (2016)

Specification for Flat Fiber Cement Sheets

R703.10.1, R703.10.2, R704.2.2

C1261—2013 (2017)E1

Specification for Firebox Brick for Residential Fireplaces

R1001.5, R1001.8

C1277—2018

Specification for Shielded Couplings Joining Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings

P3003.4.3

C1278/C1278M—2017

Specification for Fiber-reinforced Gypsum Panels

R702.3.1, R702.3.7, Table R702.4.2, Table R906.2

C1281—14

Standard Specification for Preformed Tape Sealants

R703.4

C1283—2015

Practice for Installing Clay Flue Lining

R1003.9.1, R1003.12

C1288—2017

Standard Specification for Discrete Nonasbestos Fiber-cement Interior Substrate Sheets

Table R702.4.2

C1289—2018

Standard Specification for Faced Rigid Cellular Polyisocyanurate Thermal Insulation Board

R316.8, Table R703.8.4(2), Table R703.15.1, Table R703.15.2, Table R703.16.1, Table R703.16.2, Table R906.2

C1325—2018

Standard Specification for Nonasbestos Fiber-mat Reinforced Cement Interior Substrate Sheets Backer Units

Table R702.4.2

C1328/C1328M—12

Specification for Plastic (Stucco) Cement

R702.2.2, R703.7.2

C1364—2017

Standard Specification for Architectural Cast Stone

R606.2.5

C1396/C1396M—2017

Specification for Gypsum Board

R702.2.1, R702.2.2, R702.3.1, R702.3.7

C1405—2016

Standard Specification for Glazed Brick (Single Fired, Brick Units)

R606.2.2

C1440—2017

Specification for Thermoplastic Elastomeric (TPE) Gasket Materials for Drain, Waste and Vent (DWV), Sewer, Sanitary and Storm Plumbing Systems

P3003.13

C1460—2017

Specification for Shielded Transition Couplings for Use with Dissimilar DWV Pipe and Fittings Above Ground

P3003.13

C1461—08 (2017)

Specification for Mechanical Couplings Using Thermoplastic Elastomeric (TPE) Gaskets for Joining Drain, Waste and Vent (DWV) Sewer, Sanitary and Storm Plumbing Systems for Above and Below Ground Use

P3003.13

C1492—2003 (2016)

Specification for Concrete Roof Tile

R905.3.5

C1513—2018

Standard Specification for Steel Tapping Screws for Cold-formed Steel Framing Connections

R702.3.5.1, Table R703.3(2), Table R703.16.1, Table R703.16.2

C1540—2018

Specification for Heavy Duty Shielded Couplings Joining Hubless Cast-iron Soil Pipe and Fittings

P3003.4.3

C1634—2017

Standard Specification for Concrete Facing Brick

R606.2.1

C1658/C1658M—2018

Standard Specification for Glass Mat Gypsum Panels

R702.3.1

C1668—13a

Standard Specification for Externally Applied Reflective Insulation Systems on Rigid Duct in Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Systems

M1601.3

C1670/C1670M—18

Standard Specification for Adhered Manufactured Stone Masonry Veneer Units

R606.2.6

C1691—(2017)

Standard Specification for Unreinforced Autoclaved Aerated Concrete (AAC) Masonry Units

R606.2.3

C1693—(2017)

Standard Specification for Autoclaved Aerated Concrete (AAC)

R606.2.3

C1902

Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Insulation Used in Building and Roof Applications

Table R906.2

D41/D41M—2011(2016)

Specification for Asphalt Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2

D43/D43M—2000 (2018)

Specification for Coal Tar Primer Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D226/D226M—2017

Specification for Asphalt-saturated (Organic Felt) Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

R703.2, R905.1.1, R905.1.1.1, Table R905.1.1.1, R905.1.1.2, Table R905.9.2

D227/D227M—2003 (2018)

Specification for Coal Tar Saturated (Organic Felt) Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D312/D312M—2016

Specification for Asphalt Used in Roofing

Table R905.9.2

D422—63 (2007)E2

Test Method for Particle-size Analysis of Soils

R403.1.8.1

D449/D449M—03 (2014)E1

Specification for Asphalt Used in Dampproofing and Waterproofing

R406.2

D450/D450M—2017 (2018)

Specification for Coal-tar Pitch Used in Roofing, Dampproofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D1227—13

Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Used as a Protective Coating for Roofing

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2, R905.15.2

D1248—2016

Specification for Polyethylene Plastics Extrusion Materials for Wire and Cable

M1601.1.2

D1527—99 (2005)

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40 and 80

Table P2906.4

D1784—11

Standard Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Compounds

M1601.1.2

D1785—15E1

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40, 80 and 120

Table M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table AG101.1

D1863/D1863M—2005

Specification for Mineral Aggregate Used in Built-up Roofs

Table R905.9.2

D1869—15

Specification for Rubber Rings for Asbestos-cement Pipe

P2906.18, P3003.13

D1970/D1970M—2017A

Specification for Self-adhering Polymer Modified Bitumen Sheet Materials Used as Steep Roofing Underlayment for Ice Dam Protection

R905.1.1, R905.1.1.1, R905.1.1.3, R905.2.8.2

D2104—03

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe, Schedule 40

Table P2905.4

D2178/D2178M—15A

Specification for Asphalt Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D2235—04 (2016)

Specification for Solvent Cement for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe and Fittings

P2906.9.1.1, P3003.3.2

D2239—12A

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (SIDR-PR) Based on Controlled Inside Diameter

Table P2906.4, Table AG101.1

D2241—15

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pressure-rated Pipe (SDR-Series)

Table M2105.4, Table AG101.1

D2282—99 (2005)

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR)

Table P2905.4

D2412—2011 (2018)

Test Method for Determination of External Loading Characteristics of Plastic Pipe by Parallel-plate Loading

M1601.1.2

D2447—03

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe Schedules 40 and 80, Based on Outside Diameter

Table M2101.1

D2464—15

Specification for Threaded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

D2466—2017

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

D2467—15

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

D2468—96a

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40

Table P2906.6

D2513—2018A

Specification for Gas Pressure Pipe, Tubing and Fittings

Table M2101.1, G2414.6, G2414.6.1, G2414.11, G2415.17.2

D2564—2012 (2018)

Specification for Solvent Cements for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Piping Systems

P2906.9.1.4, P3003.9.2

D2609—15

Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe

Table P2906.6

D2626/D2626M—04 (2012)e1

Specification for Asphalt-saturated and Coated Organic Felt Base Sheet Used in Roofing

R905.3.3, Table R905.9.2

D2657—2007 (2015)

Standard Practice for Heat Fusion-joining of Polyolefin Pipe Fittings

M2101.18.1, M2101.20.3 , M2105.11.1, P2906.3.1, P2906.20.2, P3003.12.1

D2661—14E1

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, P3003.3.2

D2665—14

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table AG101.1

D2672—14

Specification for Joints for IPS PVC Pipe Using Solvent Cement

Table P2906.4

D2680—01(2014)

Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) and Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Composite Sewer Piping

Table P3002.2

D2683—14

Specification for Socket-type Polyethylene Fittings for Outside Diameter-controlled Polyethylene Pipe and Tubing

Table M2105.5, M2105.11.1, Table P2906.6, P2906.20.2, Table P3002.3, P3010.5

D2729—17

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3302.1, Table AG101.1

D2737—2012A

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Tubing

M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table AG101.1

D2751—05

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3

D2822/D2822M—2005 (2011)

Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement, Asbestos Containing

Table R905.9.2

D2823/D2823—05 (2011)e1

Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings, Asbestos Containing

Table R905.9.2

D2824/D2824M—2018

Specification for Aluminum-pigmented Asphalt Roof Coatings, Nonfibered, and Fibered without Asbestos

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2

D2846/D2846M—2017BE1

Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Hot- and Cold-water Distribution Systems

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.9.1.2, P2906.9.1.3, Table AG101.1

D2855—2015

Standard Practice for Making Solvent-cemented Joints with Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe and Fittings

P3003.9.2

D2898—2010 (2017)

Test Methods for Accelerated Weathering of Fire-retardant-treated Wood for Fire Testing

R802.1.5.4, R802.1.5.8

D2949—10

Specification for 3.25-in. Outside Diameter Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table AG101.1

D3019/D3019M—2017

Specification for Lap Cement Used with Asphalt Roll Roofing, Nonfibered, Asbestos Fibered and Nonasbestos Fibered

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2

D3034—2016

Specification for Type PSM Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.1, Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1, Table AG101.1

D3035—15

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (DR-PR) Based on Controlled Outside Diameter

Table M2105.4, Table AG101.1

D3138—04 (2016)

Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Transition Joints Between Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) and Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Piping Components

P3003.13.4

D3161/D3161M—2016A

Test Method for Wind Resistance of Steep Slope Roofing Products (Fan Induced Method)

R905.2.6.1, Table R905.2.6.1, R905.4.4.1, Table R905.4.4.1, R905.16.7

D3201/D3201M—2013

Test Method for Hygroscopic Properties of Fire-retardant Wood and Wood-base Products

R802.1.5.9

D3212—2013

Specification for Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals

P3003.3.1, P3003.9.1, P3003.12.2

D3261—2016

Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe and Tubing

Table M2105.5, M2105.11.1, Table P2906.6, P2906.20.2

D3309—96a (2002)

Specification for Polybutylene (PB) Plastic Hot- and Cold-water Distribution System

Table M2101.1

D3311—2017

Specification for Drain, Waste and Vent (DWV) Plastic Fittings Patterns

P3002.3

D3350—14

Specification for Polyethylene Plastic Pipe and Fitting Materials

Table M2101.1

D3462/D3462M—2016

Specification for Asphalt Shingles Made From Glass Felt and Surfaced with Mineral Granules

R905.2.4

D3468/D3468—99 (2013)e1

Specification for Liquid-applied Neoprene and Chlorosulfanated Polyethylene Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

R905.15.2

D3679—2017

Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Siding

R703.11

D3737—2018E1

Practice for Establishing Allowable Properties for Structural Glued Laminated Timber (Glulam)

R502.1.3, R602.1.3, R802.1.2

D3747—79 (2007)

Specification for Emulsified Asphalt Adhesive for Adhering Roof Insulation

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2

D3787—01

Testing Method for Bursting Strength of Textiles, Constant-Rate-of-Traverse (CRT) Ball Burst Test

R4501.17.1.15

D3909/D3909M—14

Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Glass Felt) Surfaced with Mineral Granules

R905.2.8.2, R905.5.4, Table R905.9.2

D4022/D4022M—2007 (2012)e1

Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement, Asbestos Containing

Table R905.9.2

D4068—2017

Specification for Chlorinated Polyethylene (CPE) Sheeting for Concealed Water Containment Membrane

P2709.2, P2709.2.2

D4318—2017E1

Test Methods for Liquid Limit, Plastic Limit and Plasticity Index of Soils

R403.1.8.1

D4434/D4434M—2015

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Sheet Roofing

R905.13.2

D4479M—2007(2018)

Specification for Asphalt Roof Coatings-asbestos-free

Table R905.9.2

D4533—15

Standard Test Method for Trapezoid Tearing Strength of Geotextiles

R905.1.1, R905.1.1.1

D4551—2017

Specification for Poly (Vinyl) Chloride (PVC) Plastic Flexible Concealed Water-containment Membrane

P2709.2, P2709.2.1

D4586M—2007(2018)

Specification for Asphalt Roof Cement-asbestos-free

Table R905.9.2

D4601/D4601M—04(2012)e1

Specification for Asphalt-coated Glass Fiber Base Sheet Used in Roofing

Table R905.9.2

D4637/D4637M—2015

Specification for EPDM Sheet Used in Single-ply Roof Membrane

R905.12.2

D4829—11

Test Method for Expansion Index of Soils

R403.1.8.1

D4869/D4869M—2016

Specification for Asphalt-saturated (Organic Felt) Underlayment Used in Steep Slope Roofing

R905.1.1.1, Table R905.1.1.1, R905.1.1.3

D4897/D4897M—2016

Specification for Asphalt Coated Glass-fiber Venting Base Sheet Used in Roofing

Table R905.9.2

D4990—1997a (2013)

Specification for Coal Tar Glass Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D5019—07a

Specification for Reinforced Nonvulcanized Polymeric Sheet Used in Roofing Membrane

R905.12.2

D5034—95

Standard Test Method for Breaking Strength and Elongation of Textile Fabrics (Grab Test) Specifications for Adhesives for Field Gluing Plywood to Lumber Framing for Floor Systems

R4501.17.1.15

D5055—2019E1

Specification for Establishing and Monitoring Structural Capacities of Prefabricated Wood I-joists

R502.1.2, R802.1.8

D5456—21e1

Standard Specification for Evaluation of Structural Composite Lumber Products

R502.1.5, R602.1.5, R802.1.4, R802.1.7

D5516—2018

Test Method for Evaluating the Flexural Properties of Fire-retardant-treated Softwood Plywood Exposed to the Elevated Temperatures

R802.1.5.6

D5643/D5643M—2006(2018)

Specification for Coal Tar Roof Cement Asbestos-free

Table R905.9.2

D5664—2017

Test Methods For Evaluating the Effects of Fire-retardant Treatments and Elevated Temperatures on Strength Properties of Fire-retardant-treated Lumber

R802.1.5.7

D5665/D5665M—99a (2014)E1

Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Cold-applied Roofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D5726—98 (2013)

Specification for Thermoplastic Fabrics Used in Hot-applied Roofing and Waterproofing

Table R905.9.2

D6083/D6083M—2018

Specification for Liquid-applied Acrylic Coating Used in Roofing

Table R905.9.2, Table R905.11.2, Table R905.14.3, R905.15.2

D6162/D6162M—2016

Specification for Styrene Butadiene Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcements

Table R905.11.2

D6163/D6163M—2016

Specification for Styrene Butadiene Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements

Table R905.11.2

D6164/D6164M—2016

Specification for Styrene Butadiene Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements

Table R905.11.2

D6222/D6222M—2016

Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using Polyester Reinforcements

Table R905.11.2

D6223—2016

Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Sheet Materials Using a Combination of Polyester and Glass Fiber Reinforcement

Table R905.11.2

D6298/D6298M—2016

Specification for Fiberglass-reinforced Styrene Butadiene Styrene (SBS) Modified Bituminous Sheets with a Factory Applied Metal Surface

Table R905.11.2

D6305—08 (2015)E1

Practice for Calculating Bending Strength Design Adjustment Factors for Fire-retardant-treated Plywood Roof Sheathing

R802.1.5.6

D6380/D6380—03 (2018)

Standard Specification for Asphalt Roll Roofing (Organic Felt)

R905.2.8.2, R905.5.4

D6509/D6509M—16

Standard Specification for Atactic Polypropylene (APP) Modified Bituminous Base Steel Materials Using Glass Fiber Reinforcements

Table R905.11.2

D6694/D6694M—2015

Standard Specification for Liquid-applied Silicone Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing Systems

Table R905.14.3, R905.15.2

D6754—2015

Standard Specification for Ketone-ethylene-ester-based Sheet Roofing

R905.13.2

D6757/D6757M—2018

Specification for Underlayment for Use with Steep Slope Roofing

R905.1.1, Table R905.1.1.1

D6841—2016

Standard Practice for Calculating Design Value Treatment Adjustment Factors for Fire-retardant-treated Lumber

R802.1.5.7

D6878/D6878M—2017

Standard Specification for Thermoplastic-polyolefin-based Sheet Roofing

R905.13.2

D6947/D6947M—2017

Standard Specification for Liquid Applied Moisture Cured Polyurethane Coating Used in Spray Polyurethane Foam Roofing System

Table R905.14.3, R905.15.2

D7032—2017

Standard Specification for Establishing Performance Ratings for Wood-plastic Composite Deck Boards and Guardrail Systems (Guards or Handrails)

R507.2, R507.2.1, R507.2.3, R507.2.4

D7158/D7158M—19ae1

Standard Test Method for Wind Resistance of Asphalt Shingles (Uplift Force/Uplift Resistance Method)

R905.2.6.1, Table R905.2.6.1

D7254—2017

Standard Specification for Polypropylene (PP) siding

Table R703.3(1), R703.14

D7425/D7425M—13

Standard Specification for Spray Polyurethane Foam Used for Roofing Application

R905.14.2

D7672—19

Standard Specification for Evaluating Structural Capacities of Rim Board Products and Assemblies

R502.1.7, R602.1.7, R802.1.7

D7793—17

Standard Specification for Insulated Vinyl Siding

R703.13, Table R703.3(1)

D8257—20

Standard Specification for Mechanically Attached Polymeric Roof Underlayment Used in Steep Slope Roofing

R905.1.1, R905.1.1.1, Table R905.1.1.1

E84—2018B

Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials

R202, R302.9.3, R302.9.4, R302.10.1, R302.10.2, R316.3, R316.5.9, R316.5.11, R507.2.2, R507.3.2, R703.14.3, R802.1.5, M1601.3, M1601.5.2, P2801.6

E96/E96M—2016

Test Method for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials

R202, F302.1, Table R702.7(2), R806.5, M1411.6, M1601.4.6

E108—2017

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings

R302.2.2, R902.1

E119—2018B

Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials

Table R302.1(1), Table R302.1(2), R302.2, R302.3, R302.4.1, R302.11.1

E136—2016A

Standard Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750°C

R202, R302.11

E283—04 (2012) or E283/E283M-19

Test Method for Determining the Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified Pressure Differences Across the Specimen

R202

E330/E330M—14 or 14 (21)

Test Method for Structural Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls and Doors by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

R609.4, R609.5, R703.1.2

E331—00 (2009 or 2016)

Test Method for Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Skylights, Doors and Curtain Walls by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

R703.1.1, R703.2

E814—2013A(2017)

Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Through-penetration Firestops

R302.4.1.2

E970—2017

Standard Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Exposed Attic Floor Insulation Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source

R302.10.5

E1300—04e01, 07e01, 09e, 12AE1 or 16

Practice for Determining Load Resistance of Glass in Buildings

R609.3

E1509—2012 (2017)

Standard Specification for Room Heaters, Pellet Fuel-burning Type

M1410.1

E1602—2003 (2017)

Guide for Construction of Solid Fuel Burning Masonry Heaters

R1002.2

E1886—2013a or 2019

Test Method for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Missile(s) and Exposed to Cyclic Pressure Differentials

R301.2.1.2, R609.3.1, R609.6.1, Table R703.11.2

E1996—2014a, 17 or 2020

Standard Specification for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Impact Protective Systems Impacted by Windborne Debris in Hurricanes

R301.2.1.2, R301.2.1.2.1, R609.3.1, R609.6.1

E2178—2013

Standard Test Method for Air Permeance of Building Materials

R202

E2231—2018

Standard Practice for Specimen Preparation and Mounting of Pipe and Duct Insulation Materials to Assess Surface Burning Characteristics

M1601.3

E2273—2018

Standard Test Method for Determining the Drainage Efficiency of Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) Clad Wall Assemblies

R703.9.2

E2392/E2392M—10E1

Standard Guide for Design of Earthen Wall Building Systems

AR103.3.2

E2556/E2556M—10

Standard Specification for Vapor Permeable Flexible Sheet Water-resistive Barriers Intended for Mechanical Attachment

R703.2

E2568—2017A

Standard Specification for PB Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems

R703.9.1, R703.9.2

E2570/E2570—07 (2014)E1

Standard Test Methods for Evaluating Water-resistive Barrier (WRB) Coatings Used Under Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) or EIFS with Drainage

R703.9.2

E2634—2018

Standard Specification for Flat Wall Insulating Concrete Form (ICF) Systems

R404.1.3.3.6.1, R608.4.4

F405—05

Specification for Corrugated Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings

Table P3302.1, Table AG101.1

F409—2017

Specification for Thermoplastic Accessible and Replaceable Plastic Tube and Tubular Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2702.2, P2702.3

F437—15

Specification for Threaded Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F438—2017

Specification for Socket-type Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F439—13

Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F441/F441M—15

Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40 and 80

Table M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table AG101.1

F442/F442M—13E1

Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR)

Table M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table AG101.1

F477—14

Specification for Elastomeric Seals (Gaskets) for Joining Plastic Pipe

P2906.17, P2906.18, P3003.13

F493—14

Specification for Solvent Cements for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings

P2906.9.1.2, P2906.9.1.3, P2906.18.2

F628—2012E2

Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe with a Cellular Core

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, P3003.3.2, Table AG101.1

F656—2015

Specification for Primers for Use in Solvent Cement Joints of Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings

P2906.9.1.4, P3003.9.2

F714—13

Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR) Based on Outside Diameter

Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, P3010.4

F876—2018A

Specification for Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, Table AG101.1

F877—2018A

Specification for Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Hot- and Cold-water Distribution Systems

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6

F891—2016

Specification for Coextruded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe with a Cellular Core

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3302.1, Table AG101.1

F1055—2016A

Specification for Electrofusion Type Polyethylene Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene and Crosslinked Polyethylene Pipe and Tubing

Table M2105.5, M2105.11.2, Table P2906.6, P2906.20.2

F1281—2017

Specification for Cross-linked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) Pressure Pipe

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.12.1, Table AG101.1

F1282—2017

Specification for Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) Composite Pressure Pipe

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.12.1, Table AG101.1

F1346—91 (2003)

Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs

R4501.2, R4501.17

F1412—2016

Specification for Polyolefin Pipe and Fittings for Corrosive Waste Drainage

Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, P3003.11.1

F1488—2014E1

Specification for Coextruded Composite Pipe

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2

F1504—2014

Standard Specification for Folded Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe for Existing Sewer and Conduit Rehabilitation

P3011.6

F1554—2018

Specification for Anchor Bolts, Steel, 36, 55 and 105-ksi Yield Strength

R608.5.2.2

F1667—2018

Specification for Driven Fasteners, Nails, Spikes and Staples

R317.3, R703.3.2, R703.6.3, Table R703.15.1, Table R703.15.2, R803.2.3.1, R904.5.1, R905.2.5, R908.7.1.1, R908.7.1.2

F1807—2018

Specification for Metal Insert Fittings Utilizing a Copper Crimp Ring for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F1866—2018

Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Schedule 40 Drainage and DWV Fabricated Fittings

Table P3002.3

F1871—2011

Standard Specification for Folded/Formed Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Pipe Type A for Existing Sewer and Conduit Rehabilitation

P3011.6

F1924—12

Standard Specification for Plastic Mechanical Fittings for Use on Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene Gas Distribution Pipe and Tubing

M2105.11.1, M2105.11.3

F1960—2018

Specification for Cold Expansion Fittings with PEX Reinforcing Rings for Use with Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F1970—12E1

Standard Specification for Special Engineered Fittings, Appurtenances or Valves for Use in Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) or Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Systems

M2105.5, Table P2903.9.4

F1973—13E1 (2018)

Standard Specification for Factory Assembled Anodeless Risers and Transition Fittings in Polyethylene (PE) and Polyamide 11 (PA 11) Fuel Gas Distribution Systems

G2415.15.2

F1974—09(2015)

Specification for Metal Insert Fittings for Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene and Cross-linked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Cross-linked Polyethylene Composite Pressure Pipe

Table P2906.6, P2906.12.1

F1986—2001 (2011)

Multilayer Pipe Type 2, Compression Joints for Hot and Cold Drinking Water Systems

Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6

F2080—16

Specification for Cold-expansion Fittings with Metal Compression-sleeves for Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Pipe

Table M2105.5, P2906.6, Table P2906.6

F2090—17 or 2021

Specification for Window Fall Prevention Devices—with Emergency Escape (Egress) Release Mechanisms

R310.1.1, R312.2.1, R312.2.2, AJ102.4.3, AJ102.4.4

F2098—2015

Specification for Stainless Steel Clamps for Securing SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing to Metal Insert and Plastic Insert Fittings

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.6

F2159—2018

Standard Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings Utilizing a Copper Crimp Ring for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F2208—2014

Standard Safety Specification for Residential Pool Alarms

R4501.17.1.9

F2262—09

Standard Specification for Cross-linked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Cross-linked Polyethylene Tubing OD Controlled SDR9

Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5

F2286—16

Standard Design and Performance Specification for Removable Mesh Fencing for Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, and Spas

R4501.17.1.15

F2389—2017A

Standard for Pressure-rated Polypropylene (PP) Piping Systems

Table M2101.1, M2101.19.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, M2105.12.1, Table P2903.9.4, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.11.1, Table AG101.1

F2434—14

Standard Specification for Metal Insert Fittings Utilizing a Copper Crimp Ring for Polyethylene/Aluminum/Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) Tubing

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

F2623—14

Standard Specification for Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) SDRG Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table AG101.1

F2735—09(2016)

Standard Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) and Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.6

F2769—2018

Polyethylene or Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Plastic Hot and Cold-Water Tubing and Distribution Systems

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, Table AG101.1

F2806—10 (2015)

Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe (Metric SDR-PR)

Table M2101.1

F2855—12

Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride)/Aluminum/Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC AL CPVC) Composite Pressure Tubing

Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table AG101.1

F2945—2018

Standard Specification for Polyamide 11 Gas Pressure Pipe, Tubing and Fittings

G2414.6

F2969—12

Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) IPS Dimensioned Pressure Pipe

Table M2101.1

F3226/F3226M—16e1

Standard Specification for Metallic Press-Connect Fittings for Piping and Tubing Systems

Table P2906.6

G53—96

Practice for Operating Light- and Water-Exposure Apparatus (Fluorescent UV-Condensation Type) for Exposure of Nonmetallic Materials

R4501.17.1.15

AWC

American Wood Council
222 Catocin Circle, Suite 201
LeesburgVA20175

ANSI/AWC WFCM—2018

Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings

R301.1.1, R301.2.1.1, R301.2.2.2.1, R301.2.2.2.5, R301.2.2.3.1, R403.1.6, R608.9.2, R608.9.3, Figure R608.9(9), R608.10, Table R803.2.1

ANSI/AWC NDS—2018

National Design Specification (NDS) for Wood Construction—with 2018 NDS Supplement

R404.2.2, R502.2, Table R503.1, R602.3, R608.9.2, R609.9.3, Table R703.15.1, Table R703.15.2, R802.2, R803.2.3.1

ANSI/AWC PWF—2021

Permanent Wood Foundation Design Specification

R317.3.2, R401.1, R404.2.3

AWPA

American Wood Protection Association
P.O. Box 361784
BirminghamAL35236-1784

C1—03

All Timber Products—Preservative Treatment by Pressure Processes

R902.2

M4—15

Standard for the Care of Preservative-treated Wood Products

R317.1.1

U1—20

USE CATEGORY SYSTEM: User Specification for Treated Wood Except Commodity Specification H

R317.1, R402.1.2, R504.3, R703.6.3, Table R905.8.5

AWS

American Welding Society
8669 NW 36 Street, #130
DoralFL33166

A5.8M/A5.8—2011-ADMI

Specifications for Filler Metals for Brazing and Braze Welding

P3003.6.1

ANSI/AWS A5.31M/A5.31—2012

Specification for Fluxes for Brazing and Braze Welding Edition: 2nd

2906.15, M2103.3, M2202.2

AWWA

American Water Works Association
6666 West Quincy Avenue
DenverCO80235

C104/A21.4—16

Cement-mortar Lining for Ductile-iron Pipe and Fittings

P2906.4

C110/A21.10—12

Ductile-iron and Gray-iron Fittings

Table P2906.6

C115/A21.15—11

Flanged Ductile-iron Pipe with Ductile-iron or Gray-iron Threaded Flanges

Table P2906.4

C151/A21.51—17

Ductile-iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast

Table P2906.4

C153/A21.53—11

Ductile-iron Compact Fittings for Water Service

Table P2906.6

C500—09

Standard for Metal-seated Gate Valves for Water Supply Service

Table P2903.9.4

C504—15

Standard for Rubber-seated Butterfly Valves

Table P2903.9.4

C507—15

Ball Valves, 6 In. Through 60 In. (150 mm through 1500 mm)

Table P2903.9.4

C510—17

Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.6

C511—17

Reduced-pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.5, P2902.3.6, P2902.5.1

C901—16

Polyethylene (PE) Pressure Pipe and Tubing 3/4 in. (19 mm) through 3 in. (76 mm) for Water Service

P2906.4, Table M2105.4, Table AG101.1

C903—16

Polyethylene-aluminum-polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) Composite Pressure Pipe, 1/2 in. (12 mm) through 2 in. (51 mm), for Water Service

Table M2101

C904—16

Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Pressure Tubing, 1/2 in. (13 mm) through 3 in. (76 mm) for Water Service

P2906.4, Table P2906.4, Table AG101.1

CEN

European Committee for Standardization (EN)
Central Secretariat
Rue de Stassart 36
B-10 50 Brussels

EN 15250-2007

Slow Heat Release Appliances Fired by Solid Fuel Requirements and Test Methods

R1002.2, R1002.5

CGSB

Canadian General Standards Board
Place du Portage 111, 6B1
11 Laurier Street
GatineauQuebec, CanadaKIA 1G6

CAN/CGSB-37.54—95

Polyvinyl Chloride Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane

R905.13.2

37-GP-52M—(1984)

Roofing and Waterproofing Membrane, Sheet Applied, Elastomeric

R905.12.2

37-GP-56M—(1980)

Membrane, Modified Bituminous, Prefabricated and Reinforced for Roofing—with December 1985 Amendment

Table R905.11.2

CISPI

Cast Iron Soil Pipe Institute
5959 Shallowford Road, Suite 419
ChattanoogaTN37421

301—18

Standard Specification for Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste and Vent Piping Applications

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

310—18

Standard Specification for Coupling for Use in Connection with Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste and Vent Piping Applications

P3003.4.3

CPA

Composite Panel Association
19465 Deerfield Avenue, Suite 306
LeesburgVA20176

ANSI A135.5—2012

Prefinished Hardboard Paneling

R702.5

ANSI A135.6—2012

Engineered Wood Siding

R703.5

ANSI A135.7—2012

Engineered Wood Trim

R703.5

A208.1—2009

Particleboard

R602.1.9, R605.1

CPSC

Consumer Product Safety Commission
4330 East West Highway
BethesdaMD20814-4408

16 CFR, Part 1201—(2002)

Safety Standard for Architectural Glazing

R308.1.1, R308.3.1, Table R308.3.1(1)

16 CFR, Part 1209—(2002)

Interim Safety Standard for Cellulose Insulation

R302.10.3

16 CFR, Part 1404—(2002)

Cellulose Insulation

R302.10.3

CSA

CSA Group
8501 East Pleasant Valley Road
ClevelandOH44131-5516

ANSI/CSA/IGSHPA C448 Series-16

Design and Installation of Ground Source Heat Pump Systems for Commercial and Residential Buildings

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5

ASME A112.3.4—2018/CSA B45.9—18

Macerating Toilet Systems and Related Components

Table P2701.1, P3007.5

ASME A112.18.1—2018/CSA B125.1—2018

Plumbing Supply Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2708.4, P2708.5, P2722.1, P2722.2, P2722.3, P2902.2, Table P2903.9.4

ASME A112.18.2—2019/CSA B125.2—2019

Plumbing Waste Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2702.2

A112.18.6—2017/CSA B125.6—2017

Flexible Water Connectors

P2906.7

ASME A112.19.1—2018/CSA B45.2—18

Enameled Cast-iron and Enameled Steel Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2711.1

ASME A112.19.2—2018/CSA B45.1—18

Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2705.1, P2711.1, P2712.1, P2712.2, P2712.9

ASME A112.19.3—2017/CSA B45.4—2017

Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2705.1, P2711.1, P2712.1

ASSE 1016—2017/ASME 112.1016—2017/CSA B125.16—2017

Performance Requirements for Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and Tub/Shower Combinations

Table P2701.1, P2708.4, P2722.2

A112.19.5—2017/CSA B45.15—2017

Flush Valves and Spuds for Water-closets, Urinals and Tanks

Table P2701.1

A112.19.7—2012/CSA B45.10—2012(R2017)

Hydromassage Bathtub Systems

Table P2701.1

ASME A17.1/CSA B44—2019

Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators

R321.1

CSA 8—93

Requirements for Gas Fired Log Lighters for Wood Burning Fireplaces—with revisions through January 1999

G2433.1

A257.1—14

Circular Concrete Culvert, Storm Drain, Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.2

A257.2—14

Reinforced Circular Concrete Culvert, Storm Drain, Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.2

A257.3—14

Joints for Circular Concrete Sewer and Culvert Pipe, Manhole Sections and Fittings Using Rubber Gaskets

P3003.5, P3003.13

B64.1.1—11(R2016)

Vacuum Breakers, Atmospheric Type (AVB)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B64.1.2—11(R2016)

Pressure Vacuum Breakers (PVB)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.4

B64.1.3—11(R2016)

Spill Resistant Pressure Vacuum Breakers (SRPVB)

P2902.3.2

B64.2—11(R2016)

Vacuum Breakers, Hose Connection Type (HCVP)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B64.2.1—11(R2016)

Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers (HCVB) with Manual Draining Feature

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B64.2.1.1—11(R2016)

Hose Connection Dual Check Vacuum Breakers (HCDVB)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B64.2.2—11(R2016)

Vacuum Breakers, Hose Connection Type (HCVP) with Automatic Draining Feature

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B64.3—11(R2016)

Dual Check Backflow Preventers with Atmospheric Port (DCAP)

, Table P2902.3, P2902.5.1

B64.4—11(R2016)

Backflow Preventers, Reduced Pressure Principle Type (RP)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.5, P2902.5.1, P2903.5.1

B64.4.1—11(R2016)

Reduced Pressure Principle for Fire Sprinklers (RPF)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.5

B64.5—11(R2016)

Double Check Backflow Preventers (DCVA)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.6

B64.5.1—11(R2016)

Double Check Valve Backflow Preventers, Type for Fire Systems (DCVAF)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.6

B64.6—11(R2016)

Dual Check Valve Backflow Preventers (DuC)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.7

B64.7—11(R2016)

Laboratory Faucet Vacuum Breakers (LFVB)

Table P2902.3, P2902.3.2

B117 (2016)

Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (FOG) Apparatus

R904.5.2

B125.3—18

Plumbing Fittings

Table P2701.1, P2713.3, P2721.2, Table P2902.3, P2902.4.1, Table P2903.9.4

B137.1—17

Polyethylene (PE) Pipe, Tubing and Fittings for Cold Water Pressure Services

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, M2015.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.6

B137.2—17

Polyvinylchloride PVC Injection-moulded Gasketed Fittings for Pressure Applications

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.6

B137.3—17

Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe for Pressure Applications

Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.6, P3003.9.2, Table AG101.1

B137.5—17

Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing Systems for Pressure Applications

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.6, Table AG101.1

B137.6—17

Chlorinated polyvinylchloride CPVC Pipe, Tubing and Fittings For Hot- and Cold-water Distribution Systems

Table M2105.4, M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, Table AG101.1

B137.9—17

Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) Composite Pressure Pipe Systems

Table M2101.1, Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.6, P2906.12.1

B137.10M—17

Cross-linked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Cross-linked Polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) Composite Pressure Pipe Systems

Table M2101.1, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, P2906.12.1

B137.11—17

Polypropylene (PP-R) Pipe and Fittings for Pressure Applications

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, Table P2906.6, Table AG101.1

B137.18—17

Polyethylene of Raised Temperature Resistance (PE-RT) Tubing Systems for Pressure Applications

Table M2105.4, Table P2906.4, Table P2906.5, P2906.6, AG101.1

B181.1—18

Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe and Pipe Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.3, P3003.3.2, P3003.8.2

B181.2—18

Polyvinylchloride (PVC) and chlorinated polyvinylchloride (CPVC) Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe and Pipe Fittings

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), P3003.9.2, P3008.2, Table P3302.1

B181.3—18

Polyolefin and polyvinylidene (PVDF) Laboratory Drainage Systems

Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2), Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, P3003.11.1

B182.2—18

PSM Type polyvinylchloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings

Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

B182.4—18

Profile polyvinylchloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe & Fittings

Table P3002.2, Table P3002.3, Table P3302.1

B182.6—18

Profile Polyethylene (PE) Sewer Pipe and Fittings for leak-proof Sewer Applications

Table P3302.1

B182.8—18

Profile Polyethylene (PE) Storm Sewer and Drainage Pipe and Fittings

Table P3302.1

B356—10(R2015)

Water Pressure Reducing Valves for Domestic Water Supply Systems

P2903.3.1

B602—16

Mechanical Couplings for Drain, Waste and Vent Pipe and Sewer Pipe

P3003.3.1, P3003.4.3, P3003.5, P3003.9.1, P3003.10, P3003.12.2, P3003.13

B805—18/ICC 805—2018

Rainwater Harvesting Systems

P2912.1, P2912.1.1

CAN/CSA B483.1—07(R2017)

Drinking Water Treatment Systems

P2909.1, P2909.2

CSA B45.5—17/IAPMO Z124—17 with errata dated August 2017

Plastic Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2711.1, P2711.2, P2712.1

O325—16

Construction Sheathing

R602.1.8, R604.1, R803.2.1

O437-Series—93 (R2011)

Standards on OSB and Waferboard

R602.1.8, R604.1, R803.2.1

CSSB

Cedar Shake & Shingle Bureau
P. O. Box 1178
SumasWA98295-1178

CSSB—97

Grading and Packing Rules for Western Red Cedar Shakes and Western Red Shingles of the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau

R702.6, R703.6, Table R905.7.4, Table R905.8.5

New Roof Construction Manual (2015)

R905.8

DASMA

Door and Access Systems Manufacturers Association International
1300 Summer Avenue
ClevelandOH44115-2851

ANSI/DASMA 108—05, 12 or 17

Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors, Rolling Doors and Flexible Doors: Determination of Structural Performance Under Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference

R609.4

ANSI/DASMA 115—05, 12 or 17

Standard Method for Testing Sectional Garage Doors, Rolling Doors and Flexible Doors: Determination of Structural Performance Under Missile Impact and Cyclic Wind Pressure

R301.2.1.2

DOC

United States Department of Commerce
1401 Constitution Avenue, NW
WashingtonDC20230

PS 1—19

Structural Plywood

R404.2.1, Table R404.2.3, R602.1.8, R604.1, R803.2.1

PS 2—18

Performance Standard for Wood Structural Panels

R404.2.1, Table R404.2.3, R602.1.8, R604.1, R803.2.1

PS 20—05

American Softwood Lumber Standard

R404.2.1, R502.1.1, R602.1.1, R802.1.1

DOTn

Department of Transportation
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE
East Building, 2nd floor
WashingtonDC20590

14 CFR, Part 150 (2005)

Airport Noise Compatability Planning, Federal Aviation Administration

R327.1

49 CFR, Parts 192.281(e) & 192.283 (b) (2009)

Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards

G2414.6.1

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency
500 C Street, SW
WashingtonDC20472

FEMA TB-2—08

Flood Damage-resistant Materials Requirements

R322.1.8

FEMA TB-11—01

Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Area

R408.7

Florida Codes

Florida Building Commission
Building Codes and Standards
Department of Business and Professional Regulation
1940 N. Monroe Street, Suite 90A
TallahasseeFL32399-0772

FBC-A—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Accessibility

R320.1

FBC-B—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Building

R101.2, R101.2.1, R202, R301.2.1.1, R301.2.1.1.1.1, R301.2.1.1.3, R301.2.1.6, R301.2.5, R301.3, R302.2, Table R302.1, R302.3, R308.5, R322.1.11, R403.1.1, R403.1.2, R403.1.8, R404.5.1, R609.2, R609.11.1, R802.1.5.4, R905.2.5, R905.3.1, R905.10.3, Table R907.7.1.2, R908.5, R908.7.2, R908.8, Table R908.8.1, M1904.1, G2402.3, G2403, G2404.3, R4401.1, R4402.1, R4403.1, R4404.1, R4405.1, R4406.1, R4407.1, R4408.1, R4409.1, R4410.1, R4411.1, R4412.1, R4501.1.2, R4501.16, E406.2, E502.1, E602.1.5, F102.2, F201, F305.2, F306.1, F307.2.1, AS105.7

FBC-EC—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation

R202, R302.14, R303.4, R408.3, R806.5, Table R806.5, N1101, M1401.1, P2903.11, P2905.1, P2905.2

FBC-EB—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Existing Building

R101.2, R322.3.1, E3401.4, AJ102.6

FFPC—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Fire Prevention Code

R324.2, R330, R907.1, M1904.1, M2201.7, G2402.3, G2412.2, R4501.1.2, U103.2

FBC-FG—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas

M1301.1, M1904.1, G2401.1, G2402.3, G2423.1, R4501.1.2, R4501.15, Appendix D.3, Appendix D.4, Appendix D.5.2

FBC-M—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Mechanical

M1301.1, M1304.7.2, G2402.3, G2442.3, R4501.1.2, E502

FBC-P—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Plumbing

Table R301.2(1), R903.4.1, G2402.3, P2601.1, R4501.1.2, R4501.3, R4501.8.1, R4501.13.2, AP103.2.2, AP103.3

64E

Rule 64E, Florida Administrative Code (Sewage Disposal)

R306.3, R322.1.7, E103, E301.2.1

FS

Florida Statutes

R202, R318.1.7, R502.11.1, R802.10.2

FBC-TPHVHZ—Eighth Edition (2023)

Florida Building Code, Test Protocols for High-Velocity Hurricane Zones

RAS 109

R905.14

RAS 111

R903.2.1, R905.2.8, R905.2.8.1, R905.3.8, R908.6

RAS 115

R905.2

RAS 118

R905.3, R905.3.2, R905.3.3, R905.3.3.1, R905.3.6, R905.3.7, R905.3.7.1, R905.3.8

RAS 119

R905.3, R905.3.2, R905.3.3, R905.3.3.1, R905.3.6, R905.3.7, R905.3.7.1, R905.3.8

RAS 120

R905.3, R905.3.2, R905.3.3, R905.3.3.1, R905.3.6, R905.3.7, R905.3.7.1, R905.3.8

RAS 130

R905.7, R905.8

TAS 107

R905.2.6.1, R905.4.4.1, R905.16.7

TAS 114

R904.5.1, R904.5.2, R904.5.3

TAS 201

R301.2.1.2, R609.3.1

TAS 202

R301.2.1.2, R609.3, R609.3.1, R609.4

TAS 203

R301.2.1.2, R609.3.1

FM

Factory Mutual Global Research
Standards Laboratories Department
1301 Atwood Avenue, P. O. Box 7500
JohnsonRI02919

4450—(1989)

Approval Standard for Class 1 Insulated Steel Deck Roofs—with Supplements through July 1992

R906.1

ANSI/FM 4880—2017

American National Standard for Evaluating the Fire Performance of Insulated Building Panels, Assemblies and Interior Finish Materials

R316.6

FRSA

Florida Roofing and Sheet Metal Contractors Association
P.O. Box 4850
Winter ParkFL32792

FRSA/TRI Alliance

Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Eighth Edition, December 2023(12—23)

R905.3, R905.3.2, R905.3.3, R905.3.3.1, R905.3.6, R905.3.7, R905.3.7.1, R905.3.8

GA

Gypsum Association
6525 Belcrest Road, Suite 480
HyattsvilleMD20782

GA-253—2018

Application of Gypsum Sheathing

Table R602.3(1)

HPVA

Hardwood Plywood & Veneer Association
1825 Michael Faraday Drive
RestonVirginia20190-5350

ANSI/HP-1—2013

Standard for Hardwood and Decorative Plywood

R702.5

IAPMO

IAPMO
4755 E. Philadelphia Street
OntarioCA91761-USA

CSA B45.5—11/IAPMO Z124—17 with errata dated August 2017

Plastic Plumbing Fixtures

Table P2701.1, P2711.1, P2711.2, P2712.1

ICC

International Code Council, Inc.
500 New Jersey Avenue, NW
6th Floor
WashingtonDC20001

ICC/ANSI A117.1—09

Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities

R321.3

ICC 400—17

Standard on the Design and Construction of Log Structures

R301.1.1, R502.1.4, R602.1.4, R703.1, R802.1.3

ICC 500—20

ICC/NSSA Standard on the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters

R323.1

ICC 600—20

Standard for Residential Construction in High-wind Regions

R301.2.1.1

ISO

International Organization for Standardization
1, ch. de la Voie - Creuse
Case postale 56
CH-1211Geneva 20Switzerland

8336—2009

Fibre-cement Flat Sheets-product Specification and Test Methods

Table R702.4.2, R703.10.1, R703.10.2, R704.2.2

15874—2002

Polypropylene Plastic Piping Systems for Hot and Cold Water Installations

Table M2101.1

MAF

Masonry Association of Florida
398 Camino Gardens Blvd, Suite 108
Boca RatonFL33432

MAF—97

Guide to Concrete Masonry Residential Construction in High Wind Areas

R301.2.1.1

MSS

Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry
127 Park Street, Northeast
ViennaVA22180

SP-42—2013

Corrosion Resistant Gate, Globe, Angle and Check Valves with Flanged and Butt Weld Ends (Glasses 150, 300 & 600)

Table P2903.9.4

SP-58—2018

Pipe Hangers and Supports—Materials, Design, Manufacture, Selection, Application and Installation

G2418.2

SP-67—2011

Butterfly Valves

Table P2903.9.4

SP-70—2013

Gray Iron Gate Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends

Table P2903.9.4

SP-71—2018

Gray Iron Swing Check Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends

Table P2903.9.4

SP-72—10a

Ball Valves with Flanged or Butt-Welding Ends for General Service

P2903.9.4

SP-78—2018

Cast Iron Plug Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends

Table P2903.9.4

SP-80—2013

Bronze Gate, Globe, Angle and Check Valves

Table P2903.9.4

SP-110—10a

Ball Valves, Threaded, Socket Welding, Solder Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends (incl. a 2010 Errata Sheet)

Table P2903.9.4

MSS SP-122—2017

Plastic Industrial Ball Valves

P2903.9.4

MSS SP-139—2014

Copper Alloy Gate, Globe, Angle, and Check Valves for Low Pressure/Low Temperature Plumbing Applications

P2903.9.4

NAIMA

North American Insulation Manufacturers Association
44 Canal Center Plaza, Suite 310
AlexandriaVA22314

AH 116—09

Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards, Fifth Edition

M1601.1.1

NFPA

National Fire Protection Association
1 Batterymarch Park
QuincyMA02269

13—19

Installation of Sprinkler Systems

R302.3

13D—19

Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes

R302.13, R324.6.2.1, R325.5, P2904.1, P2904.6.1

13R—19

Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low Rise Residential Occupancies

R325.5

31—20

Standard for the Installation of Oil-burning Equipment

M1701.1, M1801.3.1, M1805.3, M2201.1

58—20

Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code

G2412.2, G2414.6.2

70—20

National Electrical Code

R324.3, R328.1, R328.6, R328.10, R905.16, R907.1, M1905.2.1, G2411.2.4, E3401.1

72—19

National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code

R314.1, R314.7.1

85—19

Boiler and Combustion Systems Hazards Code

G2452.1

211—19

Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances

R1002.5, G2427.5.2, G2427.5.5.1, G2427.5.5.3

259—18

Standard for Test Method for Potential Heat of Building Materials

R316.5.7, R316.5.8

275—17

Standard Method of Fire Tests for the Evaluation of Thermal Barriers

R316.4

276—15

Standard Method of Fire Tests for Determining the Heat Release Rate of Roofing Assemblies with Combustible Above-deck Roofing Components

R906.1

286—19

Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Evaluating Contribution of Wall and Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth

R302.9.4, R316.6

501—17

Standard on Manufactured Housing

R202

720—15

Standard for the Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detectors and Warning Equipment

R315.6.1, R315.6.2

NSF

NSF International
789 N. Dixboro
Ann ArborMI48105

14—2017

Plastics Piping System Components and Related Materials

M1301.4, P2609.3, P2909.3

41—2016

Nonliquid Saturated Treatment Systems (Composting Toilets)

P2725.1

42—2017

Drinking Water Treatment Units—Anesthetic Effects

P2909.1, P2909.3

44—2017

Residential Cation Exchange Water Softeners

P2909.1, P2909.3

50—2017

Equipment for Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Other Recreational Water Facilities

P2911.8.1

53—2017

Drinking Water Treatment Units—Health Effects

P2909.1, P2909.3

58—2017

Reverse Osmosis Drinking Water Treatment Systems

P2909.2, P2909.3

61—2018

Drinking Water System Components—Health Effects

P2609.5, P2722.1, P2903.3.2, P2903.9.4, P2906.4, P2906.5, P2906.6, P2906.15, P2909.3

62—2015

Drinking Water Distillation Systems

P2909.1

350—2017a

Onsite Residential and Commercial Water Reuse Treatment Systems

P2911.6.1

358-1—2017

Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings for Water-based Ground Source “Geothermal” Heat Pump Systems

M2105.4, M2105.5, Table AG101.1

358-2—2017

Polypropylene Pipe and Fittings for Water-based Ground Source “Geothermal” Heat Pump Systems

M2105.5

358-3—2016

Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Pipe and Fittings for Water-based Ground-source (geothermal) Heat Pump Systems

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5

NSF 358-4-2017

Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Pipe and Fittings for Water-based Ground-source (geothermal) Heat Pump Systems

Table M2105.4, Table M2105.5

359—2011(R2016)

Valves for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Water Distribution Tubing Systems

Table P2903.9.4

372—2016

Drinking Water Systems Components—Lead Content

P2906.2.1

PCA

Portland Cement Association
5420 Old Orchard Road
SkokieIL60077

100—17

Prescriptive Design of Exterior Concrete Walls for One- and Two-family Dwellings (Pub. No. PCA 100.3)

R404.1.3, R404.1.3.2.1, R404.1.3.2.2, R608.1, R608.2, R608.5.1, R608.9.2, R608.9.3

SBCA

Structural Building Components Association
6300 Enterprise Lane
MadisonWI53719

BCSI—2018

Building Component Safety Information Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing, Restraining & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses

R502.11.2, R802.10.3

FS100—12

Standard Requirements for Wind Pressure Resistance of Foam Plastic Insulating Sheathing Used in Exterior Wall Covering Assemblies

R316.8

SMACNA

Sheet Metal & Air Conditioning Contractors National Assoc. Inc.
4021 Lafayette Center Road
ChantillyVA22021

SMACNA—10

Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards 7th Edition

M1601.1.1, M1601.4.1

SMACNA/ANSI—2020

HVAC Duct Construction Standards, Metal and Flexible, 4th Edition (ANSI)

Table M1601.1.1, M1601.4.1, M1601.4.4

SRCC

Solar Rating & Certification Corporation
400 High Point Drive, Suite 400
CocoaFL32926

ICC 901/SRCC 100—2015

Solar Thermal Collector Standard

M2301.3.1

ICC 900/SRCC 300—2015

Solar Thermal System Standard

M2301.2.2.2, M2301.2.3, M2301.2.7, M2301.4, M2301.2.6, M2301.2.8, M2301.2.10

SRCC 600—13

Standard 600 for Solar Concentrating Collectors

M2301.3.1

TMS

The Masonry Society
105 South Sunset Street, Suite Q
LongmontCO80501

402—2016

Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures

R606.6.4, R703.8, R404.1.2, R606.1, R606.1.1, R703.12

403—2017

Direct Design Handbook for Masonry Structures

R606.1, R606.1.1

404—16

Standard for the Design of Architectural Cast Stone

R606.1, R606.6.4

602—2016

Specification for Masonry Structures

R404.1.2, R606.2.9, R606.2.10, R606.2.12, R703.12

TPI

Truss Plate Institute
218 N. Lee Street, Suite 312
AlexandriaVA22314

TPI 1—2014

National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction

R502.11.1, R802.10.2

UL

UL LLC
333 Pfingsten Road
NorthbrookIL60062

17—2008

Vent or Chimney Connector Dampers for Oil-fired Appliances—with revisions through September 2013

M1802.2.2

55A—2004

Materials for Built-up Roof Coverings

R905.9.2

58—2018

Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code

M2201.1

80—2007

Steel Tanks for Oil-burner Fuel—with revisions through January 2014

M2201.1

103—2020

Factory-built Chimneys for Residential Type and Building Heating Appliances—with revisions through March 2017

R202, R1005.3, G2427.5.1, G2430.1

127—2011

Factory-built Fireplaces—with revisions through July 2016

R1001.11, R1004.1, R1004.4, R1004.5, R1005.4, G2445.7

174—2004

Household Electric Storage Tank Water Heaters—with revisions through December 2016

M2005.1

180—2012

Liquid-level Indicating Gauges for Oil Burner Fuels and Other Combustible Liquids—with revisions through May 2017

M2201.5

181—2005

Factory-made Air Ducts and Air Connectors—with revisions through April 2017

M1601.1.1, M1601.4.1

181A—2013

Closure Systems for Use with Rigid Air Ducts and Air Connectors—with revisions through March 2017

M1601.2, M1601.4.1, M1601.4.4

181B—2013

Closure Systems for Use with Flexible Air Ducts and Air Connectors—with revisions through March 2017

M1601.4.1

217—2015

Single- and Multiple-station Smoke Alarms—with revisions through November 2016

R314.1.1, R315.1.1

263—2011

Test of Building Construction and Materials—with revisions through March 2018

R302.2, R302.3, R302.4.1, R302.11.1, Table R312.1(1), R606.2.2

268—2016

Smoke Detectors for Fire Alarm Systems—with revisions through July 2016

R314.7.1, R314.7.4

325—2017

Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver and Window Operations and Systems

R309.4, AO103.2

343—2017

Pumps for Oil-burning Appliances

M2204.1

378—2006

Draft Equipment—with revisions through September 2013

M1804.2.6, G2427.3.3

441—16

Gas Vents—with revisions through July 2016

G2426.1, G2427.6.1

508—2018

Industrial Control Equipment

M1411.3.1

536—2014

Flexible Metallic Hose

M2202.3

641—2010

Type L, Low-temperature Venting Systems—with revisions through April 2018

R202, R1003.11.5, M1804.2.4, G2426.1, G2427.6.1

651—2011

Schedule 40, Type EB and A Rigid PVC Conduit and Fittings—with revisions through June 2016

G2414.6.3

705—2017

Standard for Power Ventilators—with revisions through October 2018

G2439.4, M1502.4.4

723—18

Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials

R202, R302.9.3, R302.9.4, R302.10.1, R302.10.2, R316.3, R316.5.9, R316.5.11, R507.2.2, R507.3.2, R703.14.3, R802.1.5, M1601.3, M1601.5.2

726—95

Oil-fired Boiler Assemblies—with revisions through October 2013

M2001.1.1, M2006.1

727—2018

Oil-fired Central Furnaces

M1402.1

729—2003

Oil-fired Floor Furnaces—with revisions through November 2016

M1408.1

730—2003

Oil-fired Wall Furnaces—with revisions through November 2016

M1409.1

732—2018

Oil-fired Storage Tank Water Heaters—with revisions through August 2018

M2005.1

737—2011

Fireplaces Stoves

M1414.1, M1901.2

790—2004

Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings—with revisions through October 2018

R302.2.2, R902.1

795—2016

Commercial-industrial Gas Heating Equipment

G2442.1, G2452.1

834—04

Heating, Water Supply and Power Boilers—Electric—with revisions through September 2018

M2001.1.1

842—2015

Valves for Flammable Fluids—with revisions through May 2015

M2204.2

858—2014

Household Electric Ranges—with revisions through June 2018

M1901.2

875—2009

Electric Dry-bath Heaters—with revisions through September 2017

M1902.2

896—1993

Oil-burning Stoves—with revisions through November 2016

M1410.1

907—94

Fireplace Accessories—with revisions through November 2014

R1001.13

923—2013

Microwave Cooking Appliances—with revisions through July 2017

M1504.1

959—2010

Medium Heat Appliance Factory-built Chimneys—with revisions through June 2014

R1005.6

950—2014

Outline of Investigation for Energy Storage Systems and Equipment

R328.2, R328.5

1026—2012

Electric Household Cooking and Food Serving Appliances—with revisions through July 2018

M1901.2

1040—96

Fire Test of Insulated Wall Construction—with revisions through April 2017

R316.6

1042—2009

Electric Baseboard Heating Equipment—with revisions through December 2016

M1405.1

1256—02

Fire Test of Roof Deck Construction—with revisions through August 2018

R906.1

1261—2016

Electric Water Heaters for Pools and Tubs—with revisions through September 2017

M2006.1

1479—2015

Fire Tests of Through-Penetration Firestops

R302.4.1.2

1482—2011

Solid-Fuel-type Room Heaters—with revisions through August 2015

R1002.2, R1002.5, M1410.1

1618—2015

Wall Protectors, Floor Protectors, and Hearth Extensions—with revisions through January 2018

R1004.2, M1306.2.1, M1410.2, G2409.2

1693—2010

Electric Radiant Heating Panels and Heating Panel Sets—with revisions through October 2011

M1406.1

1703—2002

Flat-plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels—with revisions through September 2018

R324.3.1, R902.4, R905.17.4, R907.5

1715—97

Fire Test of Interior Finish Material—with revisions through April 2017

R316.6

1738—2010

Venting Systems for Gas-burning Appliances, Categories II, III and IV

G2426.1

1741—2010

Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection System Equipment for use with Distributed Energy Resources—with revisions through February 2018

R324.3, R328.6

1777—07

Chimney Liners—with revisions through April 2014

R1003.11.1, R1003.18, M1801.3.4 , G2425.12, G2425.15.4, G2427.5.2

1897—2015

Uplift Tests for Roof Covering Systems

R905.4.4.1

1995—2015

Heating and Cooling Equipment—with revisions through August 2018

M1402.1, M1403.1, M1407.1, M1412.1, M1413.1, E3408

1996—2009

Electric Duct Heaters—with revisions through July 2016

M1402.1, M1407.1

2034—2017

Standard for Single- and Multiple-station Carbon Monoxide Alarms—with revisions through September 2018

R202, R314.1.1, R315.1.1

2075—2013

Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors—with revisions through December 2017

R202, R314.7.4

2158A—2013

Outline of Investigation for Clothes Dryer Transition Duct—with revisions through April 2017

M1502.4.3, G2439.7.3

2523—2009

Standard for Solid Fuel-fired Hydronic Heating Appliances, Water Heaters and Boilers—with revisions through March 2018

M2005.1, M2001.1.1

2703—2014

Mounting Systems, Mounting Devices, Clamping/Retention Devices and Ground Lugs for Use with Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Modules and Panels—with revisions through December 2019

R324.3.1, R902.4

9540—2016

Standard for Energy Storage Systems and Equipment

R328.1, R328.2, R328.6

UL/CSA/ANCE 60335-2-40—2012

Standard for Household and Similar Electrical Appliances, Part 2: Particular Requirements for Motor-compressors

M1403.1, M1412.1, M1413.1

ULC

ULC
7 Underwriters Road
Toronto, OntarioCanadaM1R 3B4

CAN/ULC S 102.2—2018

Standard Methods of Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials and Assemblies

R302.10.1, R302.10.2

WDMA

Window & Door Manufacturers Association
2025 M Street, NW Suite 800
WashingtonDC20036-3309

AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S2/A440—08, 11 or 17

North American Fenestration Standard/Specifications for Windows, Doors and Skylights

R308.6.9, R609.3

FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710-20

Guidelines for the Full Frame Replacement of Windows without Removal of External Brick Veneer

R703.4

I.S. 11—18

Industry Standard Analytical Method for Design Pressure (DP) Ratings of Fenestration Products

R308.6.9.1, R609.3.1

WMA

World Millwork Alliance
10047 Robert Trent Jones Parkway
New Port RicheyFL34655-4649

ANSI/WMA 100—2018

Standard Method of Determining Structural Performance Ratings of Side Hinged Exterior Door Systems and Procedures for Component Substitution

R609.3

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-5]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 5
FLOORS
SECTION R501
GENERAL
R501.1 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the floors for buildings, including the floors of attic spaces used to house mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44.

R501.2 Requirements.

Floor construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads in accordance with Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting structural elements.

SECTION R502
WOOD FLOOR FRAMING
R502.1 General.

Wood and wood-based products used for load-supporting purposes shall conform to the applicable provisions of this section.

R502.1.1 Sawn lumber.

Sawn lumber shall be identified by a grade mark of an accredited lumber grading or inspection agency and have design values certified by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certificate of inspection issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted.

R502.1.1.1 Preservative-treated lumber.

Preservative treated dimension lumber shall also be identified as required by Section R317.2.

R502.1.1.2 End-jointed lumber.

Approved end-jointed lumber identified by a grade mark conforming to Section R502.1.1 shall be permitted to be used interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber used in an assembly required elsewhere in this code to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation “Heat-Resistant Adhesive” or “HRA” included in its grade mark.

R502.1.2 Prefabricated wood I-joists.

Structural capacities and design provisions for prefabricated wood I-joists shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5055.

R502.1.3 Structural glued laminated timbers.

Glued laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI A190.1, ANSI 117 and ASTM D3737.

R502.1.4 Structural log members.

Structural log members shall comply with the provisions of ICC-400.

R502.1.5 Structural composite lumber.

Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5456.

R502.1.6 Cross-laminated timber.

Cross-laminated timber shall be manufactured and identified as required by ANSI/APA PRG 320.

R502.1.7 Engineered wood rim board.

Engineered wood rim boards shall conform to ANSI/APA PRR 410 or shall be evaluated in accordance with ASTM D7672. Structural capacities shall be in accordance with ANSI/APA PRR 410 or established in accordance with ASTM D7672. Rim boards conforming to ANSI/APA PRR 410 shall be marked in accordance with that standard.

R502.2 Design and construction.

Floors shall be designed in accordance with Sections R301.2.1.1 or ANSI AWC NDS.

Figure R502.2 Floor Construction. Reserved.

R502.2.1 Framing at braced wall lines.

Reserved.

R502.2.2 Blocking and subflooring.

Reserved.

R502.3 Allowable joist spans.

Reserved.

R502.3.1 Sleeping areas and attic joists.

Reserved.

Table R502.3.1(1) Floor Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R502.3.1(2) Floor Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

R502.3.2 Other floor joists.

Reserved.

R502.3.3 Floor cantilevers.

Reserved.

Table R502.3.3(1) Cantilever Spans for Floor Joists Supporting Light-Frame Exterior Bearing Wall and Roof Only. Reserved.

Table R502.3.3(2) Cantilever Spans for Floor Joists Supporting Exterior Balcony. Reserved.

R502.4 Joists under bearing partitions.

Reserved.

R502.5 Allowable girder and header spans.

Reserved.

R502.6 Bearing.

Reserved.

R502.6.1 Floor systems.

Reserved.

R502.6.2 Joist framing.

Reserved.

R502.7 Lateral restraint at supports.

Reserved.

R502.7.1 Bridging.

Reserved.

R502.8 Cutting, drilling and notching.

Reserved.

Figure R502.8 Cutting, Notching and Drilling. Reserved.

R502.8.1 Sawn lumber.

Reserved.

R502.8.2 Engineered wood products.

Reserved.

R502.9 Fastening.

Reserved.

R502.10 Framing of openings.

Reserved.

R502.11 Wood trusses.
R502.11.1 Design.

Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with approved engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal-plate-connected wood trusses shall comply with ANSI/TPI 1. The truss design drawings shall be prepared by a registered professional where required by the Florida Statutes.

R502.11.2 Bracing.

Trusses shall be braced to prevent rotation and provide lateral stability in accordance with the requirements specified in the construction documents for the building and on the individual truss design drawings. In the absence of specific bracing requirements, trusses shall be braced in accordance with accepted industry practices, such as the SBCA Building Component Safety Information (BCSI) Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses.

R502.11.3 Alterations to trusses.

Truss members and components shall not be cut, notched, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without the approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of load that exceed the design load for the truss, shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting the additional loading.

R502.11.4 Truss design drawings.

Truss design drawings, prepared in compliance with Section R502.11.1, shall be submitted to the building official and approved prior to installation. Truss design drawings shall be provided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum, the information specified as follows:

1.	Slope or depth, span and spacing.

2.	Location of all joints.

3.	Required bearing widths.

4.	Design loads as applicable:

4.1.	Top chord live load.

4.2.	Top chord dead load.

4.3.	Bottom chord live load.

4.4.	Bottom chord dead load.

4.5.	Concentrated loads and their points of application.

4.6.	Controlling wind loads.

5.	Adjustments to lumber and joint connector design values for conditions of use.

6.	Each reaction force and direction.

7.	Joint connector type and description, such as size, thickness or gage, and the dimensioned location of each joint connector except where symmetrically located relative to the joint interface.

8.	Lumber size, species and grade for each member.

9.	Connection requirements for:

9.1.	Truss-to-girder-truss.

9.2.	Truss ply-to-ply.

9.3.	Field splices.

10.	Calculated deflection ratio and/or maximum description for live and total load.

11.	Maximum axial compression forces in the truss members to enable the building designer to design the size, connections and anchorage of the permanent continuous lateral bracing. Forces shall be shown on the truss drawing or on supplemental documents.

12.	Required permanent truss member bracing location.

R502.12 Draftstopping required.

Draftstopping shall be provided in accordance with Section R302.12.

R502.13 Fireblocking required.

Fireblocking shall be provided in accordance with Section R302.11.

SECTION R503
FLOOR SHEATHING
R503.1 Design and construction.

Floor sheathing shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.1.1 or ANSI AWC NDS.

Table R503.1 Minimum Thickness of Lumber Floor Sheathing. Reserved.

R503.2 Wood structural panel sheathing.

Reserved.

R503.2.1 Identification and grade.

Reserved.

R503.2.1.1 Subfloor and combined subfloor underlayment.

Reserved.

Table R503.2.1.1(1) Allowable Spans and Loads for Wood Structural Panels for Roof and Subfloor Sheathing and Combination Subfloor Underlayment. Reserved.

Table R503.2.1.1(2) Allowable Spans for Sanded Plywood Combination Subfloor Underlayment. Reserved.

R503.2.2 Allowable spans.

Reserved.

R503.2.3 Installation.

Reserved.

R503.3 Particleboard.

Reserved.

R503.3.1 Identification and grade.

Reserved.

R503.3.2 Floor underlayment.

Reserved.

R503.3.3 Installation.

Reserved.

SECTION R504
PRESSURE PRESERVATIVE-
TREATED WOOD FLOORS (ON GROUND)
R504.1 General.

Pressure preservative treated-wood basement floors and floors on ground shall be designed to withstand axial forces and bending moments resulting from lateral soil pressures at the base of the exterior walls and floor live and dead loads. Floor framing shall be designed to meet joist deflection requirements in accordance with Section R301.

R504.1.1 Unbalanced soil loads.

Unless special provision is made to resist sliding caused by unbalanced lateral soil loads, wood basement floors shall be limited to applications where the differential depth of fill on opposite exterior foundation walls is 2 feet (610 mm) or less.

R504.1.2 Construction.

Joists in wood basement floors shall bear tightly against the narrow face of studs in the foundation wall or directly against a band joist that bears on the studs. Plywood subfloor shall be continuous over lapped joists or over butt joints between in-line joists. Sufficient blocking shall be provided between joists to transfer lateral forces at the base of the end walls into the floor system.

R504.1.3 Uplift and buckling.

Where required, resistance to uplift or restraint against buckling shall be provided by interior bearing walls or properly designed stub walls anchored in the supporting soil below.

R504.2 Site preparation.

The area within the foundation walls shall have all vegetation, topsoil and foreign material removed, and any fill material that is added shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to ensure uniform support of the pressure preservative-treated wood floor sleepers.

R504.2.1 Base.

A minimum 4-inch-thick (102 mm) granular base of gravel having a maximum size of 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) or crushed stone having a maximum size of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) shall be placed over the compacted earth.

R504.2.2 Moisture barrier.

Polyethylene sheeting of minimum 6-mil (0.15 mm) thickness shall be placed over the granular base. Joints shall be lapped 6 inches (152 mm) and left unsealed. The polyethylene membrane shall be placed over the pressure preservative-treated wood sleepers and shall not extend beneath the footing plates of the exterior walls.

R504.3 Materials.

Framing materials, including sleepers, joists, blocking and plywood subflooring, shall be pressure-preservative treated and dried after treatment in accordance with AWPA U1 (Commodity Specification A, Special Requirement 4.2), and shall bear the label of an accredited agency.

SECTION R505
COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR FRAMING
R505.1 General.

In accordance with Section R301.2.1.1, the design of cold-formed steel floor framing shall be in accordance with AISI S230, Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method For One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

SECTION R506
CONCRETE FLOORS (ON GROUND)
R506.1 General.

Concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of ACI 332 and this section. Floors shall be a minimum 31/2 inches (89 mm) thick (for expansive soils, see Section R403.1.8). The specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in Section R402.2. Footings for concrete slab-on-grade floors shall be in accordance with Chapter 4.

R506.2 Site preparation.

The area within the foundation walls shall have all vegetation, top soil and foreign material removed.

R506.2.1 Fill.

Fill material shall be free of vegetation and foreign material. The fill shall be compacted to ensure uniform support of the slab, and except where approved, the fill depths shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) for clean sand or gravel and 8 inches (203 mm) for earth.

R506.2.2 Base.

A 4-inch-thick (102 mm) base course consisting of clean graded sand, gravel, crushed stone, crushed concrete or crushed blast-furnace slag passing a 2-inch (51 mm) sieve shall be placed on the prepared subgrade where the slab is below grade.

Exception: A base course is not required where the concrete slab is installed on well-drained or sand-gravel mixture soils classified as Group I according to the United Soil Classification System in accordance with Table R405.1.

R506.2.3 Vapor retarder.

A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 152 μm) polyethylene or approved vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the concrete floor slab and the base course or the prepared subgrade where no base course exists.

Exception: The vapor retarder is not required for the following:

1.	Garages, utility buildings and other unheated accessory structures.

2.	For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports.

3.	Driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork not likely to be enclosed and heated at a later date.

4.	Where approved by the building official, based on local site conditions.

R506.2.4 Joints.
R506.2.4.1 Construction joints.

Formed construction joints shall be provided when concrete placing operations are interrupted long enough for previously placed concrete to set.

R506.2.4.2 Contraction joints.

Concrete slabs-onground shall be provided with contraction joints in accordance with ACI 332 or other approved industry standards.

Contraction joints are not required for slabs onground provided with crack containment measures complying with one of the following:

1.	Concrete slabs on ground shall contain micro- or macro-synthetic fiber reinforcement. Fiber lengths shall be 1/2 inch to 2.25 inches (13 to 56 mm) in length. Dosage amounts shall be from 0.75 to 3.0 pounds per cubic yard (0.45 to 1.78 kg/m3) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Synthetic fibers shall comply with ASTM C1116. The manufacturer or supplier shall provide certification of compliance with ASTM C1116 when requested by the building official; or,

2.	Concrete slabs on ground containing 6 × 6 W1.4 × W1.4 welded wire reinforcement fabric located in the middle to the upper 1/3 of the slab. Welded wire reinforcement fabric shall be supported with approved materials or supports at spacing of 3 feet (914 mm) or less. Welded plain wire reinforcement fabric for concrete shall conform to ASTM A1064/A1064 M Carbon-Steel Wire and Welded Wire Reinforcement, Plain and Deformed, for Concrete.

Exception: Where random cracking is acceptable to the building owner, contraction joints are not required where crack containment complying with one of the above methods is provided.

SECTION R507
EXTERIOR DECKS
R507.1 Decks.

Wood-framed decks shall be in accordance with this section. For decks using materials and conditions not prescribed in this section, refer to Section R301.

R507.2 Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, guards, or handrails.

Plastic composite exterior deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails shall comply with the requirements of ASTM D7032 and the requirements of this section.

R507.2.1 Labeling.

Plastic composite deck boards and stair treads, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance to ASTM D7032 and includes the allowable load and maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032. Plastic or composite handrails and guards, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance to ASTM D7032 and includes the maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

R507.2.2 Flame spread index.

Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails shall exhibit a flame spread index not exceeding 200 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 with the test specimen remaining in place during the test.

Exception: Plastic composites determined to be noncombustible.

R507.2.3 Decay resistance.

Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails containing wood, cellulosic or other biodegradable materials shall be decay resistant in accordance with ASTM D7032.

R507.2.4 Termite resistance.

Where required by Section R318, plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails containing wood, cellulosic or other biodegradable materials shall be termite resistant in accordance with ASTM D7032.

R507.2.5 Installation of plastic composites.

Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, guards and handrails shall be installed in accordance with this code and the manufacturer’s instructions.

R507.3 Deck footings.

Deck footings shall be sized to carry the imposed loads from the deck structure to the ground as shown in Figure R507.3. The footing depth shall be in accordance with Section R403.1.4.

FIGURE R507.3

TYPICAL DECK POSTS TO DECK FOOTINGS

R507.4 Deck posts.

For single-level wood-framed decks with beams sized in accordance with Table R507.5, deck post size shall be in accordance with Table R507.4.

TABLE R507.4

DECK POST HEIGHTa

DECK POST SIZE	MAXIMUM HEIGHTa
4 × 4	8'
4 × 6	8'
6 × 6	14'

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Measured to the underside of the beam.

R507.4.1 Deck post to deck footing connection.

Posts shall bear on footings in accordance with Section R403 and Figure R507.3. Posts shall be restrained to prevent lateral displacement at the bottom support. Such lateral restraint shall be provided by manufactured connectors installed in accordance with Section R507 and the manufacturers’ instructions or a minimum post embedment of 12 inches (305 mm) in surrounding soils or concrete piers.

R507.5 Deck beams.

Maximum allowable spans for wood deck beams, as shown in Figure R507.5, shall be in accordance with Table R507.5. Beam plies shall be fastened with two rows of 10d (3-inch × 0.128-inch) nails minimum at 16 inches (406 mm) on center along each edge. Beams shall be permitted to cantilever at each end up to one-fourth of the actual beam span. Splices of multispan beams shall be located at interior post locations.

FIGURE R507.5

TYPICAL DECK BEAM SPANS

TABLE R507.5

DECK BEAM SPAN LENGTHS

SPECIESc	SIZEd	EFFECTIVE DECK JOIST SPAN LENGTHg
6	8	10	12	14	16	18
DECK BEAM SPAN LENGTHa, b (feet-inches)
Southern pine	2 – 2 × 6	6-11	5-11	5-4	4-10	4-6	4-3	4-0
2 – 2 × 8	8-9	7-7	6-9	6-2	5-9	5-4	5-0
2 – 2 × 10	10-4	9-0	8-0	7-4	6-9	6-4	6-0
2 – 2 × 12	12-2	10-7	9-5	8-7	8-0	7-6	7-0
3 – 2 × 6	8-2	7-5	6-8	6-1	5-8	5-3	5-0
3 – 2 × 8	10-10	9-6	8-6	7-9	7-2	6-8	6-4
3 – 2 × 10	13-0	11-3	10-0	9-2	8-6	7-11	7-6
3 – 2 × 12	15-3	13-3	11-10	10-9	10-0	9-4	8-10
Douglas fir-larche
hem-fire
Spruce-pine-fireredwood, western cedars,ponderosa pinef red pinef	3 × 6 or 2 – 2 × 6	5-5	4-8	4-2	3-10	3-6	3-1	2-9
3 × 8 or 2 – 2 × 8	6-10	5-11	5-4	4-10	4-10	4-1	3-8
3 × 10 or 2 – 2 × 10	8-4	7-3	6-6	5-11	5-6	5-1	4-8
3 × 12 or 2 – 2 × 12	9-8	8-5	7-6	6-10	6-4	5-11	5-7
4 × 6	6-5	5-6	4-11	4-6	4-2	3-11	3-8
4 × 8	8-5	7-3	6-6	5-11	5-6	5-2	4-10
4 × 10	9-11	8-7	7-8	7-0	6-6	6-1	5-8
4 × 12	11-5	9-11	8-10	8-1	7-6	7-0	6-7
3 – 2 × 6	7-4	6-8	6-0	5-6	5-1	4-9	4-6
3 – 2 × 8	9-8	8-6	7-7	6-11	6-5	6-0	5-8
3 – 2 × 10	12-0	10-5	9-4	8-6	7-10	7-4	6-11
3 – 2 × 12	13-11	12-1	10-9	9-10	9-1	8-6	8-1

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	Live load = 40 psf, dead load = 10 psf, L/∆ = 360 at main span, L/∆ = 180 at cantilever with a 220-pound point load applied at the end.

b.	Beams supporting deck joists from one side only.

c.	No. 2 grade, wet service factor.

d.	Beam depth shall be greater than or equal to depth of joists with a flush beam condition.

e.	Includes incising factor.

f.	Northern species. Incising factor not included.

g.	For calculation of effective deck joist span, the actual joist span length shall be multiplied by the joist span factor from the following table.

C/J	JOIST SPAN FACTOR
0 (no cantilever)	0.66
1/12 (0.87)	0.72
1/10 (0.10)	0.80
1/8 (0.125)	0.84
1/6 (0.167)	0.90
1/4 (0.250)	1.00

J	= actual joist span length (feet)

C	= actual joist cantilever length (feet)

R507.5.1 Deck post to deck beam.

Deck beams shall be attached to deck posts in accordance with Figure R507.5.1 or by other equivalent means capable to resist lateral displacement. Manufactured post-to-beam connectors shall be sized for the post and beam sizes. All bolts shall have washers under the head and nut.

Exception: Where deck beams bear directly on footings in accordance with Section R507.4.1.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R507.5.1

DECK BEAM TO DECK POST

R507.6 Deck joists.

Maximum allowable spans for wood deck joists, as shown in Figure R507.6, shall be in accordance with Table R507.6. Maximum allowable spacing for joists shall be limited by the decking material in accordance with Table R507.7. Deck joists shall be permitted to cantilever not greater than one-fourth of the actual, adjacent joist span.

FIGURE R507.6

TYPICAL DECK JOIST SPANS

TABLE R507.6

DECK JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES (ft. - in.)

SPECIESa	SIZE	SPACING OF DECK JOISTS WITH NO
CANTILEVERb,f
(inches)
	SPACING OF DECK JOISTS WITH CANTILEVERSc
(inches)

12	16	24	12	16	24
Southern pine	2 × 6	9-11	9-0	7-7	6-8	6-8	6-8
2 × 8	13-1	11-10	9-8	10-1	10-1	9-8
2 × 10	16-2	14-0	11-5	14-6	14-0	11-5
2 × 12	18-0	16-6	13-6	18-0	16-6	13-6
Douglas fir-larch,d hemfirdspruce-pine-fird	2 × 6	9-6	8-8	7-2	6-3	6-3	6-3
2 × 8	12-6	11-1	9-1	9-5	9-5	9-1
2 × 10	15-8	13-7	11-1	13-7	13-7	11-1
2 × 12	18-0	15-9	12-10	18-0	15-9	12-10
Redwood, western cedars, ponderosa pine,e red pinee	2 × 6	8-10	8-0	7-0	5-7	5-7	5-7
2 × 8	11-8	10-7	8-8	8-6	8-6	8-6
2 × 10	14-11	13-0	10-7	12-3	12-3	10-7
2 × 12	17-5	15-1	12-4	16-5	15-1	12-4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	No. 2 grade with wet service factor.

b.	Live load = 40 psf, dead load = 10 psf, L/∆ = 360.

c.	Live load = 40 psf, dead load = 10 psf, L/∆ = 360 at main span, L/∆ = 180 at cantilever with a 220-pound point load applied to end.

d.	Includes incising factor.

e.	Northern species with no incising factor.

f.	Cantilevered spans not exceeding the nominal depth of the joist are permitted.

R507.6.1 Lateral restraint at supports.

Joist ends and bearing locations shall be provided with lateral restraint to prevent rotation. Where lateral restraint is provided by joist hangers or blocking between joists, their depth shall equal not less than 60 percent of the joist depth. Where lateral restraint is provided by rim joists, they shall be secured to the end of each joist with not less than (3) 10d (3-inch × 0.128-inch) nails or (3) No. 10 × 3-inch (76 mm) long wood screws.

R507.6.2 Deck joist and deck beam bearing.

The ends of each joist and beam shall have not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) of bearing on wood or metal and not less than 3 inches (76 mm) on concrete or masonry for the entire width of the beam. Joist framing into the side of a ledger board or beam shall be supported by approved joist hangers. Joists bearing on a beam shall be connected to the beam to resist lateral displacement.

R507.7 Decking.

Maximum allowable spacing for joists supporting decking shall be in accordance with Table R507.7. Wood decking shall be attached to each supporting member with not less than (2) 8d threaded nails or (2) No. 8 wood screws.

TABLE R507.7

MAXIMUM JOIST SPACING

MATERIAL TYPE AND NOMINAL SIZE	MAXIMUM ON-CENTER JOIST SPACING
Perpendicular to joist	Diagonal to joista
11/4-inch-thick wood	16 inches	12 inches
2-inch-thick wood	24 inches	16 inches
Plastic composite	In accordance with Section R507.2	In accordance with Section R507.2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.01745 rad.

a.	Maximum angle of 45 degrees from perpendicular for wood deck boards

R507.8 Vertical and lateral supports.

Where supported by attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary structure and designed for both vertical and lateral loads. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. For decks with cantilevered framing members, connection to exterior walls or other framing members shall be designed and constructed to resist uplift resulting from the full live load specified in Table R301.5 acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck. Where positive connection to the primary building structure cannot be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-supporting.

R507.8.1 Vertical supports.

Vertical loads shall be transferred to band joists with ledgers in accordance with this section.

R507.8.1.1 Ledger details.

Deck ledgers shall be a minimum 2-inch by 8-inch (51 mm by 203 mm) nominal, pressure-preservative-treated southern pine, incised pressure-preservative-treated Hem-fir, or approved, naturally durable, No. 2 grade or better lumber. Deck ledgers shall not support concentrated loads from beams or girders. Deck ledgers shall not be supported on stone or masonry veneer.

R507.8.1.2 Band joist details.

Band joists attached by a ledger shall be a minimum 2-inch-nominal (51 mm), solid-sawn, spruce-pine-fir lumber or a minimum 1-inch (25 mm) nominal engineered wood rim boards specified in Section R502.1.7. Band joists attached by a ledger shall be fully supported by a wall or sill plate below.

R507.8.1.3 Ledger to band joist fastener details.

Fasteners used in deck ledger connections in accordance with Table R507.8.1.3(1) shall be hot-dipped galvanized or stainless steel and shall be installed in accordance with Table R507.8.1.3(2) and Figures R507.8.1.3(1) and R507.8.1.3(2).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R507.8.1.3(1)

PLACEMENT OF LAG SCREWS AND BOLTS IN LEDGERS

TABLE R507.8.1.3(1)

DECK LEDGER CONNECTION TO BAND JOISTa, b

(Deck live load = 40 psf, deck dead load = 10 psf)

CONNECTION DETAILS	JOIST SPAN
6′ and less	6′1″ to 8′	8′1″ to 10′	10′1″ to 12′	12′1″ to 14′	14′1″ to 16′	16′1″ to 18′
On-center spacing of fasteners
1/2-inch diameter lag screw with 1/2-inchmaximum sheathingc, d	30	23	18	15	13	11	10
1/2-inch diameter bolt with 1/2-inch maximum sheathingd	36	36	34	29	24	21	19
1/2-inch diameter bolt with 1-inch maximumsheathinge	36	36	29	24	21	18	16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

a.	Ledgers shall be flashed in accordance with Section R703.4 to prevent water from contacting the house band joist.

b.	Reserved.

c.	The tip of the lag screw shall fully extend beyond the inside face of the band joist.

d.	Sheathing shall be wood structural panel or solid sawn lumber.

e.	Sheathing shall be permitted to be wood structural panel, gypsum board, fiberboard, lumber or foam sheathing. Up to 1/2-inch thickness of stacked washers shall be permitted to substitute for up to 1/2 inch of allowable sheathing thickness where combined with wood structural panel or lumber sheathing.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R507.8.1.3(2)

PLACEMENT OF LAG SCREWS AND BOLTS IN BAND JOISTS

TABLE R507.8.1.3(2)

PLACEMENT OF LAG SCREWS AND BOLTS IN DECK LEDGERS AND BAND JOISTS

MINIMUM END AND EDGE DISTANCES AND SPACING BETWEEN ROWS
	TOP EDGE	BOTTOM EDGE	ENDS	ROW SPACING
Ledgera	2 inchesd	3/4 inch	2 inchesb	15/8 inchesb
Band Joistc	3/4 inch	2 inches	2 inchesb	15/8 inchesb

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm

a.	Lag screws or bolts shall be staggered from the top to the bottom along the horizontal run of the deck ledger in accordance with Figure R507.8.1.3(1)

b.	Maximum 5 inches.

c.	For engineered rim joists, the manufacturer’s recommendations shall govern.

d.	The minimum distance from bottom row of lag screws or bolts to the top edge of the ledger shall be in accordance with Figure R507.8.1.3(1).

R507.8.2 Deck lateral load connection.

Where the lateral load connection is provided in accordance with Figure R507.8.2(1), hold-down tension devices shall be installed in not less than two locations per deck, within 24 inches of each end of the deck. Each device shall have an allowable stress design capacity of not less than 1,500 pounds (6672 N). Where the lateral load connections are provided in accordance with Figure R507.8.2(2), the hold-down tension devices shall be installed in not less than four locations per deck, and each device shall have an allowable stress design capacity of not less than 750 pounds (3336 N).

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE 507.8.2(1)

DECK ATTACHMENT FOR LATERAL LOADS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R507.8.2(2)

DECK ATTACHMENT FOR LATERAL LOADS

R507.9 Exterior guards.

Guards shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Sections R301.5 andR312, and this section.

R507.9.1 Support of guards.

Where guards are supported on deck framing, guard loads shall be transferred to the deck framing with a continuous load path to the deck joists.

R507.9.1.1 Guards supported by side of deck framing.

Where guards are connected to the interior or exterior side of a deck joist or beam, the joist or beam shall be connected to the adjacent joists to prevent rotation of the joist or beam. Connections relying only on fasteners in end grain withdrawal are not permitted.

R507.9.1.2 Guards supported on top of deck framing.

Where guards are mounted on top of the decking, the guards shall be connected to the deck framing or blocking and installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions to transfer the guard loads to the adjacent joists.

R507.9.2 Wood posts at deck guards.

Where 4-inch by 4-inch (102 mm by 102 mm) wood posts support guard loads applied to the top of the guard, such posts shall not be notched at the connection to the supporting structure.

R507.9.3 Plastic composite guards.

Plastic composite guards shall comply with the provisions of Section R507.2.

R507.9.4 Other guards.

Other guards shall be in accordance with either manufacturer’s instructions or accepted engineering principles.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-6]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 6
WALL CONSTRUCTION
SECTION R601
GENERAL
R601.1 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of walls and partitions for buildings.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44.

R601.2 Requirements.

Wall construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads imposed in accordance with Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting structural elements.

R601.2.1 Compressible floor-covering materials.

Compressible floor-covering materials that compress more than 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) when subjected to 50 pounds (23 kg) applied over 1 inch square (645 mm) of material and are greater than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness in the uncompressed state shall not extend beneath walls, partitions or columns, which are fastened to the floor.

SECTION R602
WOOD WALL FRAMING
R602.1 General.

Wood and wood-based products used for load-supporting purposes shall conform to the applicable provisions of this section.

R602.1.1 Sawn lumber.

Sawn lumber shall be identified by a grade mark of an accredited lumber grading or inspection agency and have design values certified by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certification of inspection issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted.

R602.1.2 End-jointed lumber.

Approved end-jointed lumber identified by a grade mark conforming to Section R602.1 shall be permitted to be used interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber used in an assembly required elsewhere in this code to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation “Heat Resistant Adhesive” or “HRA” included in its grade mark.

R602.1.3 Structural glued-laminated timbers.

Glued-laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI A190.1, ANSI 117 and ASTM D3737.

R602.1.4 Structural log members.

Structural log members shall comply with the provisions of ICC 400.

R602.1.5 Structural composite lumber.

Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5456.

R602.1.6 Cross-laminated timber.

Cross-laminated timber shall be manufactured and identified as required by ANSI/APA PRG 320.

R602.1.7 Engineered wood rim board.

Engineered wood rim boards shall conform to ANSI/APA PRR 410 or shall be evaluated in accordance with ASTM D7672. Structural capacities shall be in accordance with either ANSI/APA PRR 410 or established in accordance with ASTM D7672. Rim boards conforming to ANSI/APA PRR 410 shall be marked in accordance with that standard.

R602.1.8 Wood structural panels.

Wood structural panel sheathing shall conform to DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or, when manufactured in Canada, CSA O437 or CSA O325. Panels shall be identified for grade, bond classification, and performance category by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.

R602.1.9 Particleboard.

Particleboard shall conform to ANSI A208.1. Particleboard shall be identified by the grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.

R602.1.10 Fiberboard.

Fiberboard shall conform to ASTM C208. Fiberboard sheathing, where used structurally, shall be identified by an approved agency as conforming to ASTM C208.

R602.1.11 Structural insulated panels.

Structural insulated panels shall be manufactured and identified in accordance with ANSI/APA PRS 610.1.

R602.2 Grade.

Studs shall be a minimum No. 3, standard or stud grade lumber.

Exception: Bearing studs not supporting floors and nonbearing studs shall be permitted to be utility grade lumber, provided the studs are spaced in accordance with Section R602.3.

R602.3 Design and construction.

Exterior walls of woodframe construction shall be designed in accordance with Section R301.2.1.1 or ANSI AWC NDS.

Table R602.3(1) Fastening Schedule. Reserved

Figure R602.3(1) Typical Wall, Floor and Roof Framing. Reserved.

Table R602.3(2) Alternate Attachments to Table R602.3(1). Reserved.

Figure R602.3(2) Framing Details. Reserved.

Table R602.3(3) Requirements for Wood Structural Panel Wall Sheathing Used to Resist Wind Pressures. Reserved.

Table R602.3(4) Allowable Spans for Particleboard Wall Sheathing. Reserved.

Table R602.3(5) Size, Height and Spacing of Wood Studs. Reserved.

R602.3.1 Stud size, height and spacing.

Reserved.

R602.3.2 Top plate.

Reserved.

Table R602.3.2 Single Top-Plate Splice Connection Details. Reserved.

R602.3.3 Bearing studs.

Reserved.

R602.3.4 Bottom (sole) plate.

Reserved.

R602.3.5 Braced wall panel uplift load path.

Reserved.

R602.4 Interior load-bearing walls.

Reserved.

R602.5 Interior nonbearing walls.

Reserved.

R602.6 Drilling and notching of studs.

Reserved.

Figure R602.6(1) Notching and Bored Hole Limitations for Exterior Walls and Bearing Walls. Reserved.

Figure R602.6(2) Notching and Bored Hole Limitations for Interior Nonbearing Walls. Reserved.

R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate.

Reserved.

Figure R602.6.1 Top Plate Framing to Accommodate Piping. Reserved.

R602.7 Headers.

Reserved.

Table R602.7(1) Girder Spans and Header Spans for Exterior Bearing Walls. Reserved.

Table R602.7(2) Girder Spans and Header Spans for Interior Bearing Walls. Reserved.

Table R602.7(3) Girder and Header Spans for Open Porches. Reserved.

R602.7.1 Single member headers.

Reserved.

Figure R602.7.1(1) Single Member Header in Exterior Bearing Wall. Reserved.

Figure R602.7.1(2) Alternative Single Member Header Without Cripple. Reserved.

R602.7.2 Rim board headers.

Reserved.

Figure R602.7.2 Rim Board Header Construction. Reserved.

R602.7.3 Wood structural panel box headers.

Reserved.

Table R602.7.3 Maximum Spans for Wood Structural Panel Box Headers. Reserved.

Figure R602.7.3 Typical Wood Structural Panel Box Header Construction. Reserved.

R602.7.4 Nonbearing walls.

Reserved.

R602.7.5 Supports for headers.

Reserved.

Table R602.7.5 Minimum Number of Full Height Studs at Each End of Headers in Exterior Walls. Reserved.

R602.8 Fireblocking required.

Reserved.

R602.9 Cripple walls.

Reserved.

R602.10 Wall bracing.

Reserved.

R602.10.1 Braced wall lines.

Reserved.

R602.10.1.1 Length of a braced wall line.

Reserved.

R602.10.1.2 Offsets along a braced wall line. Reserved.

R602.10.1.2 Offsets along a braced wall line.

Reserved.

R602.10.1.3 Spacing of braced wall lines.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.1.3 Braced Wall Line Spacing. Reserved.

R602.10.1.4 Angled walls.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.1.4 Angled Walls. Reserved.

R602.10.2 Braced wall panels.

Reserved.

R602.10.2.1 Braced wall panel uplift load path.

Reserved.

R602.10.2.2 Locations of braced wall panels.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.2.2 Location of Braced Wall Panels. Reserved.

R602.10.2.2.1 Location of braced wall panels in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

R602.10.2.3 Minimum number of braced wall panels.

Reserved.

R602.10.3 Required length of bracing.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.3(1) Bracing Requirements Based on Wind Speed. Reserved.

Table R602.10.3(2) Wind Adjustment Factors to the Required Length of Wall Bracing. Reserved.

Table R602.10.3(3) Bracing Requirements Based on Seismic Design Category. Reserved.

Table R602.10.3(4) Seismic Adjustment Factors to the Required Length of Wall Bracing. Reserved.

R602.10.4 Construction methods for braced wall panels.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.4 Bracing Methods. Reserved.

R602.10.4.1 Mixing methods.

Reserved.

R602.10.4.2 Continuous sheathing methods.

Reserved.

R602.10.4.3 Braced wall panel interior finish material.

Reserved.

R602.10.5 Minimum length of a braced wall panel.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.5 Minimum Length of Braced Wall Panels. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.5 Braced Wall Panels with Continuous Sheathing. Reserved.

R602.10.5.1 Contributing length.

Reserved.

R602.10.5.2 Partial credit.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.5.2 Partial Credit for Braced Wall Panels Less Than 48 Inches in Actual Length. Reserved.

R602.10.6 Construction of Methods ABW, PFH, PFG, CS-PF and BV-WSP.

Reserved.

R602.10.6.1 Method ABW: Alternate braced wall panels.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.6.1 Minimum Hold-Down Forces for Method ABW Braced Wall Panels. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.6.1 Method ABW—Alternate Braced Wall Panel. Reserved.

R602.10.6.2 Method PFH: Portal frame with hold-downs.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.6.2 Method PFH—Portal Frame with Hold-Downs. Reserved.

R602.10.6.3 Method PFG: Portal frame at garage door openings in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.6.3 Method PFG—Portal Frame at Garage Door Openings in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C. Reserved.

R602.10.6.4 Method CS-PF: Continuously sheathed portal frame.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.6.4 Method CS-PF—Continuously Sheathed Portal Frame Panel Construction. Reserved.

Table R602.10.6.4 Tension Strap Capacity for Resisting Wind Pressures Perpendicular to Methods PFH, PFG and CS-PF Braced Wall Panels. Reserved.

R602.10.6.5 Wall bracing for dwellings with stone and masonry veneer in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

Table R602.10.6.5 Method BV-WSP Wall Bracing Requirements. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.6.5 Method BV-WSP—Wall Bracing for Dwellings with Stone and Masonry Veneer in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2. Reserved.

R602.10.6.5.1 Length of bracing.

Reserved.

R602.10.7 Ends of braced wall lines with continuous sheathing.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.7 End Conditions for Braced Wall Lines with Continuous Sheathing. Reserved.

R602.10.8 Braced wall panel connections.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.8(1) Braced Wall Panel Connection When Perpendicular to Floor/Ceiling Framing. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.8(2) Braced Wall Panel Connection When Parallel to Floor/Ceiling Framing. Reserved.

R602.10.8.1 Braced wall panel connections for Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

R602.10.8.2 Connections to roof framing.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.8.2(1) Braced Wall Panel Connection to Perpendicular Rafters. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.8.2(2) Braced Wall Panel Connection Option to Perpendicular Rafters or Roof Trusses. Reserved.

Figure R602.10.8.2(3) Braced Wall Panel Connection Option to Perpendicular Rafters or Roof Trusses. Reserved.

R602.10.9 Braced wall panel support.

Reserved.

Figure R602.10.9 Masonry Stem Walls Supporting Braced Wall Panels. Reserved.

R602.10.9.1 Braced wall panel support for Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

R602.10.10 Panel joints.

Reserved.

R602.10.11 Cripple wall bracing.

Reserved.

R602.10.11.1 Cripple wall bracing for Seismic Design Categories D0 and D1 and townhouses in Seismic Design Category C.

Reserved.

R602.10.11.2 Cripple wall bracing for Seismic Design Category D2.

Reserved.

R602.10.11.3 Redesignation of cripple walls.

Reserved.

R602.11 Wall anchorage.

Reserved.

R602.11.1 Wall anchorage for all buildings in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 and townhouses in Seismic Design Category C.

Reserved.

R602.11.2 Stepped foundations in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.

Reserved.

Figure R602.11.2 Stepped Foundation Construction. Reserved.

R602.12 Simplified wall bracing.

Reserved.

R602.12.1 Circumscribed rectangle.

Reserved.

Figure R602.12.1 Rectangle Circumscribing an Enclosed Building. Reserved.

R602.12.2 Sheathing materials.

Reserved.

R602.12.3 Bracing unit.

Reserved.

R602.12.3.1 Multiple bracing units.

Reserved.

R602.12.4 Number of bracing units.

Reserved.

Table R602.12.4 Minimum Number of Bracing Units on Each Side of the Circumscribed Rectangle. Reserved.

R602.12.5 Distribution of bracing units.

Reserved.

Figure R602.12.5 Bracing Unit Distribution. Reserved.

R602.12.6 Narrow panels.

Reserved.

R602.12.6.1 Method CS-G.

Reserved.

R602.12.6.2 Method CS-PF.

Reserved.

R602.12.6.3 Methods ABW, PFH and PFG.

Reserved.

R602.12.7 Lateral support.

Reserved.

R602.12.8 Stem walls.

Reserved.

SECTION R603
COLD-FORMED STEEL WALL FRAMING
R603.1 General.

In accordance with Section R301.2.1.1, the design of cold-formed steel wall framing shall be in accordance with AISI S230, Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method For One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

SECTION R604
WOOD STRUCTURAL PANELS
R604.1 Identification and grade.

Wood structural panels shall conform to DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210, CSA O437 or CSA O325. Panels shall be identified by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.

R604.2 Allowable spans.

The maximum allowable spans for wood structural panel wall sheathing shall not exceed the values set forth in Section R602.3.

R604.3 Installation.

Wood structural panel wall sheathing shall be attached to framing in accordance with Section R602.3.

SECTION R605
PARTICLEBOARD
R605.1 Identification and grade.

Particleboard shall conform to ANSI A208.1 and shall be so identified by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency.

SECTION R606
GENERAL MASONRY CONSTRUCTION
R606.1 General.

Masonry construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section and Section R301.2.1.1, TMS 402, TMS 403 or TMS 404.

R606.1.1 Professional registration not required.

When the empirical design provisions of Appendix A of TMS 402, the provisions of TMS 403, or the provisions of this section are used to design masonry, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having authority.

R606.2 Masonry construction materials.
R606.2.1 Concrete masonry units.

Concrete masonry units shall conform to the following standards: ASTM C55 for concrete brick; ASTM C73 for calcium silicate face brick; ASTM C90 for load-bearing concrete masonry units; ASTM C744 for prefaced concrete and calcium silicate masonry units; or ASTM C1634 for concrete facing brick.

R606.2.2 Clay or shale masonry units.

Clay or shale masonry units shall conform to the following standards: ASTM C34 for structural clay load-bearing wall tile; ASTM C56 for structural clay nonload-bearing wall tile; ASTM C62 for building brick (solid masonry units made from clay or shale); ASTM C1088 for solid units of thin veneer brick; ASTM C126 for ceramic-glazed structural clay facing tile, facing brick and solid masonry units; ASTM C212 for structural clay facing tile; ASTM C216 for facing brick (solid masonry units made from clay or shale); ASTM C652 for hollow brick (hollow masonry units made from clay or shale); or ASTM C1405 for glazed brick (single-fired solid brick units).

Exception: Structural clay tile for nonstructural use in fireproofing of structural members and in wall furring shall not be required to meet the compressive strength specifications. The fire-resistance rating shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 and shall comply with the requirements of Section R302.

R606.2.3 AAC masonry.

AAC masonry units shall conform to ASTM C1691 and ASTM C1693 for the strength class specified.

R606.2.4 Stone masonry units.

Stone masonry units shall conform to the following standards: ASTM C503 for marble building stone (exterior); ASTM C568 for limestone building stone; ASTM C615 for granite building stone; ASTM C616 for sandstone building stone; or ASTM C629 for slate building stone.

R606.2.5 Architectural cast stone.

Architectural cast stone shall conform to ASTM C1364.

R606.2.6 Adhered manufactured stone masonry veneer units.

Adhered manufactured stone masonry veneer units shall conform to ASTM C1670.

R606.2.7 Second hand units.

Second hand masonry units shall not be reused unless they conform to the requirements of new units. The units shall be of whole, sound materials and free from cracks and other defects that will interfere with proper laying or use. Old mortar shall be cleaned from the unit before reuse.

R606.2.8 Mortar.

Except for mortars listed in Sections R606.2.9, R606.2.10 and R606.2.11, mortar for use in masonry construction shall meet the proportion specifications of Table R606.2.8 or the property specifications of ASTM C270. The type of mortar shall be in accordance with Sections R606.2.8.1 and R606.2.8.2.

TABLE R606.2.8

MORTAR PROPORTIONSa, b

		PROPORTIONS BY VOLUME (cementitious materials)	
MORTAR	TYPE	Portland cement or
blended cement
	Mortar cement	Masonry cement	Hydrated limec or
lime putty
	Aggregate ratio
(measured in damp,
loose conditions)

M	S	N	M	S	N
Cement-lime	M	1	—	—	—	—	—	—	1/4	Not less than 21/4 and
not more than 3 times
the sum of separate
volumes of lime, if
used, and cement

S	1	—	—	—	—	—	—	over 1/4 to 1/2
N	1	—	—	—	—	—	—	over 1/2 to 11/4
O	1	—	—	—	—	—	—	over 11/4 to 21/2
Mortar cement	M	1	—	—	1	—	—	—	—
M	—	1	—	—	—	—	—
S	1/2	—	—	1	—	—	—
S	—	—	1	—	—	—	—
N	—	—	—	1	—	—	—
O	—	—	—	1	—	—	—
Masonry cement	M	1				—	—	1	—
M	—	1	—	—
S	1/2	—	—	1
S	—	—	1	—
N	—	—	—	1
O	—	—	—	1

For SI: 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	For the purpose of these specifications, the weight of 1 cubic foot of the respective materials shall be considered to be as follows:

Portland Cement	94 pounds	Masonry Cement	Weight printed on bag
Mortar Cement	Weight printed on bag	Hydrated Lime	40 pounds
Lime Putty (Quicklime)	80 pounds	Sand, damp and loose	80 pounds of dry sand

b.	Two air-entraining materials shall not be combined in mortar.

c.	Hydrated lime conforming to the requirements of ASTM C207.

R606.2.8.1 Foundation walls.

Mortar for masonry foundation walls constructed as set forth in Tables R404.1.1(1) through R404.1.1(4) shall be Type M or S mortar.

R606.2.8.2 Masonry serving as the lateral-forceresisting system.

Mortar for masonry serving as the lateral-force-resisting system shall be Type M, S or N mortar.

R606.2.9 Surface-bonding mortar.

Surface-bonding mortar shall comply with ASTM C887. Surface bonding of concrete masonry units shall comply with ASTM C946.

R606.2.10 Mortar for AAC masonry.

Thin-bed mortar for AAC masonry shall comply with Article 2.1 C.1 of TMS 602. Mortar used for the leveling courses of AAC masonry shall comply with Article 2.1 C.2 of TMS 602.

R606.2.11 Mortar for adhered masonry veneer.

Mortar for use with adhered masonry veneer shall conform to ASTM C270 Type S or Type N or shall comply with ANSI A118.4 for latex-modified portland cement mortar.

R606.2.12 Grout.

Grout shall consist of cementitious material and aggregate in accordance with ASTM C476 or the proportion specifications of Table R606.2.12. Type M or Type S mortar to which sufficient water has been added to produce pouring consistency shall be permitted to be used as grout.

TABLE R606.2.12

GROUT PROPORTIONS BY VOLUME FOR MASONRY CONSTRUCTION

TYPE	PORTLAND CEMENT
OR BLENDED CEMENT
SLAG CEMENT	HYDRATED LIME
OR LIME PUTTY
	AGGREGATE MEASURED IN A DAMP, LOOSE CONDITION
Fine	Coarse
Fine	1	0 to 1/10	
21/4 to 3 times the sum of the volume of
the cementitious materials	—
Coarse	1	0 to 1/10	
21/4 to 3 times the sum of the volume of
the cementitious materials	
1 to 2 times the sum of the volumes
of the cementitious materials
R606.2.13 Metal reinforcement and accessories.

Metal reinforcement and accessories shall conform to Article 2.4 of TMS 602. Where provided in exterior walls, joint reinforcement shall be a minimum No. 9-gauge ladder-type stainless steel, hot dipped galvanized, or epoxy coated in accordance with TMS 602 Section 2.4E1, 2.4F1b or 2.4F2a as appropriate.

R606.3 Construction requirements.
R606.3.1 Bed and head joints.

Unless otherwise required or indicated on the project drawings, head and bed joints shall be 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) thick, except that the thickness of the bed joint of the starting course placed over foundations shall be not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) and not more than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Mortar joint thickness for load-bearing masonry shall be within the following tolerances from the specified dimensions:

1.	Bed joint: + 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

2.	Head joint: - 1/4 inch (6.4 mm), + 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

3.	Collar joints: - 1/4 inch (6.4 mm), + 3/8 inch (9.5 mm).

R606.3.1.1 Masonry opening tolerances.

Masonry rough openings may vary in the cross section dimension or elevation dimension specified on the approved plans from - 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) to + 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). For exterior window and door installation provisions, see Section R609.3.

R606.3.2 Masonry unit placement.

The mortar shall be sufficiently plastic and units shall be placed with sufficient pressure to extrude mortar from the joint and produce a tight joint. Deep furrowing of bed joints that produces voids shall not be permitted. Any units disturbed to the extent that initial bond is broken after initial placement shall be removed and relaid in fresh mortar. Surfaces to be in contact with mortar shall be clean and free of deleterious materials.

R606.3.2.1 Solid masonry.

Solid masonry units shall be laid with full head and bed joints and all interior vertical joints that are designed to receive mortar shall be filled.

R606.3.2.2 Hollow masonry.

For hollow masonry units, head and bed joints shall be filled solidly with mortar for a distance in from the face of the unit not less than the thickness of the face shell.

R606.3.3 Installation of wall ties.

The installation of wall ties shall be as follows:

1.	The ends of wall ties shall be embedded in mortar joints. Wall ties shall have not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) mortar coverage from the exposed face.

2.	Wall ties shall not be bent after being embedded in grout or mortar.

3.	For solid masonry units, solid grouted hollow units, or hollow units in anchored masonry veneer, wall ties shall be embedded in mortar bed not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

4.	For hollow masonry units in other than anchored masonry veneer, wall ties shall engage outer face shells by not less than 1/2 inch (13 mm).

R606.3.4 Protection for reinforcement.

Bars shall be completely embedded in mortar or grout. Joint reinforcement embedded in horizontal mortar joints shall not have less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) mortar coverage from the exposed face. Other reinforcement shall have a minimum coverage of one bar diameter over all bars, but not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm), except where exposed to weather or soil, in which case the minimum coverage shall be 2 inches (51 mm).

R606.3.4.1 Corrosion protection.

Minimum corrosion protection of joint reinforcement, anchor ties and wire fabric for use in masonry wall construction shall conform to Table R606.3.4.1.

TABLE R606.3.4.1

MINIMUM CORROSION PROTECTION

MASONRY METAL
ACCESSORY
	STANDARD
Joint reinforcement, interior walls	ASTM A641, Class 1
Wire ties or anchors in exterior walls
completely embedded in mortar or grout
	ASTM A641, Class 3
Wire ties or anchors in exterior walls not
completely embedded in mortar or grout
	ASTM A153, Class B-2
Joint reinforcement in exterior walls or
interior walls exposed to moist environment
	ASTM A153, Class B-2
Sheet metal ties or anchors exposed to
weather
	ASTM A153, Class B-2
Sheet metal ties or anchors completely
embedded in mortar or grout
	ASTM A653, Coating
Designation G60

Stainless steel hardware for any exposure	ASTM A167, Type 304
R606.3.5 Grouting requirements.
R606.3.5.1 Grout placement.

Grout shall be a plastic mix suitable for pumping without segregation of the constituents and shall be mixed thoroughly. Grout shall be placed by pumping or by an approved alternate method and shall be placed before any initial set occurs and not more than 11/2 hours after water has been added. Grout shall be consolidated by puddling or mechanical vibrating during placing and reconsolidated after excess moisture has been absorbed but before plasticity is lost. Grout shall not be pumped through aluminum pipes.

Maximum pour heights and the minimum dimensions of spaces provided for grout placement shall conform to Table R606.3.5.1. Grout shall be poured in lifts of 8-foot (2438 mm) maximum height. Where a total grout pour exceeds 8 feet (2438 mm) in height, the grout shall be placed in lifts not exceeding 64 inches (1626 mm) and special inspection during grouting shall be required. If the work is stopped for 1 hour or longer, the horizontal construction joints shall be formed by stopping all tiers at the same elevation and with the grout 1 inch (25 mm) below the top.

TABLE R606.3.5.1

GROUT SPACE DIMENSIONS AND POUR HEIGHTS

GROUT TYPE	GROUT POUR MAXIMUM HEIGHT
(feet)
	MINIMUM WIDTH OF
GROUT SPACESa, b
(inches)	MINIMUM GROUTb, c SPACE DIMENSIONS FOR
GROUTING CELLS OF HOLLOW UNITS
(inches × inches)
Fine	1	0.75	1.5 × 2
5	2	2 × 3
12	2.5	2.5 × 3
24	3	3 × 3
Coarse	1	1.5	1.5 × 3
5	2	2.5 × 3
12	2.5	3 × 3
24	3	3 × 4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	For grouting between masonry wythes.

b.	Grout space dimension is the clear dimension between any masonry protrusion and shall be increased by the horizontal projection of the diameters of the horizontal bars within the cross section of the grout space.

c.	Area of vertical reinforcement shall not exceed 6 percent of the area of the grout space.

R606.3.5.2 Cleanouts.

Provisions shall be made for cleaning the space to be grouted. Mortar that projects more than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) into the grout space and any other foreign matter shall be removed from the grout space prior to inspection and grouting. Where required by the building official, cleanouts shall be provided in the bottom course of masonry for each grout pour where the grout pour height exceeds 64 inches (1626 mm). In solid grouted masonry, cleanouts shall be spaced horizontally not more than 32 inches (813 mm) on center. The cleanouts shall be sealed before grouting and after inspection.

R606.3.5.3 Construction.

Requirements for grouted masonry construction shall be as follows:

1.	Masonry shall be built to preserve the unobstructed vertical continuity of the cells or spaces to be filled. In partially grouted construction, cross webs forming cells to be filled shall be full-bedded in mortar to prevent leakage of grout. Head and end joints shall be solidly filled with mortar for a distance in from the face of the wall or unit not less than the thickness of the longitudinal face shells.

2.	Vertical reinforcement shall be held in position at top and bottom and at intervals not exceeding 200 diameters of the reinforcement.

3.	Cells containing reinforcement shall be filled solidly with grout.

4.	The thickness of grout or mortar between masonry units and reinforcement shall be not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm), except that 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) bars shall be permitted to be laid in horizontal mortar joints not less than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) thick, and steel wire reinforcement shall be permitted to be laid in horizontal mortar joints not less than twice the thickness of the wire diameter.

R606.3.6 Grouted multiple-wythe masonry.

Grouted multiple-wythe masonry shall conform to all the requirements specified in Section R606.3.5 and the requirements of this section.

R606.3.6.1 Bonding of backup wythe.

Where all interior vertical spaces are filled with grout in multiple-wythe construction, masonry headers shall not be permitted. Metal wall ties shall be used in accordance with Section R606.13.2 to prevent spreading of the wythes and to maintain the vertical alignment of the wall. Wall ties shall be installed in accordance with Section R606.13.2 where the backup wythe in multiple-wythe construction is fully grouted.

R606.3.6.2 Grout barriers.

Vertical grout barriers or dams shall be built of solid masonry across the grout space the entire height of the wall to control the flow of the grout horizontally. Grout barriers shall be not more than 25 feet (7620 mm) apart. The grouting of any section of a wall between control barriers shall be completed in one day without interruptions greater than 1 hour.

R606.3.7 Masonry bonding pattern.

Masonry laid in running and stack bond shall conform to Sections R606.3.7.1 and R606.3.7.2.

R606.3.7.1 Masonry laid in running bond.

In each wythe of masonry laid in running bond, head joints in successive courses shall be offset by not less than one-fourth the unit length, or the masonry walls shall be reinforced longitudinally as required in Section R606.3.7.2.

R606.3.7.2 Masonry laid in stack bond.

Where unit masonry is laid with less head joint offset than in Section R606.3.7.1, the minimum area of horizontal reinforcement placed in mortar bed joints or in bond beams spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm) apart shall be 0.0007 times the vertical cross-sectional area of the wall.

R606.4 Thickness of masonry.

The nominal thickness of masonry walls shall conform to the requirements of Sections R606.4.1 through R606.4.4.

R606.4.1 Minimum thickness.

The minimum thickness of masonry bearing walls more than one story high shall be 8 inches (203 mm). Solid masonry walls of one-story dwellings and garages shall be not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in thickness where not greater than 9 feet (2743 mm) in height, provided that where gable construction is used, an additional 6 feet (1829 mm) is permitted to the peak of the gable. Masonry walls shall be laterally supported in either the horizontal or vertical direction at intervals as required by Section R606.6.4.

R606.4.2 Rubble stone masonry wall.

The minimum thickness of rough, random or coursed rubble stone masonry walls shall be 16 inches (406 mm).

R606.4.3 Change in thickness.

Where walls of masonry of hollow units or masonry-bonded hollow walls are decreased in thickness, a course of solid masonry or masonry units filled with mortar or grout shall be constructed between the wall below and the thinner wall above, or special units or construction shall be used to transmit the loads from face shells or wythes above to those below.

R606.4.4 Parapet walls.

Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick and their height shall not exceed four times their thickness. Unreinforced hollow unit masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and their height shall not exceed three times their thickness.

R606.5 Corbeled masonry.

Corbeled masonry shall be in accordance with Sections R606.5.1 through R606.5.3.

R606.5.1 Units.

Solid masonry units or masonry units filled with mortar or grout shall be used for corbeling.

R606.5.2 Corbel projection.

The maximum projection of one unit shall not exceed one-half the height of the unit or one-third the thickness at right angles to the wall. The maximum corbeled projection beyond the face of the wall shall not exceed:

1.	One-half of the wall thickness for multiwythe walls bonded by mortar or grout and wall ties or masonry headers.

2.	One-half the wythe thickness for single wythe walls, masonry-bonded hollow walls, multiwythe walls with open collar joints and veneer walls.

R606.5.3 Corbeled masonry supporting floor or roof-framing members.

Where corbeled masonry is used to support floor or roof-framing members, the top course of the corbel shall be a header course or the top course bed joint shall have ties to the vertical wall.

R606.6 Support conditions.

Bearing and support conditions shall be in accordance with Sections R606.6.1 through R606.6.4.

R606.6.1 Bearing on support.

Each masonry wythe shall be supported by at least two-thirds of the wythe thickness.

R606.6.2 Support at foundation.

Cavity wall or masonry veneer construction shall be permitted to be supported on an 8-inch (203 mm) foundation wall, provided the 8-inch (203 mm) wall is corbeled to the width of the wall system above with masonry constructed of solid masonry units or masonry units filled with mortar or grout. The total horizontal projection of the corbel shall not exceed 2 inches (51 mm) with individual corbels projecting not more than one-third the thickness of the unit or one-half the height of the unit. The hollow space behind the corbeled masonry shall be filled with mortar or grout.

R606.6.3 Beam supports.

Beams, girders or other concentrated loads supported by a wall or column shall have a bearing of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in length measured parallel to the beam upon solid masonry not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in thickness, or upon a metal bearing plate of adequate design and dimensions to distribute the load safely, or upon a continuous reinforced masonry member projecting not less than 4 inches (102 mm) from the face of the wall.

R606.6.3.1 Joist bearing.

Joists shall have a bearing of not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm), except as provided in Section R606.6.3, and shall be supported in accordance with Section R606.1.

R606.6.4 Lateral support.

Masonry walls shall be laterally supported in either the horizontal or the vertical direction in accordance with Section R301.2.1.1, TMS 402, TMS 403 or TMS 404.

Table R606.6.4 Spacing of Lateral Support for Masonry Walls. Reserved.

R606.6.4.1 Horizontal lateral support.

Reserved.

R606.6.4.1.1 Bonding pattern.

Reserved.

R606.6.4.1.2 Metal reinforcement.

Reserved.

R606.6.4.2 Vertical lateral support.

Reserved.

R606.6.4.2.1 Roof structures.

Reserved.

R606.6.4.2.2 Floor diaphragms.

Reserved.

R606.7 Piers.

The unsupported height of masonry piers shall not exceed 10 times their least dimension. Where structural clay tile or hollow concrete masonry units are used for isolated piers to support beams and girders, the cellular spaces shall be filled solidly with grout or Type M or S mortar, except that unfilled hollow piers shall be permitted to be used if their unsupported height is not more than four times their least dimension. Where hollow masonry units are solidly filled with grout or Type M, S or N mortar, the allowable compressive stress shall be permitted to be increased as provided in Table R606.9.

R606.7.1 Pier cap.

Hollow piers shall be capped with 4 inches (102 mm) of solid masonry or concrete, a masonry cap block, or shall have cavities of the top course filled with concrete or grout.

R606.8 Chases.

Chases and recesses in masonry walls shall not be deeper than one-third the wall thickness, and the maximum length of a horizontal chase or horizontal projection shall not exceed 4 feet (1219 mm), and shall have not less than 8 inches (203 mm) of masonry in back of the chases and recesses and between adjacent chases or recesses and the jambs of openings. Chases and recesses in masonry walls shall be designed and constructed so as not to reduce the required strength or required fire resistance of the wall and in no case shall a chase or recess be permitted within the required area of a pier. Masonry directly above chases or recesses wider than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be supported on noncombustible lintels.

R606.9 Allowable stresses.

Allowable compressive stresses in masonry shall not exceed the values prescribed in Table R606.9. In determining the stresses in masonry, the effects of all loads and conditions of loading and the influence of all forces affecting the design and strength of the several parts shall be taken into account.

TABLE R606.9

ALLOWABLE COMPRESSIVE STRESSES FOR EMPIRICAL DESIGN OF MASONRY

CONSTRUCTION;
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
OF UNIT, GROSS AREA
	ALLOWABLE COMPRESSIVE
STRESSESa GROSS
CROSS-SECTIONAL AREAb

Type M or S mortar	Type N mortar
Solid masonry of brick and
other solid units of clay or
shale; sand-lime or
concrete brick:		
 8,000 + psi	350	300
 4,500 psi	225	200
 2,500 psi	160	140
 1,500 psi	115	100
Groutedc masonry, of clay
or shale; sand-lime or
concrete:
		
 4,500 + psi	225	200
 2,500 psi	160	140
 1,500 psi	115	100
Solid masonry of solid
concrete masonry units:
		
 3,000 + psi	225	200
 2,000 psi	160	140
 1,200 psi	115	100
Masonry of hollow load-
bearing units:
		
 2,000 + psi	140	120
 1,500 psi	115	100
 1,000 psi	75	70
  700 psi	60	55
Hollow walls (cavity or
masonry bondedd) solid
units:
		
 2,500 + psi	160	140
 1,500 psi	115	100
 Hollow units	75	70
Stone ashlar masonry:		
 Granite	720	640
 Limestone or marble	450	400
 Sandstone or cast stone	360	320
Rubble stone masonry:		
 Coarse, rough or random	120	100

For SI: 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

a.	Linear interpolation shall be used for determining allowable stresses for masonry units having compressive strengths that are intermediate between those given in the table.

b.	Gross cross-sectional area shall be calculated on the actual rather than nominal dimensions.

c.	See Section R606.13.

d.	Where floor and roof loads are carried upon one wythe, the gross cross-sectional area is that of the wythe under load; if both wythes are loaded, the gross cross-sectional area is that of the wall minus the area of the cavity between the wythes. Walls bonded with metal ties shall be considered as cavity walls unless the collar joints are filled with mortar or grout.

R606.9.1 Combined units.

In walls or other structural members composed of different kinds or grades of units, materials or mortars, the maximum stress shall not exceed the allowable stress for the weakest of the combination of units, materials and mortars of which the member is composed. The net thickness of any facing unit that is used to resist stress shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

R606.10 Lintels.

Masonry over openings shall be supported by steel lintels, reinforced concrete or masonry lintels or masonry arches, designed to support load imposed.

R606.11 Anchorage.

Reserved.

Figure R606.11(1) Anchorage Requirements for Masonry Walls Located in Seismic Design Category A, B or C and Where Wind Loads Are Less Than 30 PSF. Reserved.

Figure R606.11(2) Requirements for Reinforced Grouted Masonry Construction in Seismic Design Category C. Reserved.

Figure R606.11(3) Requirements for Reinforced Masonry Construction in Seismic Design Category D0, D1 or D2. Reserved.

R606.12 Seismic requirements.

Reserved.

R606.12.1 General.

Reserved.

R606.12.1.1 Floor and roof diaphragm construction.

Reserved.

R606.12.2 Seismic Design Category C.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.1 Minimum length of wall without openings.

Reserved.

Table R606.12.2.1 Minimum Solid Wall Length Along Exterior Wall Lines. Reserved.

R606.12.2.2 Design of elements not part of the lateral force-resisting system.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.2.1 Load-bearing frames or columns.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.2.2 Masonry partition walls.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement requirements for masonry elements.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.3 Design of elements part of the lateral force-resisting system.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.3.1 Connections to masonry shear walls.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.3.2 Connections to masonry columns.

Reserved.

R606.12.2.3.3 Minimum reinforcement requirements for masonry shear walls.

Reserved.

R606.12.3 Seismic Design Category D0 or D1.

Reserved.

R606.12.3.1 Design requirements.

Reserved.

R606.12.3.2 Minimum reinforcement requirements for masonry walls.

Reserved.

Table R606.12.3.2 Minimum Distributed Wall Reinforcement for Buildings Assigned to Seismic Design Category D0 or D1. Reserved.

R606.12.3.2.1 Shear wall reinforcement requirements.

Reserved.

R606.12.3.3 Minimum reinforcement for masonry columns.

Reserved.

R606.12.3.4 Material restrictions.

Reserved.

R606.12.3.5 Lateral tie anchorage.

Reserved.

R606.12.4 Seismic Design Category D2.

Reserved.

R606.12.4.1 Design of elements not part of the lateral force-resisting system.

Reserved.

Table R606.12.4.1 Minimum Reinforcing for Stacked Bonded Masonry Walls in Seismic Design Category D2. Reserved.

R606.12.4.2 Design of elements part of the lateral force-resisting system.

Reserved.

Table R606.12.4.2 Minimum Reinforcing for Stacked Bonded Masonry Walls in Seismic Design Category D2. Reserved.

R606.13 Multiple-wythe masonry.

The facing and backing of multiple-wythe masonry walls shall be bonded in accordance with Section R606.13.1, R606.13.2 or R606.13.3. In cavity walls, neither the facing nor the backing shall be less than 3 inches (76 mm) nominal in thickness and the cavity shall be not more than 4 inches (102 mm) nominal in width. The backing shall be not less than as thick as the facing.

Exception: Cavities shall be permitted to exceed the 4-inch (102 mm) nominal dimension provided tie size and tie spacing have been established by calculation.

R606.13.1 Bonding with masonry headers.

Bonding with solid or hollow masonry headers shall comply with Sections R606.13.1.1 and R606.13.1.2.

R606.13.1.1 Solid units.

Where the facing and backing (adjacent wythes) of solid masonry construction are bonded by means of masonry headers, not less than 4 percent of the wall surface of each face shall be composed of headers extending not less than 3 inches (76 mm) into the backing. The distance between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) either vertically or horizontally. In walls in which a single header does not extend through the wall, headers from the opposite sides shall overlap not less than 3 inches (76 mm), or headers from opposite sides shall be covered with another header course overlapping the header below not less than 3 inches (76 mm).

R606.13.1.2 Hollow units.

Where two or more hollow units are used to make up the thickness of a wall, the stretcher courses shall be bonded at vertical intervals not exceeding 34 inches (864 mm) by lapping not less than 3 inches (76 mm) over the unit below, or by lapping at vertical intervals not exceeding 17 inches (432 mm) with units that are not less than 50 percent thicker than the units below.

R606.13.2 Bonding with wall ties or joint reinforcement.

Bonding with wall ties or joint reinforcement shall comply with Section R606.13.2.3.

R606.13.2.1 Bonding with wall ties.

Bonding with wall ties, except as required by Section R607, where the facing and backing (adjacent wythes) of masonry walls are bonded with 3/16-inch-diameter (5 mm) wall ties embedded in the horizontal mortar joints, there shall be not less than one metal tie for each 41/2 square feet (0.418 m2) of wall area. Ties in alternate courses shall be staggered. The maximum vertical distance between ties shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm), and the maximum horizontal distance shall not exceed 36 inches (914 mm). Rods or ties bent to rectangular shape shall be used with hollow masonry units laid with the cells vertical. In other walls, the ends of ties shall be bent to 90-degree (0.79 rad) angles to provide hooks not less than 2 inches (51 mm) long. Additional bonding ties shall be provided at all openings, spaced not more than 3 feet (914 mm) apart around the perimeter and within 12 inches (305 mm) of the opening.

R606.13.2.2 Bonding with adjustable wall ties.

Where the facing and backing (adjacent wythes) of masonry are bonded with adjustable wall ties, there shall be not less than one tie for each 2.67 square feet (0.248 m2) of wall area. Neither the vertical nor the horizontal spacing of the adjustable wall ties shall exceed 24 inches (610 mm). The maximum vertical offset of bed joints from one wythe to the other shall be 1.25 inches (32 mm). The maximum clearance between connecting parts of the ties shall be 1/16 inch (2 mm). Where pintle legs are used, ties shall have not less than two 3/16-inch-diameter (5 mm) legs.

R606.13.2.3 Bonding with prefabricated joint reinforcement.

Where the facing and backing (adjacent wythes) of masonry are bonded with prefabricated joint reinforcement, there shall be not less than one cross wire serving as a tie for each 2.67 square feet (0.248 m2) of wall area. The vertical spacing of the joint reinforcement shall not exceed 16 inches (406 mm). Cross wires on prefabricated joint reinforcement shall not be smaller than No. 9 gage. The longitudinal wires shall be embedded in the mortar.

R606.13.3 Bonding with natural or cast stone.

Bonding with natural and cast stone shall conform to Sections R606.13.3.1 and R606.13.3.2.

R606.13.3.1 Ashlar masonry.

In ashlar masonry, bonder units, uniformly distributed, shall be provided to the extent of not less than 10 percent of the wall area. Such bonder units shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) into the backing wall.

R606.13.3.2 Rubble stone masonry.

Rubble stone masonry 24 inches (610 mm) or less in thickness shall have bonder units with a maximum spacing of 3 feet (914 mm) vertically and 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally, and if the masonry is of greater thickness than 24 inches (610 mm), shall have one bonder unit for each 6 square feet (0.557 m2) of wall surface on both sides.

R606.14 Anchored and adhered masonry veneer.
R606.14.1 Anchored veneer.

Anchored masonry veneer installed over a backing of wood or cold-formed steel shall meet the requirements of Section R703.8.

R606.14.2 Adhered veneer.

Adhered masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of Section R703.12.

SECTION R607
GLASS UNIT MASONRY
R607.1 General.

Panels of glass unit masonry located in load-bearing and nonload-bearing exterior and interior walls shall be constructed in accordance with this section.

R607.2 Materials.

Hollow glass units shall be partially evacuated and have a minimum average glass face thickness of 3/16 inch (5 mm). The surface of units in contact with mortar shall be treated with a polyvinyl butyral coating or latex-based paint. The use of reclaimed units is prohibited.

R607.3 Units.

Hollow or solid glass block units shall be standard or thin units.

R607.3.1 Standard units.

The specified thickness of standard units shall be not less than 37/8 inches (98 mm).

R607.3.2 Thin units.

The specified thickness of thin units shall be not less than 31/8 inches (79 mm) for hollow units and not less than 3 inches (76 mm) for solid units.

R607.4 Isolated panels.

Isolated panels of glass unit masonry shall conform to the requirements of this section.

R607.4.1 Exterior standard-unit panels.

The maximum area of each individual standard-unit panel shall be 144 square feet (13.4 m2) where the design wind pressure is 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa). The maximum area of such panels subjected to design wind pressures other than 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa) shall be in accordance with Figure R607.4.1. The maximum panel dimension between structural supports shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) in width or 20 feet (6096 mm) in height.

For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

FIGURE R607.4.1

GLASS UNIT MASONRY DESIGN WIND LOAD RESISTANCE

R607.4.2 Exterior thin-unit panels.

The maximum area of each individual thin-unit panel shall be 85 square feet (7.9 m2). The maximum dimension between structural supports shall be 15 feet (4572 mm) in width or 10 feet (3048 mm) in height. Thin units shall not be used in applications where the design wind pressure as stated in Table R301.2(1) exceeds 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa).

R607.4.3 Interior panels.

The maximum area of each individual standard-unit panel shall be 250 square feet (23.2 m2). The maximum area of each thin-unit panel shall be 150 square feet (13.9 m2). The maximum dimension between structural supports shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) in width or 20 feet (6096 mm) in height.

R607.4.4 Curved panels.

The width of curved panels shall conform to the requirements of Sections R607.4.1, R607.4.2 and R607.4.3, except additional structural supports shall be provided at locations where a curved section joins a straight section, and at inflection points in multicurved walls.

R607.5 Panel support.

Glass unit masonry panels shall conform to the support requirements of this section.

R607.5.1 Deflection.

The maximum total deflection of structural members that support glass unit masonry shall not exceed l/600.

R607.5.2 Lateral support.

Glass unit masonry panels shall be laterally supported along the top and sides of the panel. Lateral supports for glass unit masonry panels shall be designed to resist not less than 200 pounds per lineal feet (2918 N/m) of panel, or the actual applied loads, whichever is greater. Except for single unit panels, lateral support shall be provided by panel anchors along the top and sides spaced not greater than 16 inches (406 mm) on center or by channel-type restraints. Single unit panels shall be supported by channel-type restraints.

Exceptions:

1.	Lateral support is not required at the top of panels that are one unit wide.

2.	Lateral support is not required at the sides of panels that are one unit high.

R607.5.2.1 Panel anchor restraints.

Panel anchors shall be spaced not greater than 16 inches (406 mm) on center in both jambs and across the head. Panel anchors shall be embedded not less than 12 inches (305 mm) and shall be provided with two fasteners so as to resist the loads specified in Section R607.5.2.

R607.5.2.2 Channel-type restraints.

Glass unit masonry panels shall be recessed not less than 1 inch (25 mm) within channels and chases. Channel-type restraints shall be oversized to accommodate expansion material in the opening, packing and sealant between the framing restraints, and the glass unit masonry perimeter units.

R607.6 Sills.

Before bedding of glass units, the sill area shall be covered with a water base asphaltic emulsion coating. The coating shall be not less than 1/8 inch (3 mm) thick.

R607.7 Expansion joints.

Glass unit masonry panels shall be provided with expansion joints along the top and sides at all structural supports. Expansion joints shall be not less than 3/8 inch (10 mm) in thickness and shall have sufficient thickness to accommodate displacements of the supporting structure. Expansion joints shall be entirely free of mortar and other debris and shall be filled with resilient material.

R607.8 Mortar.

Glass unit masonry shall be laid with Type S or N mortar. Mortar shall not be retempered after initial set. Mortar unused within 11/2 hours after initial mixing shall be discarded.

R607.9 Reinforcement.

Glass unit masonry panels shall have horizontal joint reinforcement spaced not greater than 16 inches (406 mm) on center located in the mortar bed joint. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall extend the entire length of the panel but shall not extend across expansion joints. Longitudinal wires shall be lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) at splices. Joint reinforcement shall be placed in the bed joint immediately below and above openings in the panel. The reinforcement shall have not less than two parallel longitudinal wires of size W1.7 or greater, and have welded cross wires of size W1.7 or greater.

R607.10 Placement.

Glass units shall be placed so head and bed joints are filled solidly. Mortar shall not be furrowed. Head and bed joints of glass unit masonry shall be 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick, except that vertical joint thickness of radial panels shall be not less than 1/8 inch (3 mm) or greater than 5/8 inch (16 mm). The bed joint thickness tolerance shall be minus 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) and plus 1/8 inch (3 mm). The head joint thickness tolerance shall be plus or minus 1/8 inch (3 mm).

SECTION R608
EXTERIOR CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION
R608.1 General.

Exterior concrete walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section or in accordance with the provisions of PCA 100, ACI 318 or ACI 332. Where PCA 100, ACI 318, ACI 332 or the provisions of this section are used to design concrete walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by Florida Statutes.

R608.1.1 Interior construction.

These provisions are based on the assumption that interior walls and partitions, both load-bearing and nonload-bearing, floors and roof/ceiling assemblies are constructed of light-framed construction complying with the limitations of this code and the additional limitations of Section R608.2. Design and construction of light-framed assemblies shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code. Where second-story exterior walls are of light-framed construction, they shall be designed and constructed as required by this code.

Aspects of concrete construction not specifically addressed by this code, including interior concrete walls, shall comply with ACI 318.

R608.1.2 Other concrete walls.

Exterior concrete walls constructed in accordance with this code shall comply with the shapes and minimum concrete cross-sectional dimensions of Table R608.3. Other types of forming systems resulting in concrete walls not in compliance with this section shall be designed in accordance with ACI 318.

R608.2 Applicability limits.

The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction of exterior concrete walls for buildings not greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in plan dimensions, floors with clear spans not greater than 32 feet (9754 mm) and roofs with clear spans not greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm). Buildings shall not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm) in mean roof height or two stories in height above grade. Floor/ceiling dead loads shall not exceed 10 pounds per square foot (479 Pa), roof/ceiling dead loads shall not exceed 15 pounds per square foot (718 Pa) and attic live loads shall not exceed 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa). Roof overhangs shall not exceed 2 feet (610 mm) of horizontal projection beyond the exterior wall and the dead load of the overhangs shall not exceed 8 pounds per square foot (383 Pa).

Walls constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be limited to buildings subjected to a maximum design wind speed of 160 mph (72 m/s) Exposure B, 136 mph (61 m/s) Exposure C and 125 mph (56 m/s) Exposure D.

Buildings that are not within the scope of this section shall be designed in accordance with PCA 100 or ACI 318.

R608.3 Concrete wall systems.

Concrete walls constructed in accordance with these provisions shall comply with the shapes and minimum concrete cross-sectional dimensions of Table R608.3.

TABLE R608.3

DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR WALLSa, b

WALL TYPE
AND NOMINAL
THICKNESS	MAXIMUM
WALL WEIGHTc
(psf)	MINIMUM
WIDTH, W, OF
VERTICAL CORES
(inches)
	MINIMUM
THICKNESS, T, OF
VERTICAL CORES
(inches)
	MAXIMUM
SPACING OF
VERTICAL CORES
(inches)
	MAXIMUM
SPACING OF
HORIZONTAL
CORES
(inches)	MINIMUM WEB
THICKNESS
(inches)
4″ Flatd	50	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A
6″ Flatd	75	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A
8″ Flatd	100	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A
10″ Flatd	125	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A
6″ Waffle-grid	56	8e	5.5e	12	16	2
8″ Waffle-grid	76	8f	8f	12	16	2
6″ Screen-grid	53	6.25g	6.25g	12	12	N/A

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm; 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per cubic foot = 2402.77 kg/m3, 1 square inch = 645.16 mm2, 1 inch4 = 42 cm4.

a.	Width “W,” thickness “T,” spacing and web thickness, refer to Figures R608.3(2) and R608.3(3).

b.	N/A indicates not applicable.

c.	Wall weight is based on a unit weight of concrete of 150 pcf. For flat walls the weight is based on the nominal thickness. The tabulated values do not include any allowance for interior and exterior finishes.

d.	Nominal wall thickness. The actual as-built thickness of a flat wall shall not be more than 1/2 inch less or more than 1/4 inch more than the nominal dimension indicated.

e.	Vertical core is assumed to be elliptical-shaped. Another shape core is permitted provided the minimum thickness is 5 inches, the moment of inertia, I, about the centerline of the wall (ignoring the web) is not less than 65 inch4, and the area, A, is not less than 31.25 square inches. The width used to calculate A and I shall not exceed 8 inches.

f.	Vertical core is assumed to be circular. Another shape core is permitted provided the minimum thickness is 7 inches, the moment of inertia, I, about the centerline of the wall (ignoring the web) is not less than 200 inch4, and the area, A, is not less than 49 square inches. The width used to calculate A and I shall not exceed 8 inches.

g.	Vertical core is assumed to be circular. Another shape core is permitted provided the minimum thickness is 5.5 inches, the moment of inertia, I, about the centerline of the wall is not less than 76 inch4, and the area, A, is not less than 30.25 square inches. The width used to calculate A and I shall not exceed 6.25 inches.

SEE TABLE 608.3 FOR MINIMUM DIMENSIONS

FIGURE R608.3(1)

FLAT WALL SYSTEM

SEE TABLE R608.3 FOR MINIMUM DIMENSIONS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.3(2)

WAFFLE-GRID WALL SYSTEM

SEE TABLE R608.3 FOR MINIMUM DIMENSIONS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.3(3)

SCREEN-GRID WALL SYSTEM

R608.3.1 Flat wall systems.

Flat concrete wall systems shall comply with Table R608.3 and Figure R608.3(1) and have a minimum nominal thickness of 4 inches (102 mm).

R608.3.2 Waffle-grid wall systems.

Waffle-grid wall systems shall comply with Table R608.3 and Figure R608.3(2) and shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 6 inches (152 mm) for the horizontal and vertical concrete members (cores). The core and web dimensions shall comply with Table R608.3. The maximum weight of waffle-grid walls shall comply with Table R608.3.

R608.3.3 Screen-grid wall systems.

Screen-grid wall systems shall comply with Table R608.3 and Figure R608.3(3) and shall have a minimum nominal thickness of 6 inches (152 mm) for the horizontal and vertical concrete members (cores). The core dimensions shall comply with Table R608.3. The maximum weight of screen-grid walls shall comply with Table R608.3.

R608.4 Stay-in-place forms.

Stay-in-place concrete forms shall comply with this section.

R608.4.1 Surface burning characteristics.

The flame spread index and smoke-developed index of forming material, other than foam plastic, left exposed on the interior shall comply with Section R302.9. The surface burning characteristics of foam plastic used in insulating concrete forms shall comply with Section R316.3.

R608.4.2 Interior covering.

Stay-in-place forms constructed of rigid foam plastic shall be protected on the interior of the building as required by Sections R316.4 and R702.3.4. Where gypsum board is used to protect the foam plastic, it shall be installed with a mechanical fastening system. Use of adhesives is permitted in addition to mechanical fasteners.

R608.4.3 Exterior wall covering.

Stay-in-place forms constructed of rigid foam plastics shall be protected from sunlight and physical damage by the application of an approved exterior wall covering complying with this code. Exterior surfaces of other stay-in-place forming systems shall be protected in accordance with this code.

Requirements for installation of masonry veneer, stucco and other finishes on the exterior of concrete walls and other construction details not covered in this section shall comply with the requirements of this code.

R608.4.4 Flat ICF wall systems.

Flat ICF wall system forms shall conform to ASTM E2634.

R608.5 Materials.

Materials used in the construction of concrete walls shall comply with this section.

R608.5.1 Concrete and materials for concrete.

Materials used in concrete, and the concrete itself, shall conform to requirements of this section, PCA 100, ACI 318 or ACI 332.

R608.5.1.1 Cements.

The following standards as referenced in Chapter 46 shall be permitted to be used.

1.	ASTM C150

2.	ASTM C595

3.	ASTM C1157

R608.5.1.2 Concrete mixing and delivery.

Mixing and delivery of concrete shall comply with ASTM C94 or ASTM C685.

R608.5.1.3 Maximum aggregate size.

The nominal maximum size of coarse aggregate shall not exceed onefifth the narrowest distance between sides of forms, or three-fourths the clear spacing between reinforcing bars or between a bar and the side of the form.

Exception: When approved, these limitations shall not apply where removable forms are used and workability and methods of consolidation permit concrete to be placed without honeycombs or voids.

R608.5.1.4 Proportioning and slump of concrete.

Proportions of materials for concrete shall be established to provide workability and consistency to permit concrete to be worked readily into forms and around reinforcement under conditions of placement to be employed, without segregation or excessive bleeding. Slump of concrete placed in removable forms shall not exceed 6 inches (152 mm).

Exception: When approved, the slump is permitted to exceed 6 inches (152 mm) for concrete mixtures that are resistant to segregation, and are in accordance with the form manufacturer’s recommendations.

Slump of concrete placed in stay-in-place forms shall exceed 6 inches (152 mm). Slump of concrete shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C143.

R608.5.1.5 Compressive strength.

The minimum specified compressive strength of concrete, f'c, shall comply with Section R402.2 and shall be not less than 2,500 pounds per square inch (17.2 MPa) at 28 days.

R608.5.1.6 Consolidation of concrete.

Concrete shall be consolidated by suitable means during placement and shall be worked around embedded items and reinforcement and into corners of forms. Where stay-in-place forms are used, concrete shall be consolidated by internal vibration.

Exception: When approved, self-consolidating concrete mixtures with slumps equal to or greater than 8 inches (203 mm) that are specifically designed for placement without internal vibration need not be internally vibrated.

R608.5.2 Steel reinforcement and anchor bolts.
R608.5.2.1 Steel reinforcement.

Steel reinforcement shall comply with ASTM A615, ASTM A706, or ASTM A996. ASTM A996 bars produced from rail steel shall be Type R.

R608.5.2.2 Anchor bolts.

Anchor bolts for use with connection details in accordance with Figures R608.9(1) through R608.9(12) shall be bolts with heads complying with ASTM A307 or ASTM F1554. ASTM A307 bolts shall be Grade A with heads. ASTM F1554 bolts shall be Grade 36 minimum. Instead of bolts with heads, it is permissible to use rods with threads on both ends fabricated from steel complying with ASTM A36. The threaded end of the rod to be embedded in the concrete shall be provided with a hex or square nut.

R608.5.2.3 Sheet steel angles and tension tie straps.

Angles and tension tie straps for use with connection details in accordance with Figures R608.9(1) through R608.9(12) shall be fabricated from sheet steel complying with ASTM A653 SS, ASTM A792 SS, or ASTM A875 SS. The steel shall be minimum Grade 33 unless a higher grade is required by the applicable figure.

R608.5.3 Form materials and form ties.

Forms shall be made of wood, steel, aluminum, plastic, a composite of cement and foam insulation, a composite of cement and wood chips, or other approved material suitable for supporting and containing concrete. Forms shall provide sufficient strength to contain concrete during the concrete placement operation.

Form ties shall be steel, solid plastic, foam plastic, a composite of cement and wood chips, a composite of cement and foam plastic, or other suitable material capable of resisting the forces created by fluid pressure of fresh concrete.

R608.5.4 Reinforcement installation details.

TABLE R608.5.4(1)

LAP SPLICE AND TENSION DEVELOPMENT LENGTHS

	BAR SIZE
NO.
	YIELD STRENGTH OF STEEL, fy- psi (MPa)
40,000 (280)	60,000 (420)
Splice length or tension development length
(inches)

Lap splice length-tension	4	20	30
5	25	38
6	30	45
Tension development length for straight bar	4	15	23
5	19	28
6	23	34
Tension development length for:
a.90-degree and 180-degree standard hooks with not less than 21/2 inches
of side cover perpendicular to plane of hook, and
b.90-degree standard hooks with not less than 2 inches of cover on the bar
extension beyond the hook.
	4	6	9
5	7	11
6	8	13
Tension development length for bar with 90-degree or 180-degree standard
hook having less cover than required above.
	4	8	12
5	10	15
6	12	18

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.5.4(1)

LAP SPLICES

For SI: 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

FIGURE R608.5.4(2)

DEVELOPMENT LENGTH AND COVER FOR HOOKS AND BAR EXTENSION

TABLE R608.5.4(2)

MAXIMUM SPACING FOR ALTERNATIVE BAR SIZE AND/OR ALTERNATIVE GRADE OF STEELa, b, c

BAR SPACING FROM
APPLICABLE TABLE IN
SECTION R608.6
(inches)
	BAR SIZE FROM APPLICABLE TABLE IN SECTION R608.6
#4	#5	#6
Alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel desired
Grade 60	Grade 40	Grade 60	Grade 40	Grade 60	Grade 40
#5	#6	#4	#5	#6	#4	#6	#4	#5	#6	#4	#5	#4	#5	#6
Maximum spacing for alternate bar size and/or alternate grade of steel (inches)
8	12	18	5	8	12	5	11	3	5	8	4	6	2	4	5
9	14	20	6	9	13	6	13	4	6	9	4	6	3	4	6
10	16	22	7	10	15	6	14	4	7	9	5	7	3	5	7
11	17	24	7	11	16	7	16	5	7	10	5	8	3	5	7
12	19	26	8	12	18	8	17	5	8	11	5	8	4	6	8
13	20	29	9	13	19	8	18	6	9	12	6	9	4	6	9
14	22	31	9	14	21	9	20	6	9	13	6	10	4	7	9
15	23	33	10	16	22	10	21	6	10	14	7	11	5	7	10
16	25	35	11	17	23	10	23	7	11	15	7	11	5	8	11
17	26	37	11	18	25	11	24	7	11	16	8	12	5	8	11
18	28	40	12	19	26	12	26	8	12	17	8	13	5	8	12
19	29	42	13	20	28	12	27	8	13	18	9	13	6	9	13
20	31	44	13	21	29	13	28	9	13	19	9	14	6	9	13
21	33	46	14	22	31	14	30	9	14	20	10	15	6	10	14
22	34	48	15	23	32	14	31	9	15	21	10	16	7	10	15
23	36	48	15	24	34	15	33	10	15	22	10	16	7	11	15
24	37	48	16	25	35	15	34	10	16	23	11	17	7	11	16
25	39	48	17	26	37	16	35	11	17	24	11	18	8	12	17
26	40	48	17	27	38	17	37	11	17	25	12	18	8	12	17
27	42	48	18	28	40	17	38	12	18	26	12	19	8	13	18
28	43	48	19	29	41	18	40	12	19	26	13	20	8	13	19
29	45	48	19	30	43	19	41	12	19	27	13	20	9	14	19
30	47	48	20	31	44	19	43	13	20	28	14	21	9	14	20
31	48	48	21	32	45	20	44	13	21	29	14	22	9	15	21
32	48	48	21	33	47	21	45	14	21	30	15	23	10	15	21
33	48	48	22	34	48	21	47	14	22	31	15	23	10	16	22
34	48	48	23	35	48	22	48	15	23	32	15	24	10	16	23
35	48	48	23	36	48	23	48	15	23	33	16	25	11	16	23
36	48	48	24	37	48	23	48	15	24	34	16	25	11	17	24
37	48	48	25	38	48	24	48	16	25	35	17	26	11	17	25
38	48	48	25	39	48	25	48	16	25	36	17	27	12	18	25
39	48	48	26	40	48	25	48	17	26	37	18	27	12	18	26
40	48	48	27	41	48	26	48	17	27	38	18	28	12	19	27
41	48	48	27	42	48	26	48	18	27	39	19	29	12	19	27
42	48	48	28	43	48	27	48	18	28	40	19	30	13	20	28
43	48	48	29	44	48	28	48	18	29	41	20	30	13	20	29
44	48	48	29	45	48	28	48	19	29	42	20	31	13	21	29
45	48	48	30	47	48	29	48	19	30	43	20	32	14	21	30
46	48	48	31	48	48	30	48	20	31	44	21	32	14	22	31
47	48	48	31	48	48	30	48	20	31	44	21	33	14	22	31
48	48	48	32	48	48	31	48	21	32	45	22	34	15	23	32

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	This table is for use with tables in Section R608.6 that specify the minimum bar size and maximum spacing of vertical wall reinforcement for foundation walls and above-grade walls. Reinforcement specified in tables in Section R608.6 is based on Grade 60 (420 MPa) steel reinforcement.

b.	Bar spacing shall not exceed 48 inches on center and shall be not less than one-half the nominal wall thickness.

c.	For Grade 50 (350 MPa) steel bars (ASTM A996, Type R), use spacing for Grade 40 (280 MPa) bars or interpolate between Grade 40 (280 MPa) and Grade 60 (420 MPa).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

FIGURE R608.5.4(3)

STANDARD HOOKS

R608.5.4.1 Support and cover.

Reinforcement shall be secured in the proper location in the forms with tie wire or other bar support system such that displacement will not occur during the concrete placement operation. Steel reinforcement in concrete cast against the earth shall have a minimum cover of 3 inches (76 mm). Minimum cover for reinforcement in concrete cast in removable forms that will be exposed to the earth or weather shall be 11/2 inches (38 mm) for No. 5 bars and smaller, and 2 inches (50 mm) for No. 6 bars and larger. For concrete cast in removable forms that will not be exposed to the earth or weather, and for concrete cast in stay-in-place forms, minimum cover shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm). The minus tolerance for cover shall not exceed the smaller of one-third the required cover and 3/8 inch (10 mm). See Section R608.5.4.4 for cover requirements for hooks of bars developed in tension.

R608.5.4.2 Location of reinforcement in walls.

For location of reinforcement in foundation walls and above-grade walls, see Sections R404.1.3.3.7.2 and R608.6.5, respectively.

R608.5.4.3 Lap splices.

Vertical and horizontal wall reinforcement required by Sections R608.6 and R608.7 shall be the longest lengths practical. Where splices are necessary in reinforcement, the length of lap splices shall be in accordance with Table R608.5.4(1) and Figure R608.5.4(1). The maximum gap between noncontact parallel bars at a lap splice shall not exceed the smaller of one-fifth the required lap length and 6 inches (152 mm). See Figure R608.5.4(1).

R608.5.4.4 Development of bars in tension.

Where bars are required to be developed in tension by other provisions of this code, development lengths and cover for hooks and bar extensions shall comply with Table R608.5.4(1) and Figure R608.5.4(2). The development lengths shown in Table R608.5.4(1) shall apply to bundled bars in lintels installed in accordance with Section R608.8.2.2.

R608.5.4.5 Standard hooks.

Where reinforcement is required by this code to terminate with a standard hook, the hook shall comply with Figure R608.5.4(3).

R608.5.4.6 Webs of waffle-grid walls.

Reinforcement, including stirrups, shall not be placed in webs of waffle-grid walls, including lintels. Webs are permitted to have form ties.

R608.5.4.7 Alternate grade of reinforcement and spacing.

Where tables in Sections R404.1.3 and R608.6 specify vertical wall reinforcement based on minimum bar size and maximum spacing, which are based on Grade 60 (420 MPa) steel reinforcement, different size bars or bars made from a different grade of steel are permitted provided an equivalent area of steel per linear foot of wall is provided. Use of Table R608.5.4(2) is permitted to determine the maximum bar spacing for different bar sizes than specified in the tables and/or bars made from a different grade of steel. Bars shall not be spaced less than one-half the wall thickness, or more than 48 inches (1219 mm) on center.

R608.5.5 Construction joints in walls.

Construction joints shall be made and located to not impair the strength of the wall. Construction joints in plain concrete walls, including walls required to have not less than No. 4 bars at 48 inches (1219 mm) on center by Section R608.6, shall be located at points of lateral support, and not less than one No. 4 bar shall extend across the construction joint at a spacing not to exceed 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Construction joint reinforcement shall have not less than 12 inches (305 mm) embedment on both sides of the joint. Construction joints in reinforced concrete walls shall be located in the middle third of the span between lateral supports, or located and constructed as required for joints in plain concrete walls.

Exception: Vertical wall reinforcement required by this code is permitted to be used in lieu of construction joint reinforcement, provided the spacing does not exceed 24 inches (610 mm), or the combination of wall reinforcement and No. 4 bars described in Section R608.5.5 does not exceed 24 inches (610 mm).

R608.6 Above-grade wall requirements.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R608.6(1)

ABOVE-GRADE CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION ONE STORY

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R608.6(2)

ABOVE-GRADE CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION CONCRETE FIRST STORY AND LIGHT-FRAMED SECOND STORY

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R608.6(3)

ABOVE-GRADE CONCRETE WALL CONSTRUCTION TWO-STORY

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.6(4)

ABOVE-GRADE CONCRETE WALL SUPPORTED ON MONOLITHIC SLAB-ON-GROUND FOOTING

TABLE R608.6(1)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR FLAT ABOVE-GRADE WALLSa, b, c, d, e

MAXIMUM WIND SPEED
(mph)
	MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT PER STORY
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)f, g
Nominalh wall thickness (inches)
Exposure Category	4	6	8	10
B	C	D	Topi	Sidei	Topi	Sidei	Topi	Sidei	Topi	Sidei
115			8	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	4@39	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@41	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
120			8	4@48	4@43	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	4@36	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@37	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
130	110		8	4@48	4@38	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@39	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@34	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
140	119	110	8	4@43	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@34	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@34	4@31	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
150	127	117	8	4@37	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@34	4@33	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@31	4@27	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
160	136	125	8	4@34	4@34	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@34	4@29	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
10	4@27	4@24	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square inch = 1.895 kPa, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Table is based on ASCE 7 components and cladding wind pressures for an enclosed building using a mean roof height of 35 feet, interior wall area 4, an effective wind area of 10 square feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II.

b.	Table is based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi.

c.	See Section R608.6.5 for location of reinforcement in wall.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the unsupported height of the wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where No. 4 reinforcing bars at a spacing of 48 inches are specified in the table as indicated by shaded cells, use of bars with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi or 60,000 psi is permitted.

g.	Other than for No. 4 bars spaced at 48 inches on center, table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R608.5.4.7 and Table R608.5.4(2).

h.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances on nominal thicknesses.

i.	“Top” means gravity load from roof or floor construction bears on top of wall. “Side” means gravity load from floor construction is transferred to wall from a wood ledger or cold-formed steel track bolted to side of wall. For nonload-bearing walls where floor framing members span parallel to the wall, use of the “Top” bearing condition is permitted.

TABLE R608.6(2)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR WAFFLE-GRID ABOVE-GRADE WALLSa, b, c, d, e

MAXIMUM WIND SPEED
(mph)
	MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT PER STORY
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)f, g
Nominalh wall thickness (inches)
Exposure Category	6	8
B	C	D	Topi	Sidei	Topi	Sidei
115			8	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	5@43	4@48	4@48
10	5@47	5@37	4@48	4@48
120			8	4@48	5@48	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	5@40	4@48	4@48
10	5@43	5@37	4@48	4@48
130	110		8	4@48	5@42	4@48	4@48
9	5@45	5@37	4@48	4@48
10	5@37	5@37	4@48	4@48
140	119	110	8	4@48	5@38	4@48	4@48
9	5@39	5@37	4@48	4@48
10	5@37	5@35	4@48	4@48
150	127	117	8	5@43	5@37	4@48	4@48
9	5@37	5@37	4@48	4@48
10	5@36	6@44	4@48	4@48
160	136	125	8	5@38	5@37	4@48	4@48
9	5@37	6@47	4@48	4@48
10	6@45	6@39	4@48	6@46

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Table is based on ASCE 7 components and cladding wind pressures for an enclosed building using a mean roof height of 35 feet, interior wall area 4, an effective wind area of 10 square feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II.

b.	Table is based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi.

c.	See Section R608.6.5 for location of reinforcement in wall.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the unsupported height of the wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where No. 4 reinforcing bars at a spacing of 48 inches are specified in the table as indicated by shaded cells, use of bars with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi or 60,000 psi is permitted.

g.	Other than for No. 4 bars spaced at 48 inches on center, table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi. Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches such as, 12, 24, 36 and 48, that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R608.5.4.7 and Table R608.5.4(2).

h.	See Table R608.3 for minimum core dimensions and maximum spacing of horizontal and vertical cores.

i.	“Top” means gravity load from roof or floor construction bears on top of wall. “Side” means gravity load from floor construction is transferred to wall from a wood ledger or cold-formed steel track bolted to side of wall. For nonload-bearing walls and where floor framing members span parallel to the wall, the “top” bearing condition is permitted to be used.

TABLE R608.6(3)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR 6-INCH SCREEN-GRID ABOVE-GRADE WALLSa, b, c, d, e

MAXIMUM WIND SPEED
(mph)
	MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED
WALL HEIGHT PER STORY
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)f, g
Nominalh wall thickness (inches)
Exposure Category	6
B	C	D	Topi	Sidei
115			8	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	5@41
10	4@48	6@48
120			8	4@48	4@48
9	4@48	5@38
10	5@42	6@48
130	110		8	4@48	5@41
9	5@44	6@48
10	5@35	6@48
140	119	110	8	4@48	5@36
9	5@38	6@48
10	6@48	6@48
150	127	117	8	5@42	6@48
9	6@48	6@48
10	6@48	6@42
160	136	125	8	5@37	6@48
9	6@48	6@45
10	6@44	6@38

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Table is based on ASCE 7 components and cladding wind pressures for an enclosed building using a mean roof height of 35 feet, interior wall area 4, an effective wind area of 10 square feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II.

b.	Table is based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi.

c.	See Section R608.6.5 for location of reinforcement in wall.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the unsupported height of the wall in inches.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted.

f.	Where No. 4 reinforcing bars at a spacing of 48 inches are specified in the table as indicated by shaded cells, use of bars with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi or 60,000 psi is permitted.

g.	Other than for No. 4 bars spaced at 48 inches on center, table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi. Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. Where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches such as, 12, 24, 36 and 48, that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R608.5.4.7 and Table R608.5.4(2).

h.	See Table R608.3 for minimum core dimensions and maximum spacing of horizontal and vertical cores.

i.	“Top” means gravity load from roof or floor construction bears on top of wall. “Side” means gravity load from floor construction is transferred to wall from a wood ledger or cold-formed steel track bolted to side of wall. For nonload-bearing wall and where floor framing members span parallel to the wall, use of the “Top” bearing condition is permitted.

TABLE R608.6(4)

MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT FOR FLAT, WAFFLE- AND SCREEN-GRID ABOVE-GRADE WALLS DESIGNED CONTINUOUS WITH FOUNDATION STEM WALLSa, b, c, d, e, k, l

MAXIMUM WIND SPEED
(mph)
	HEIGHT
OFSTEM WALLh, i
(feet)	MAXIMUM
DESIGN
LATERAL
SOIL LOAD
(psf/ft)	MAXIMUM
UNSUPPORTED
HEIGHT OF ABOVE-
GRADE WALL
(feet)	MINIMUM VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT-BAR SIZE AND SPACING (inches)f, g
Wall type and nominal thicknessj (inches)
Exposure Category	Flat	Waffle	Screen
B	C	D	4	6	8	10	6	8	6
115			3	30	8	4@30	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@22	4@26	4@21
10	4@23	5@43	4@48	4@48	4@17	4@20	4@16
60	10	4@19	5@37	4@48	4@48	4@14	4@17	4@14
6	30	10	DR	5@21	6@35	4@48	DR	4@10	DR
60	10	DR	5@12	6@25	6@28	DR	DR	DR
120			3	30	8	4@28	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@21	4@48	4@20
10	4@22	5@41	4@48	4@48	4@16	4@19	4@15
60	10	4@18	5@35	4@48	4@48	4@14	4@17	4@13
6	30	10	DR	5@21	6@35	4@48	DR	4@10	DR
60	10	DR	5@12	6@25	6@28	DR	DR	DR
130	110		3	30	8	4@25	4@48	4@48	4@48	4@18	4@22	4@18
10	4@19	5@36	4@48	4@48	4@14	4@17	4@13
6	60	10	4@16	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@12	4@17	4@12
30	10	DR	5@19	6@35	4@48	DR	4@9	DR
60	10	DR	5@12	6@24	6@28	DR	DR	DR
140	119	110	3	30	8	4@22	5@42	4@48	4@48	4@16	4@20	4@16
10	4@17	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@21	4@17	4@12
60	10	4@15	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@11	4@17	4@10
6	30	10	DR	5@18	6@35	6@35	DR	4@48	DR
60	10	DR	5@11	6@23	6@28	DR	DR	DR
150	127	117	3	30	8	4@20	5@37	4@48	4@48	4@15	4@18	4@14
10	4@15	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@11	4@17	4@11
60	10	4@13	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@10	4@16	4@9
6	30	10	DR	5@17	6@33	6@32	DR	4@8	DR
60	10	DR	DR	6@22	6@28	DR	DR	DR
160	136	125	3	30	8	4@18	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@13	4@17	4@13
10	4@13	5@34	4@48	4@48	4@10	4@16	4@9
60	10	4@11	5@31	6@45	4@48	4@9	4@14	4@8
6	30	10	DR	5@15	6@31	6@30	DR	4@7	DR
60	10	DR	DR	6@21	6@27	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.	Table is based on ASCE 7 components and cladding wind pressures for an enclosed building using a mean roof height of 35 feet, interior wall area 4, an effective wind area of 10 square feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II.

b.	Table is based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi.

c.	See Section R608.6.5 for location of reinforcement in wall.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the height of the wall in inches from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the above-grade wall.

e.	Interpolation is not permitted. For intermediate values of basic wind speed, heights of stem wall and above-grade wall, and design lateral soil load, use next higher value.

f.	Where No. 4 reinforcing bars at a spacing of 48 inches are specified in the table as indicated by shaded cells, use of bars with a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi or 60,000 psi is permitted.

g.	Other than for No. 4 bars spaced at 48 inches on center, table values are based on reinforcing bars with a minimum yield strength of 60,000 psi. Maximum spacings shown are the values calculated for the specified bar size. In waffle and screen-grid walls where the bar used is Grade 60 and the size specified in the table, the actual spacing in the wall shall not exceed a whole-number multiple of 12 inches such as, 12, 24, 36 and 48, that is less than or equal to the tabulated spacing. Vertical reinforcement with a yield strength of less than 60,000 psi and/or bars of a different size than specified in the table are permitted in accordance with Section R608.5.4.7 and Table R608.5.4(2).

h.	Height of stem wall is the distance from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the slab-on-ground.

i.	Where the distance from the exterior finish ground level to the top of the slab-on-ground is equal to or greater than 4 feet, the stem wall shall be laterally supported at the top and bottom before backfilling. Where the wall is designed and constructed to be continuous with the above-grade wall, temporary supports bracing the top of the stem wall shall remain in place until the above-grade wall is laterally supported at the top by floor or roof construction.

j.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances on nominal thicknesses, and minimum core dimensions and maximum spacing of horizontal and vertical cores for waffle-and screen-grid walls.

k.	Tabulated values are applicable to construction where gravity loads bear on top of wall, and conditions where gravity loads from floor construction are transferred to wall from a wood ledger or cold-formed steel track bolted to side of wall. See Tables R608.6(1), R608.6(2) and R608.6(3).

l.	DR = Design Required.

R608.6.1 General.

The minimum thickness of load-bearing and nonload-bearing above-grade walls and reinforcement shall be as set forth in the appropriate table in this section based on the type of wall form to be used. The wall shall be designed in accordance with ACI 318 where the wall or building is not within the limitations of Section R608.2, where design is required by the tables in this section or where the wall is not within the scope of the tables in this section.

Above-grade concrete walls shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure R608.6(1), R608.6(2), R608.6(3) or R608.6(4). Above-grade concrete walls that are continuous with stem walls and not laterally supported by the slab-on-ground shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Concrete walls shall be supported on continuous foundation walls or slabs-on-ground that are monolithic with the footing in accordance with Section R403. The minimum length of solid wall without openings shall be in accordance with Section R608.7. Reinforcement around openings, including lintels, shall be in accordance with Section R608.8. Lateral support for above-grade walls in the out-of-plane direction shall be provided by connections to the floor framing system, if applicable, and to ceiling and roof framing systems in accordance with Section R608.9. The wall thickness shall be equal to or greater than the thickness of the wall in the story above.

R608.6.2 Wall reinforcement for wind.

Vertical wall reinforcement for resistance to out-of-plane wind forces shall be determined from Table R608.6(1), R608.6(2), R608.6(3) or R608.6(4). For the design of nonload-bearing walls, in Tables R608.6(1), R608.6(2) and R608.6(3) use the appropriate column labeled “Top.” (see Sections R608.7.2.2.2 and R608.7.2.2.3). There shall be a vertical bar at corners of exterior walls. Unless more horizontal reinforcement is required by Section R608.7.2.2.1, the minimum horizontal reinforcement shall be four No. 4 bars [Grade 40 (280 MPa)] placed as follows: top bar within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the wall, bottom bar within 12 inches (305 mm) of the finish floor and one bar each at approximately one-third and two-thirds of the wall height.

R608.6.3 Continuity of wall reinforcement between stories.

Vertical reinforcement required by this section shall be continuous between elements providing lateral support for the wall. Reinforcement in the wall of the story above shall be continuous with the reinforcement in the wall of the story below, or the foundation wall, if applicable. Lap splices, where required, shall comply with Section R608.5.4.3 and Figure R608.5.4(1). Where the above-grade wall is supported by a monolithic slab-on-ground and footing, dowel bars with a size and spacing to match the vertical above-grade concrete wall reinforcement shall be embedded in the monolithic slab-on-ground and footing the distance required to develop the dowel bar in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4 and Figure R608.5.4(2) and lap-spliced with the above-grade wall reinforcement in accordance with Section R608.5.4.3 and Figure R608.5.4(1).

Exception: Where reinforcement in the wall above cannot be made continuous with the reinforcement in the wall below, the bottom of the reinforcement in the wall above shall be terminated in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Extend below the top of the floor the distance required to develop the bar in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4 and Figure R608.5.4(2).

2.	Lap-spliced in accordance with Section R608.5.4.3 and Figure R608.5.4(1) with a dowel bar that extends into the wall below the distance required to develop the bar in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4 and Figure R608.5.4(2).

Where a construction joint in the wall is located below the level of the floor and less than the distance required to develop the bar in tension, the distance required to develop the bar in tension shall be measured from the top of the concrete below the joint. See Section R608.5.5.

R608.6.4 Termination of reinforcement.

Where indicated in Items 1 through 3, vertical wall reinforcement in the top-most story with concrete walls shall be terminated with a 90-degree (1.57 rad) standard hook complying with Section R608.5.4.5 and Figure R608.5.4(3).

1.	Vertical bars adjacent to door and window openings required by Section R608.8.1.2.

2.	Vertical bars at the ends of required solid wall segments (see Section R608.7.2.2.2).

3.	Vertical bars (other than end bars, see Item 2) used as shear reinforcement in required solid wall segments where the reduction factor for design strength, R3, used is based on the wall having horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement (see Section R608.7.2.2.3).

The bar extension of the hook shall be oriented parallel to the horizontal wall reinforcement and be within 4 inches (102 mm) of the top of the wall.

Horizontal reinforcement shall be continuous around the building corners by bending one of the bars and lapsplicing it with the bar in the other wall in accordance with Section R608.5.4.3 and Figure R608.5.4(1).

Exception: In lieu of bending horizontal reinforcement at corners, separate bent reinforcing bars shall be permitted provided that the bent bar is lap-spliced with the horizontal reinforcement in both walls in accordance with Section R608.5.4.3 and Figure R608.5.4(1).

In required solid wall segments where the reduction factor for design strength, R3, is based on the wall having horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement in accordance with Section R608.7.2.2.1, horizontal wall reinforcement shall be terminated with a standard hook complying with Section R608.5.4.5 and Figure R608.5.4(3) or in a lapsplice, except at corners where the reinforcement shall be continuous as required.

R608.6.5 Location of reinforcement in wall.

Except for vertical reinforcement at the ends of required solid wall segments, which shall be located as required by Section R608.7.2.2.2, the location of the vertical reinforcement shall not vary from the center of the wall by more than the greater of 10 percent of the wall thickness and 3/8-inch (10 mm). Horizontal and vertical reinforcement shall be located to provide not less than the minimum cover required by Section R608.5.4.1.

R608.7 Solid walls for resistance to lateral forces.

TABLE R608.7(1A)

UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN EACH EXTERIOR ENDWALL FOR WIND PERPENDICULAR TO RIDGE ONE STORY OR TOP STORY OF TWO STORYa, c, d, e, f, g

SIDEWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ENDWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ROOF
SLOPE
	UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN ENDWALLS FOR WIND PERPENDICULAR TO RIDGE
(feet)

Basic Wind Speed (mph) Exposure
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B	Minimumb
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
15	15	< 1:12	1.03	1.12	1.32	1.53	1.76	2.00	0.92
5:12	1.43	1.56	1.83	2.12	2.43	2.77	1.15
7:12	2.00	2.18	2.56	2.97	3.41	3.88	1.25
12:12	3.20	3.48	4.09	4.74	5.44	6.19	1.54
30	< 1:12	1.03	1.12	1.32	1.53	1.76	2.00	0.98
5:12	1.43	1.56	1.83	2.12	2.43	2.77	1.43
7:12	2.78	3.03	3.56	4.13	4.74	5.39	1.64
12:12	5.17	5.63	6.61	7.67	8.80	10.01	2.21
45	< 1:12	1.03	1.12	1.32	1.53	1.76	2.00	1.04
5:12	1.43	1.56	1.83	2.12	2.43	2.77	1.72
7:12	3.57	3.88	4.56	5.28	6.07	6.90	2.03
12:12	7.15	7.78	9.13	10.59	12.16	13.84	2.89
60	< 1:12	1.03	1.12	1.32	1.53	1.76	2.00	1.09
5:12	1.43	1.56	1.83	2.12	2.43	2.77	2.01
7:12	4.35	4.73	5.55	6.44	7.39	8.41	2.42
12:12	9.12	9.93	11.66	13.52	15.52	17.66	3.57
30	15	< 1:12	1.84	2.01	2.35	2.73	3.13	3.57	1.82
5:12	2.56	2.78	3.27	3.79	4.35	4.95	2.23
7:12	3.61	3.93	4.61	5.34	6.13	6.98	2.42
12:12	5.61	6.10	7.16	8.31	9.54	10.85	2.93
30	< 1:12	1.84	2.01	2.35	2.73	3.13	3.57	1.93
5:12	2.56	2.78	3.27	3.79	4.35	4.95	2.75
7:12	4.92	5.35	6.28	7.29	8.37	9.52	3.12
12:12	8.92	9.71	11.39	13.22	15.17	17.26	4.14
45	< 1:12	1.84	2.01	2.35	2.73	3.13	3.57	2.03
5:12	2.56	2.78	3.27	3.79	4.35	4.95	3.26
7:12	6.23	6.78	7.96	9.23	10.60	12.06	3.82
12:12	12.23	13.31	15.63	18.12	20.80	23.67	5.36
60	< 1:12	1.84	2.01	2.35	2.73	3.13	3.57	2.14
5:12	2.56	2.78	3.27	3.79	4.35	4.95	3.78
7:12	7.54	8.21	9.64	11.17	12.83	14.60	4.52
12:12	15.54	16.92	19.86	23.03	26.44	30.08	6.57
60	15	< 1:12	3.42	3.72	4.36	5.06	5.81	6.61	3.63
5:12	4.75	5.17	6.06	7.03	8.07	9.19	4.40
7:12	6.76	7.36	8.64	10.02	11.51	13.09	4.75
12:12	10.35	11.27	13.23	15.34	17.61	20.04	5.71
30	< 1:12	3.42	3.72	4.36	5.06	5.81	6.61	3.83
5:12	4.75	5.17	6.06	7.03	8.07	9.19	5.37
7:12	9.12	9.93	11.66	13.52	15.52	17.66	6.07
12:12	16.30	17.75	20.83	24.16	27.73	31.55	8.00
45	< 1:12	3.55	3.87	4.54	5.27	6.05	6.88	4.03
5:12	4.94	5.37	6.31	7.31	8.40	9.55	6.34
7:12	11.71	12.75	14.97	17.36	19.93	22.67	7.39
12:12	22.70	24.71	29.00	33.64	38.62	43.94	10.29
60	< 1:12	3.68	4.01	4.71	5.46	6.27	7.13	4.23
5:12	5.11	5.57	6.54	7.58	8.70	9.90	7.31
7:12	14.38	15.66	18.37	21.31	24.46	27.83	8.71
12:12	29.30	31.90	37.44	43.42	49.85	56.72	12.57

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound-force per linear foot = 0.146 kN/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.88 Pa.

a.	Tabulated lengths were derived by calculating design wind pressures in accordance with Figure 28.4-1 of ASCE 7 for a building with a mean roof height of 35 feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II. For wind perpendicular to the ridge, the effects of a 2-foot overhang on each endwall are included. The design pressures were used to calculate forces to be resisted by solid wall segments in each. The forces to be resisted by each wall line were then divided by the default design strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of length to determine the unreduced length, UR, of solid wall length required in each endwall. The actual mean roof height of the building shall not exceed the least horizontal dimension of the building.

b.	Tabulated lengths in the “minimum” column are based on the requirement of Section 28.4.4 of ASCE 7 that the main windforce-resisting system be designed for a minimum pressure of 16 psf multiplied by the wall area of the building and 8 psf multiplied by the roof area of the building projected onto a vertical plane normal to the assumed wind direction. Tabulated lengths in shaded cells are less than the “minimum” value. Where the minimum controls, it is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Notes c, d and e. See Section R608.7.1.1.

c.	For buildings with a mean roof height of less than 35 feet, tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the appropriate factor, R1, from Table R608.7(2). The reduced length shall be not less than the “minimum” value shown in the table.

d.	Tabulated lengths for “one story or top story of two story” are based on a floor-to-ceiling height of 10 feet. Tabulated lengths for “first story of two story” are based on floor-to-ceiling heights of 10 feet each for the first and second story. For floor-to-ceiling heights less than assumed, use the lengths in this table or Table R608.7 (1B) or (1C), or multiply the value in the table by the reduction factor, R2, from Table R608.7(3).

e.	Tabulated lengths are based on the default design shear strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of solid wall segment. The tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable reduction factor for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4).

f.	The reduction factors, R1, R2 and R3, in Tables R608.7(2), R608.7(3), and R608.7(4), respectively, are permitted to be compounded, subject to the limitations of Note b. However, the minimum number and minimum length of solid wall segments in each wall line shall comply with Sections R608.7.1 and R608.7.2.1, respectively.

g.	For intermediate values of sidewall length, endwall length, roof slope and basic wind speed, use the next higher value, or determine by interpolation.

TABLE R608.7(1B)

UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN EACH EXTERIOR ENDWALL FOR WIND PERPENDICULAR TO RIDGE FIRST STORY OF TWO STORYa, c, d, e, f, g

SIDEWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ENDWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ROOF
SLOPE
	UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN ENDWALLS FOR WIND PERPENDICULAR TO RIDGE
(feet)

Basic Wind Speed (mph) Exposure
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B	Minimumb
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
15	15	< 1:12	2.98	3.25	3.81	4.42	5.07	5.77	2.54
5:12	4.13	4.50	5.28	6.12	7.03	8.00	2.76
7:12	4.31	4.70	5.51	6.39	7.34	8.35	2.87
12:12	5.51	6.00	7.04	8.16	9.37	10.66	3.15
30	< 1:12	2.98	3.25	3.81	4.42	5.07	5.77	2.59
5:12	4.13	4.50	5.28	6.12	7.03	8.00	3.05
7:12	5.09	5.55	6.51	7.55	8.67	9.86	3.26
12:12	7.48	8.15	9.56	11.09	12.73	14.49	3.83
45	< 1:12	2.98	3.25	3.81	4.42	5.07	5.77	2.65
5:12	4.13	4.50	5.28	6.12	7.03	8.00	3.34
7:12	5.88	6.40	7.51	8.71	10.00	11.37	3.65
12:12	9.46	10.30	12.09	14.02	16.09	18.31	4.51
60	< 1:12	2.98	3.25	3.81	4.42	5.07	5.77	2.71
5:12	4.13	4.50	5.28	6.12	7.03	8.00	3.63
7:12	6.66	7.25	8.51	9.87	11.32	12.89	4.04
12:12	11.43	12.45	14.61	16.94	19.45	22.13	5.19
30	15	< 1:12	5.32	5.79	6.80	7.89	9.05	10.30	5.06
5:12	7.39	8.04	9.44	10.95	12.57	14.30	5.47
7:12	7.94	8.65	10.15	11.77	13.51	15.37	5.65
12:12	9.94	10.82	12.70	14.73	16.91	19.24	6.17
30	< 1:12	5.32	5.79	6.80	7.89	9.05	10.30	5.16
5:12	7.39	8.04	9.44	10.95	12.57	14.30	5.98
7:12	9.25	10.07	11.82	13.71	15.74	17.91	6.35
12:12	13.25	14.43	16.93	19.64	22.54	25.65	7.38
45	< 1:12	5.32	5.79	6.80	7.89	9.05	10.30	5.27
5:12	7.39	8.04	9.44	10.95	12.57	14.30	6.50
7:12	10.56	11.50	13.50	15.65	17.97	20.45	7.06
12:12	16.56	18.03	21.16	24.55	28.18	32.06	8.60
60	< 1:12	5.32	5.79	6.80	7.89	9.05	10.30	5.38
5:12	7.39	8.04	9.44	10.95	12.57	14.30	7.01
7:12	11.87	12.93	15.17	17.60	20.20	22.98	7.76
12:12	19.87	21.64	25.40	29.45	33.81	38.47	9.81
60	15	< 1:12	9.87	10.74	12.61	14.62	16.79	19.10	10.10
5:12	13.71	14.93	17.52	20.32	23.33	26.54	10.87
7:12	15.08	16.42	19.27	22.35	25.66	29.20	11.22
12:12	18.67	20.33	23.86	27.67	31.77	36.14	12.19
30	< 1:12	9.87	10.74	12.61	14.62	16.79	19.10	10.30
5:12	13.71	14.93	17.52	20.32	23.33	26.54	11.85
7:12	17.44	18.99	22.29	25.85	29.67	33.76	12.54
12:12	24.62	26.81	31.46	36.49	41.89	47.66	14.48
45	< 1:12	10.27	11.18	13.12	15.21	17.47	19.87	10.50
5:12	14.26	15.52	18.22	21.13	24.26	27.60	12.82
7:12	20.21	22.01	25.83	29.95	34.39	39.12	13.86
12:12	31.20	33.97	39.87	46.23	53.07	60.39	16.76
60	< 1:12	10.64	11.59	13.60	15.77	18.11	20.60	10.70
5:12	14.77	16.09	18.88	21.90	25.14	28.60	13.79
7:12	23.05	25.09	29.45	34.15	39.21	44.61	15.18
12:12	37.97	41.34	48.52	56.27	64.60	73.49	19.05

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound force per linear foot = 0.146 kN/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.88 Pa.

a.	Tabulated lengths were derived by calculating design wind pressures in accordance with Figure 28.4-1 of ASCE 7 for a building with a mean roof height of 35 feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II. For wind perpendicular to the ridge, the effects of a 2-foot overhang on each endwall are included. The design pressures were used to calculate forces to be resisted by solid wall segments in each endwall. The forces to be resisted by each wall line were then divided by the default design strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of length to determine the unreduced length, UR, of solid wall length required in each endwall. The actual mean roof height of the building shall not exceed the least horizontal dimension of the building.

b.	Tabulated lengths in the “minimum” column are based on the requirement of Section 28.4.4 of ASCE 7 that the main windforce-resisting system be designed for a minimum pressure of 1016 psf multiplied by the wall area of the building and 8 psf multiplied by the roof area of the building projected onto a vertical plane normal to the assumed wind direction. Tabulated lengths in shaded cells are less than the “minimum” value. Where the minimum controls, it is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Notes c, d and e. See Section R608.7.1.1.

c.	For buildings with a mean roof height of less than 35 feet, tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the appropriate factor, R1, from Table R608.7(2). The reduced length shall be not less than the “minimum” value shown in the table.

d.	Tabulated lengths for “one story or top story of two story” are based on a floor-to-ceiling height of 10 feet. Tabulated lengths for “first story of two story” are based on floor-to-ceiling heights of 10 feet each for the first and second story. For floor-to-ceiling heights less than assumed, use the lengths in this table or Table R608.7(1A) or (1C), or multiply the value in the table by the reduction factor, R2, from Table R608.7(3).

e.	Tabulated lengths are based on the default design shear strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of solid wall segment. The tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable reduction factor for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4).

f.	The reduction factors, R1, R2 and R3, in Tables R608.7(2), R608.7(3), and R608.7(4), respectively, are permitted to be compounded, subject to the limitations of Note b. However, the minimum number and minimum length of solid wall segments in each wall line shall comply with Sections R608.7.1 and R608.7.2.1, respectively.

g.	For intermediate values of sidewall length, endwall length, roof slope and basic wind speed, use the next higher value, or determine by interpolation.

TABLE R608.7(1C)

UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN EACH EXTERIOR SIDEWALL FOR WIND PARALLEL TO RIDGEa, c, d, e, f, g

SIDEWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ENDWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ROOF
SLOPE
	UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN SIDEWALLS FOR WIND PARALLEL TO RIDGE (feet)
Basic Wind Speed (mph) Exposure
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B	Minimumb
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
One story or top story of two story
< 30	15	< 1:12	1.08	1.18	1.39	161	1.84	2.10	0.90
5:12	1.29	1.40	1.65	1.91	2.19	2.49	1.08
7:12	1.38	1.50	1.76	2.04	2.35	2.67	1.17
12:12	1.63	1.78	2.09	2.42	2.78	3.16	1.39
30	< 1:12	2.02	2.20	2.59	3.00	3.44	3.92	1.90
5:12	2.73	2.97	3.48	4.04	4.64	5.28	2.62
7:12	3.05	3.32	3.89	4.51	5.18	5.89	2.95
12:12	3.93	4.27	5.02	5.82	6.68	7.60	3.86
45	< 1:12	3.03	3.30	3.87	4.49	5.15	5.86	2.99
5:12	4.55	4.96	5.82	6.75	7.74	8.81	4.62
7:12	5.24	5.71	6.70	7.77	8.92	10.15	5.36
12:12	7.16	7.79	9.14	10.61	12.17	13.85	7.39
60	< 1:12	4.11	4.47	5.25	6.09	6.99	7.96	4.18
5:12	6.78	7.39	8.67	10.05	11.54	13.13	7.07
7:12	8.00	8.71	10.22	11.85	13.61	15.48	8.38
12:12	11.35	12.36	14.51	16.82	19.31	21.97	12.00
60	45	< 1:12	3.17	3.46	4.06	4.70	5.40	6.14	2.99
5:12	4.75	5.18	6.07	7.04	8.09	9.20	4.62
7:12	5.47	5.96	6.99	8.11	9.31	10.59	5.36
12:12	7.45	8.11	9.52	11.04	12.68	14.43	7.39
60	< 1:12	4.41	4.81	5.64	6.54	7.51	8.54	4.18
5:12	7.22	7.86	9.23	10.70	12.29	13.98	7.07
7:12	8.50	9.25	10.86	12.59	14.46	16.45	8.38
12:12	12.02	13.09	15.36	17.81	20.45	23.27	12.00
SIDEWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ENDWALL
LENGTH
(feet)	ROOF
SLOPE
	UNREDUCED LENGTH, UR, OF SOLID WALL REQUIRED IN SIDEWALLS FOR WIND PARALLEL TO RIDGE (feet)
Basic Wind Speed Exposure (mph)
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B	Minimumb
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
First story of two story
< 30	15	< 1:12	3.03	3.30	3.88	4.49	5.16	5.87	2.52
5:12	3.24	3.52	4.14	4.80	5.51	6.26	2.70
7:12	3.33	3.62	4.25	4.93	5.66	6.44	2.79
12:12	3.58	3.90	4.58	5.31	6.10	6.94	3.01
30	< 1:12	5.50	5.99	7.03	8.16	9.36	10.65	5.14
5:12	6.21	6.76	7.93	9.20	10.56	12.01	5.86
7:12	6.52	7.10	8.34	9.67	11.10	12.63	6.19
12:12	7.41	8.06	9.46	10.97	12.60	14.33	7.10
45	< 1:12	8.00	8.71	10.22	11.85	13.61	15.48	7.85
5:12	9.52	10.37	12.17	14.11	16.20	18.43	9.48
7:12	10.21	11.12	13.05	15.14	17.38	19.77	10.21
12:12	12.13	13.20	15.50	17.97	20.63	23.47	12.25
60	< 1:12	10.56	11.50	13.50	15.65	17.97	20.44	10.65
5:12	13.24	14.41	16.91	19.62	22.52	25.62	13.54
7:12	14.45	15.73	18.46	21.41	24.58	27.97	14.85
12:12	17.80	19.38	22.75	26.38	30.29	34.46	18.48
60	45	< 1:12	8.39	9.14	10.72	12.44	14.28	16.25	7.85
5:12	9.97	10.86	12.74	14.78	16.97	19.30	9.48
7:12	10.69	11.64	13.66	15.84	18.19	20.69	10.21
12:12	12.67	13.80	16.19	18.78	21.56	24.53	12.25
60	< 1:12	11.37	12.38	14.53	16.85	19.35	22.01	10.65
5:12	14.18	15.44	18.12	21.02	24.13	27.45	13.54
7:12	15.46	16.83	19.75	22.91	26.29	29.92	14.85
12:12	18.98	20.66	24.25	28.13	32.29	36.74	18.48

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound force per linear foot = 0.146 kN/m, 1 pound per square foot = 47.88 Pa.

a.	Tabulated lengths were derived by calculating design wind pressures in accordance with Figure 28.4-1 of ASCE 7 for a building with a mean roof height of 35 feet, topographic factor, Kzt, equal to 1.0, and Risk Category II. The design pressures were used to calculate forces to be resisted by solid wall segments in each sidewall. The forces to be resisted by each wall line were then divided by the default design strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of length to determine the unreduced length, UR, of solid wall length required in each sidewall. The actual mean roof height of the building shall not exceed the least horizontal dimension of the building.

b.	Tabulated lengths in the “minimum” column are based on the requirement of Section 28.4.4 of ASCE 7 that the main windforce-resisting system be designed for a minimum pressure of 16 psf multiplied by the wall area of the building and 8 psf multiplied by the roof area of the building projected onto a vertical plane normal to the assumed wind direction. Tabulated lengths in shaded cells are less than the “minimum” value. Where the minimum controls, it is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Notes c, d and e. See Section R608.7.1.1.

c.	For buildings with a mean roof height of less than 35 feet, tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the appropriate factor, R1, from Table R608.7(2). The reduced length shall be not less than the “minimum” value shown in the table.

d.	Tabulated lengths for “one story or top story of two story” are based on a floor-to-ceiling height of 10 feet. Tabulated lengths for “first story of two story” are based on floor-to-ceiling heights of 10 feet each for the first and second story. For floor-to-ceiling heights less than assumed, use the lengths in this table or Table R608.7(1A) or (1B), or multiply the value in the table by the reduction factor, R2, from Table R608.7(3).

e.	Tabulated lengths are based on the default design shear strength of 840 pounds per linear foot of solid wall segment. The tabulated lengths are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable reduction factor for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4).

f.	The reduction factors, R1, R2 and R3, in Tables R608.7(2), R608.7(3), and R608.7(4), respectively, are permitted to be compounded, subject to the limitations of Note b. However, the minimum number and minimum length of solid walls segments in each wall line shall comply with Sections R608.7.1 and R608.7.2.1, respectively.

g.	For intermediate values of sidewall length, endwall length, roof slope and basic wind speed, use the next higher value, or determine by interpolation.

TABLE R608.7(2)

REDUCTION FACTOR, R1, FOR BUILDINGS WITH MEAN ROOF HEIGHT LESS THAN 35 FEETa

MEAN ROOF HEIGHTb, c
(feet)
	REDUCTION FACTOR R1, FOR MEAN ROOF HEIGHT
Exposure category
B	C	D
< 15	0.96	0.84	0.87
20	0.96	0.89	0.91
25	0.96	0.93	0.94
30	0.96	0.97	0.98
35	1.00	1.00	1.00

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.0175 rad.

a.	See Section R608.7.1.1 and Note c to Table R608.7(1A) for application of reduction factors in this table. This reduction is not permitted for “minimum” values.

b.	For intermediate values of mean roof height, use the factor for the next greater height, or determine by interpolation.

c.	Mean roof height is the average of the roof eave height and height of the highest point on the roof surface, except that for roof slopes of less than or equal to 21/8:12 (10 degrees), the mean roof height is permitted to be taken as the roof eave height.

TABLE R608.7(3)

REDUCTION FACTOR, R2, FOR FLOOR-TO-CEILING WALL HEIGHTS LESS THAN 10 FEETa, b

STORY UNDER
CONSIDERATION
	FLOOR-TO-CEILING HEIGHTc
(feet)
	ENDWALL LENGTH
(feet)
	ROOF SLOPE	REDUCTION FACTOR, R2
Endwalls—for wind perpendicular to ridge
One story or top story of two story	8	15	< 5:12	0.83
7:12	0.90
12:12	0.94
60	< 5:12	0.83
7:12	0.95
12:12	0.98
First story of two story	16 combined first and second story	15	< 5:12	0.83
7:12	0.86
12:12	0.89
60	< 5:12	0.83
7:12	0.91
12:12	0.95
Sidewalls—for wind parallel to ridge
One story or top story of two story	8	15	< 1:12	0.84
5:12	0.87
7:12	0.88
12:12	0.89
60	< 1:12	0.86
5:12	0.92
7:12	0.93
12:12	0.95
First story of two story	16 combined first and second story	15	< 1:12	0.83
5:12	0.84
7:12	0.85
12:12	0.86
60	< 1:12	0.84
5:12	0.87
7:12	0.88
12:12	0.90

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	See Section R608.7.1.1 and Note d to Table R608.7(1A) for application of reduction factors in this table.

b.	For intermediate values of endwall length, and/or roof slope, use the next higher value, or determine by interpolation.

c.	Tabulated values in Table R608.7(1A) and (1C) for “one story or top story of two story” are based on a floor-to-ceiling height of 10 feet. Tabulated values in Table R608.7(1B) and (1C) for “first story of two story” are based on floor-to-ceiling heights of 10 feet each for the first and second story. For floor to ceiling heights between those shown in this table and those assumed in Table R608.7(1A), (1B) or (1C), use the solid wall lengths in Table R608.7(1A), (1B) or (1C), or determine the reduction factor by interpolating between 1.0 and the factor shown in this table.

TABLE R608.7(4)

REDUCTION FACTOR FOR DESIGN STRENGTH, R3, FOR FLAT, WAFFLE- AND SCREEN-GRID WALLSa, c

NOMINAL
THICKNESS OF
WALL
(inches)
	VERTICAL BARS AT EACH END OF
SOLID WALL SEGMENT
	VERTICAL
REINFORCEMENT
LAYOUT DETAIL
[see Figure R608.7(2)]
	REDUCTION FACTOR, R3, FOR LENGTH OF SOLID WALL
Horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement provided
Number of bars	Bar size	No	Yesd
40,000b	60,000b	40,000b	60,000b
Flat walls
4	2	4	1	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.50
3	4	2	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.27
2	5	1	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.25
3	5	2	0.61	0.61	0.26	0.18
6	2	4	3	0.70	0.48	0.70	0.48
3	4	4	0.49	0.38	0.49	0.33
2	5	3	0.46	0.38	0.46	0.31
3	5	4	0.38	0.38	0.32	0.16
8	2	4	3	0.70	0.47	0.70	0.47
3	4	5	0.47	0.32	0.47	0.32
2	5	3	0.45	0.31	0.45	0.31
4	4	6	0.36	0.28	0.36	0.25
3	5	5	0.31	0.28	0.31	0.16
4	5	6	0.28	0.28	0.24	0.12
10	2	4	3	0.70	0.47	0.70	0.47
2	5	3	0.45	0.30	0.45	0.30
4	4	7	0.36	0.25	0.36	0.25
6	4	8	0.25	0.22	0.25	0.13
4	5	7	0.24	0.22	0.24	0.12
6	5	8	0.22	0.22	0.12	0.08
Waffle-grid wallse
6	2	4	3	0.78	0.78	0.70	0.48
3	4	4	0.78	0.78	0.49	0.25
2	5	3	0.78	0.78	0.46	0.23
3	5	4	0.78	0.78	0.24	0.16
8	2	4	3	0.78	0.78	0.70	0.47
3	4	5	0.78	0.78	0.47	0.24
2	5	3	0.78	0.78	0.45	0.23
4	4	6	0.78	0.78	0.36	0.18
3	5	5	0.78	0.78	0.23	0.16
4	5	6	0.78	0.78	0.18	0.13
Screen-grid wallse
6	2	4	3	0.93	0.93	0.70	0.48
3	4	4	0.93	0.93	0.49	0.25
2	5	3	0.93	0.93	0.46	0.23
3	5	4	0.93	0.93	0.24	0.16

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1,000 pounds per square inch = 6.895 MPa.

a.	See Note e to Table R608.7(1A) for application of adjustment factors in this table.

b.	Yield strength in pounds per square inch of vertical wall reinforcement at ends of solid wall segments.

c.	Values are based on concrete with a specified compressive strength, f'c, of 2,500 psi. Where concrete with f'c of not less than 3,000 psi is used, values in shaded cells are permitted to be decreased by multiplying by 0.91.

d.	Horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Section R608.7.2.2.

e.	Each end of each solid wall segment shall have rectangular flanges. In the through-the-wall dimension, the flange shall be not less than 51/2 inches for 6-inch-nominal waffle- and screen-grid walls, and not less than 71/2 inches for 8-inch-nominal waffle-grid walls. In the in-plane dimension, flanges shall be long enough to accommodate the vertical reinforcement required by the layout detail selected from Figure R608.7(2) and provide the cover required by Section R608.5.4.1. If necessary to achieve the required dimensions, form material shall be removed or use of flat wall forms is permitted.

FIGURE R608.7(1)

MINIMUM SOLID WALL LENGTH

FIGURE R608.7(2)

VERTICAL REINFORCEMENT LAYOUT DETAIL

FIGURE R608.7(3)

VERTICAL WALL REINFORCEMENT ADJACENT TO WALL OPENINGS

R608.7.1 Length of solid wall.

Each exterior wall line in each story shall have a total length of solid wall required by Section R608.7.1.1. A solid wall is a section of flat, wafflegrid or screen-grid wall, extending the full story height without openings or penetrations, except those permitted by Section R608.7.2. Solid wall segments that contribute to the total length of solid wall shall comply with Section R608.7.2.

R608.7.1.1 Length of solid wall for wind.

Buildings shall have solid walls in each exterior endwall line (the side of a building that is parallel to the span of the roof or floor framing) and sidewall line (the side of a building that is perpendicular to the span of the roof or floor framing) to resist lateral in-plane wind forces. The site-appropriate basic wind speed and exposure category shall be used in Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C) to determine the unreduced total length, UR, of solid wall required in each exterior endwall line and sidewall line. For buildings with a mean roof height of less than 35 feet (10 668 mm), the unreduced values determined from Tables R608.7(1A) though (1C) are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable factor, R1, from Table R608.7(2); however, reduced values shall be not less than the minimum values in Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C). Where the floor-to-ceiling height of a story is less than 10 feet (3048 mm), the unreduced values determined from Tables R608.7(1A) through (C), including minimum values, are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable factor, R2, from Table R608.7(3). To account for different design strengths than assumed in determining the values in Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C), the unreduced lengths determined from Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C), including minimum values, are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by the applicable factor, R3, from Table R608.7(4). The reductions permitted by Tables R608.7(2), R608.7(3) and R608.7(4) are cumulative.

The total length of solid wall segments, TL, in a wall line that comply with the minimum length requirements of Section R608.7.2.1 [see Figure R608.7(1)] shall be equal to or greater than the product of the unreduced length of solid wall from Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C), UR and the applicable reduction factors, if any, from Tables R608.7(2), R608.7(3) and R608.7(4) as indicated by Equation R6-1.

(Equation R6-1)

where:

TL = Total length of solid wall segments in a wall line that comply with Section R608.7.2.1 [see Figure R608.7(1)].

R1 = 1.0 or reduction factor for mean roof height from Table R608.7(2).

R2 = 1.0 or reduction factor for floor-to-ceiling wall height from Table R608.7(3).

R3 = 1.0 or reduction factor for design strength from Table R608.7(4).

UR = Unreduced length of solid wall from Tables R608.7(1A) through (1C).

The total length of solid wall in a wall line, TL, shall be not less than that provided by two solid wall segments complying with the minimum length requirements of Section R608.7.2.1.

To facilitate determining the required wall thickness, wall type, number and grade of vertical bars at each end of each solid wall segment, and whether shear reinforcement is required, use of Equation R6-2 is permitted.

(Equation R6-2)

After determining the maximum permitted value of the reduction factor for design strength, R3, in accordance with Equation R6-2, select a wall type from Table R608.7(4) with R3 less than or equal to the value calculated.

R608.7.2 Solid wall segments.

Solid wall segments that contribute to the required length of solid wall shall comply with this section. Reinforcement shall be provided in accordance with Section R608.7.2.2 and Table R608.7(4). Solid wall segments shall extend the full story-height without openings, other than openings for the utilities and other building services passing through the wall. In flat walls and waffle-grid walls, such openings shall have an area of less than 30 square inches (19 355 mm2) without any dimension exceeding 61/4 inches (159 mm), and shall not be located within 6 inches (152 mm) of the side edges of the solid wall segment. In screen-grid walls, such openings shall be located in the portion of the solid wall segment between horizontal and vertical cores of concrete and opening size and location are not restricted provided there is not any concrete removed.

R608.7.2.1 Minimum length of solid wall segment and maximum spacing.

Only solid wall segments equal to or greater than 24 inches (610 mm) in length shall be included in the total length of solid wall required by Section R608.7.1. In addition, not more than two solid wall segments equal to or greater than 24 inches (610 mm) in length and less than 48 inches (1219 mm) in length shall be included in the required total length of solid wall. The maximum clear opening width shall be 18 feet (5486 mm). See Figure R608.7(1).

R608.7.2.2 Reinforcement in solid wall segments.
R608.7.2.2.1 Horizontal shear reinforcement.

Where reduction factors for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4) based on horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement being provided are used, solid wall segments shall have horizontal reinforcement consisting of minimum No. 4 bars. Horizontal shear reinforcement shall be the same grade of steel required for the vertical reinforcement at the ends of solid wall segments by Section R608.7.2.2.2.

The spacing of horizontal reinforcement shall not exceed the smaller of one-half the length of the solid wall segment, minus 2 inches (51 mm), and 18 inches (457 mm). Horizontal shear reinforcement shall terminate in accordance with Section R608.6.4.

R608.7.2.2.2 Vertical reinforcement.

Vertical reinforcement applicable to the reduction factor(s) for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4) that is used, shall be located at each end of each solid wall segment in accordance with the applicable detail in Figure R608.7(2). The No. 4 vertical bar required on each side of an opening by Section R608.8.1.2 is permitted to be used as reinforcement at the ends of solid wall segments where installed in accordance with the applicable detail in Figure R608.7(2). There shall be not less than two No. 4 bars at each end of solid wall segments located as required by the applicable detail in Figure R608.7(2). One of the bars at each end of solid wall segments shall be deemed to meet the requirements for vertical wall reinforcement required by Section R608.6.

The vertical wall reinforcement at each end of each solid wall segment shall be developed below the bottom of the adjacent wall opening [see Figure R608.7(3)] by one of the following methods:

1.	Where the wall height below the bottom of the adjacent opening is equal to or greater than 22 inches (559 mm) for No. 4 or 28 inches (711 mm) for No. 5 vertical wall reinforcement, reinforcement around openings in accordance with Section R608.8.1 shall be sufficient.

2.	Where the wall height below the bottom of the adjacent opening is less than required by Item 1 above, the vertical wall reinforcement adjacent to the opening shall extend into the footing far enough to develop the bar in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4 and Figure R608.5.4(2), or shall be lap-spliced with a dowel that is embedded in the footing far enough to develop the dowel-bar in tension.

R608.7.2.2.3 Vertical shear reinforcement.

Where reduction factors for design strength, R3, from Table R608.7(4) based on horizontal and vertical shear reinforcement being provided are used, solid wall segments shall have vertical reinforcement consisting of minimum No. 4 bars. Vertical shear reinforcement shall be the same grade of steel required by Section R608.7.2.2.2 for the vertical reinforcement at the ends of solid wall segments. The spacing of vertical reinforcement throughout the length of the segment shall not exceed the smaller of one third the length of the segment, and 18 inches (457 mm). Vertical shear reinforcement shall be continuous between stories in accordance with Section R608.6.3, and shall terminate in accordance with Section R608.6.4. Vertical shear reinforcement required by this section is permitted to be used for vertical reinforcement required by Table R608.6(1), R608.6(2), R608.6(3) or R608.6(4), whichever is applicable.

R608.7.2.3 Solid wall segments at corners.

At all interior and exterior corners of exterior walls, a solid wall segment shall extend the full height of each wall story. The segment shall have the length required to develop the horizontal reinforcement above and below the adjacent opening in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4. For an exterior corner, the limiting dimension is measured on the outside of the wall, and for an interior corner the limiting dimension is measured on the inside of the wall. See Section R608.8.1. The length of a segment contributing to the required length of solid wall shall comply with Section R608.7.2.1.

The end of a solid wall segment complying with the minimum length requirements of Section R608.7.2.1 shall be located not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) from each corner.

R608.8 Requirements for lintels and reinforcement around openings.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R608.8(1)

REINFORCEMENT OF OPENINGS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.8(2)

LINTEL FOR FLAT WALLS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.8(3)

LINTELS FOR WAFFLE-GRID WALLS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R608.8(4)

LINTELS FOR SCREEN-GRID WALLS

TABLE R608.8(1)

LINTEL DESIGN LOADING CONDITIONSa, b, d

DESCRIPTION OF LOADS AND OPENINGS ABOVE INFLUENCING DESIGN OF LINTEL	DESIGN LOAD
CONDITIONc

Opening in wall of top story of two-story building, or first story of one-story building
Wall supporting loads from roof, including
attic floor, if applicable, and
	Top of lintel equal to or less than W/2 below top of wall	2
Top of lintel greater than W/2 below top of wall	NLB
Wall not supporting loads from roof or attic floor	NLB
Opening in wall of first story of two-story building where wall immediately above is of concrete construction,
or opening in basement wall of one-story building where wall immediately above is of concrete construction

LB ledger board mounted to side of wall
with bottom of ledger less than or equal to
W/2 above top of lintel, and	Top of lintel greater than W/2 below bottom of opening in story above	1
Top of lintel less than or equal to W/2
below bottom of opening in story above,
and	Opening is entirely within the footprint
of the opening in the story above
	1
Opening is partially within the footprint
of the opening in the story above
	4
LB ledger board mounted to side of wall with bottom of ledger more than W/2 above top of lintel	NLB
NLB ledger board mounted to side of wall
with bottom of ledger less than or equal to
W/2 above top of lintel, or no ledger board,
and
	Top of lintel greater than W/2 below bottom of opening in story above	NLB
Top of lintel less than or equal to W/2
below bottom of opening in story above,
and	Opening is entirely within the footprint
of the opening in the story above
	NLB
Opening is partially within the footprint of
the opening in the story above
	1
Opening in basement wall of two-story building
where walls of two stories above are of concrete construction

LB ledger board mounted to side of wall
with bottom of ledger less than or equal to
W/2 above top of lintel, and
	Top of lintel greater than W/2 below bottom of opening in story above	1
Top of lintel less than or equal to W/2
below bottom of opening in story above,
and	Opening is entirely within the footprint
of the opening in the story above
	1
Opening is partially within the footprint of
the opening in the story above
	5
LB ledger board mounted to side of wall with bottom of ledger more than W/2 above top of lintel	NLB
NLB ledger board mounted to side of wall
with bottom of ledger less than or equal to
W/2 above top of lintel, or no ledger board,
and
	Top of lintel greater than W/2 below bottom of opening in story above	NLB
Top of lintel less than or equal to W/2
below bottom of opening in story above,
and	Opening is entirely within the footprint
of the opening in the story above
	NLB
Opening is partially within the footprint of
the opening in the story above
	1
Opening in wall of first story of two-story building where wall immediately above is of light-framed construction,
or opening in basement wall of one-story building where wall immediately above is of light-framed construction

Wall supporting loads from roof, second
floor and top-story wall of light-framed
construction, and	Top of lintel equal to or less than W/2 below top of wall	3
Top of lintel greater than W/2 below top of wall	NLB
Wall not supporting loads from roof or second floor	NLB

a.	LB means load bearing, NLB means nonload bearing, and W means width of opening.

b.	Footprint is the area of the wall below an opening in the story above, bounded by the bottom of the opening and vertical lines extending downward from the edges of the opening.

c.	For design loading condition “NLB” see Tables R608.8(9) and R608.8(10). For all other design loading conditions, see Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(8).

d.	A NLB ledger board is a ledger attached to a wall that is parallel to the span of the floor, roof or ceiling framing that supports the edge of the floor, ceiling or roof.

TABLE R608.8(2)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 4-INCH-NOMINAL THICK FLAT LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, m

ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF BARS
AND BAR SIZE IN
TOP AND BOTTOM
OF LINTEL
	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8	Span without stirrupsi, j	3-2	3-4	2-6	2-1	2-0
1-#4	40,000	5-2	5-5	4-3	3-7	2-9
60,000	6-2	6-5	5-1	4-2	2-11
1-#5	40,000	6-3	6-7	5-2	4-2	2-11
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	1-1	1-2	0-9	0-6	0-4
12	Span without stirrupsi, j	3-4	3-7	2-11	2-6	2-2
1-#4	40,000	6-7	7-0	5-7	4-9	3-8
60,000	7-11	8-6	6-9	5-9	4-5
1-#5	40,000	8-1	8-8	6-10	5-10	4-6
60,000	9-8	10-4	8-2	6-11	4-10

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-1	9-8	7-8	6-6	4-10
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	1-8	1-11	1-3	0-11	0-6
16	Span without stirrupsi, j	4-7	5-0	4-0	3-7	3-1
1-#4	40,000	6-8	7-3	5-9	4-11	3-10
60,000	9-3	10-1	8-0	6-10	5-4
1-#4	40,000	9-6	10-4	8-2	6-11	5-5
60,000	11-5	12-5	9-10	8-4	6-6

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-7	11-7	9-2	7-9	6-1
60,000	12-9	13-10	11-0	9-4	6-9
2-#5	40,000	13-0	14-1	11-2	9-2	6-6
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distancek, l	2-3	2-8	1-8	1-3	0-9
20	Span without stirrupsi, j	5-9	6-5	5-2	4-7	3-11
1-#4	40,000	7-5	8-2	6-6	5-7	4-4
60,000	9-0	10-0	7-11	6-9	5-3
1-#5	40,000	9-2	10-2	8-1	6-11	5-4
60,000	12-9	14-2	11-3	9-7	7-5

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	11-10	13-2	10-5	8-11	6-11
60,000	14-4	15-10	12-7	10-9	8-4
2-#5	40,000	14-7	16-2	12-9	10-6	7-7
60,000	17-5	19-2	15-3	12-4	8-8
2-#6	40,000	16-4	18-11	13-3	10-6	7-7
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	2-9	3-5	2-2	1-7	0-11
24	Span without stirrupsi, j	6-11	7-9	6-3	5-7	4-9
1-#4	40,000	8-0	9-0	7-2	6-2	4-9
60,000	9-9	11-0	8-9	7-6	5-10
1-#5	40,000	10-0	11-3	8-11	7-7	5-11
60,000	13-11	15-8	12-5	10-7	8-3

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	12-11	14-6	11-6	9-10	7-8
60,000	15-7	17-7	13-11	11-11	9-3
2-#5	40,000	15-11	17-11	14-3	11-9	8-7
60,000	19-1	21-6	17-1	14-0	9-11
2-#6	40,000	17-7	21-1	14-10	11-9	8-7
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	3-3	4-1	2-7	1-11	1-2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness.

b.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note j.

c.	Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

j.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

k.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the clear span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

m.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel clear spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(3)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 6-INCH-NOMINAL THICK FLAT LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, m

ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF
LINTEL	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)
	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8	Span without stirrupsi, j	4-2	4-8	3-3	2-6	2-0
1-#4	40,000	5-1	5-5	4-3	3-6	2-8
60,000	6-2	6-7	5-2	4-2	3-3
1-#5	40,000	6-3	6-8	5-3	4-3	3-3
60,000	7-6	8-0	6-4	5-1	3-8

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	7-0	7-6	5-11	4-9	3-8
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	1-7	1-10	1-2	0-9	0-5
12	Span without stirrupsi, j	4-2	4-8	3-6	2-11	2-5
1-#4	40,000	5-7	6-1	4-10	3-11	3-0
60,000	7-9	8-6	6-9	5-6	4-3
1-#5	40,000	7-11	8-8	6-11	5-7	4-4
60,000	9-7	10-6	8-4	6-9	5-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	8-11	9-9	7-9	6-3	4-10
60,000	10-8	11-9	9-4	7-6	5-10
2-#5	40,000	10-11	12-0	9-6	7-8	5-6
60,000	12-11	14-3	11-3	9-0	6-1
2-#6	40,000	12-9	14-0	11-1	8-1	5-6
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	2-6	3-0	1-10	1-3	0-9
16	Span without stirrupsi, j	5-7	6-5	4-11	4-0	3-4
1-#4	40,000	6-5	7-2	5-9	4-8	3-7
60,000	7-10	8-9	7-0	5-8	4-4
1-#5	40,000	7-11	8-11	7-1	5-9	4-5
60,000	11-1	12-6	9-11	8-0	6-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-3	11-7	9-2	7-6	5-9
60,000	12-5	14-0	11-1	9-0	7-0
2-#5	40,000	12-8	14-3	11-4	9-2	6-9
60,000	15-2	17-1	13-7	11-0	7-11
2-#6	40,000	14-11	16-9	13-4	9-8	6-9
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	3-3	4-1	2-7	1-9	1-0
20	Span without stirrupsi, j	6-11	8-2	6-3	5-2	4-4
1-#5	40,000	8-9	10-1	8-0	6-6	5-1
60,000	10-8	12-3	9-9	8-0	6-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-11	11-4	9-1	7-4	5-8
60,000	13-9	15-10	12-8	10-3	7-11
2-#5	40,000	14-0	16-2	12-11	10-6	7-11
60,000	16-11	19-6	15-6	12-7	9-1
2-#6	40,000	16-7	19-1	15-3	11-3	7-11
60,000	19-11	22-10	18-3	13-2	9-1
Center distance Ak, l	3-11	5-2	3-3	2-2	1-4
24	Span without stirrupsi, j	8-2	9-10	7-8	6-4	5-3
1-#5	40,000	9-5	11-1	8-10	7-3	5-7
60,000	11-6	13-6	10-9	8-9	6-10

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-8	12-6	10-0	8-2	6-4
60,000	12-11	15-2	12-2	9-11	7-8
2-#5	40,000	15-2	17-9	14-3	11-7	9-0
60,000	18-4	21-6	17-3	14-0	10-4
2-#6	40,000	18-0	21-1	16-11	12-9	9-2
60,000	21-7	25-4	20-4	14-9	10-4
Center distance Ak, l	4-6	6-2	4-0	2-8	1-7

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pounds per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness.

b.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note j.

c.	Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

j.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

k.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the clear span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

m.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel clear spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(4)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 8-INCH-NOMINAL THICK FLAT LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, m

ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF
LINTEL	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8	Span without stirrupsi, j	4-4	4-9	3-9	2-10	2-1
1-#4	40,000	4-4	4-9	3-9	2-11	2-3
60,000	6-1	6-7	5-3	4-0	3-1
1-#5	40,000	6-2	6-9	5-4	4-1	3-2
60,000	7-5	8-1	6-5	4-11	3-9

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	6-11	7-6	6-0	4-7	3-6
60,000	8-3	9-0	7-2	5-6	4-2
2-#5	40,000	8-5	9-2	7-3	5-7	4-2
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	2-1	2-6	1-6	0-11	0-6
12	Span without stirrupsi, j	4-10	5-8	4-2	3-2	2-7
1-#4	40,000	5-5	6-1	4-10	3-9	2-10
60,000	6-7	7-5	5-11	4-7	3-6
1-#5	40,000	6-9	7-7	6-0	4-8	3-7
60,000	9-4	10-6	8-4	6-6	5-0

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	8-8	9-9	7-9	6-0	4-7
60,000	10-6	11-9	9-5	7-3	5-7
2-#5	40,000	10-8	12-0	9-7	7-5	5-6
60,000	12-10	14-5	11-6	8-11	6-7
2-#6	40,000	12-7	14-2	11-3	8-3	5-6
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	3-2	4-0	2-6	1-6	0-11
16	Span without stirrupsi, j	6-5	7-9	5-10	4-5	3-7
1-#4	40,000	6-2	7-1	5-8	4-5	3-5
60,000	7-6	8-8	6-11	5-5	4-2
1-#5	40,000	7-8	8-10	7-1	5-6	4-3
60,000	9-4	10-9	8-7	6-8	5-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	8-8	10-0	8-0	6-2	4-9
60,000	12-0	13-11	11-2	8-8	6-8
2-#5	40,000	12-3	14-2	11-4	8-10	6-9
60,000	14-10	17-2	13-8	10-8	7-11
2-#6	40,000	14-6	16-10	13-5	10-1	6-11
60,000	17-5	20-2	16-1	11-10	7-11
Center distancek, l	4-1	5-5	3-6	2-1	1-3
20	Span without stirrupsi, j	7-10	9-10	7-5	5-8	4-7
1-#5	40,000	8-4	9-11	8-0	6-3	4-9
60,000	10-2	12-1	9-9	7-7	5-10

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-5	11-3	9-0	7-0	5-5
60,000	11-6	13-8	11-0	8-7	6-7
2-#5	40,000	11-9	13-11	11-2	8-9	6-8
60,000	16-4	19-5	15-7	12-2	9-3
2-#6	40,000	16-0	19-0	15-3	11-10	8-3
60,000	19-3	22-11	18-5	13-7	9-3
Center distance Ak, l	4-10	6-10	4-5	2-8	1-7
24	Span without stirrupsi, j	9-2	11-9	8-11	6-11	5-7
1-#5	40,000	8-11	10-10	8-9	6-10	5-3
60,000	10-11	13-3	10-8	8-4	6-5

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-1	12-3	9-11	7-9	6-0
60,000	12-3	15-0	12-1	9-5	7-3
2-#5	40,000	12-6	15-3	12-4	9-7	7-5
60,000	17-6	21-3	17-2	13-5	10-4
2-#6	40,000	17-2	20-11	16-10	13-2	9-7
60,000	20-9	25-3	20-4	15-4	10-7
Center distance Ak, l	5-6	8-1	5-3	3-3	1-11

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, Grade 40 = 280 MPa; Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

Note: Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shown in shaded cells shall be equal to or greater than that required for lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups.

a.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness.

b.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note j.

c.	Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

j.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

k.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the clear span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

m.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel clear spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(5)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 10-INCH-NOMINAL THICK FLAT LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, m

ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF
LINTEL	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8	Span without stirrupsi, j	6-0	7-2	4-10	3-1	2-3
1-#4	40,000	4-3	4-9	3-9	2-9	2-1
60,000	5-11	6-7	5-3	3-10	2-11
1-#5	40,000	6-1	6-9	5-4	3-11	3-0
60,000	7-4	8-1	6-5	4-9	3-7

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	6-10	7-6	6-0	4-5	3-4
60,000	8-2	9-1	7-2	5-4	4-1
2-#5	40,000	8-4	9-3	7-4	5-5	4-1
60,000	9-11	11-0	8-9	6-6	4-8
2-#6	40,000	9-9	10-10	8-7	6-4	4-1
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Ak, l	2-6	3-1	1-11	1-1	0-7
12	Span without stirrupsi, j	5-5	6-7	4-10	3-5	2-8
1-#4	40,000	5-3	6-0	4-10	3-7	2-9
60,000	6-5	7-4	5-10	4-4	3-4
1-#5	40,000	6-6	7-6	6-0	4-5	3-5
60,000	7-11	9-1	7-3	5-5	4-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	7-4	8-5	6-9	5-0	3-10
60,000	10-3	11-9	9-5	7-0	5-4
2-#5	40,000	10-5	12-0	9-7	7-2	5-5
60,000	12-7	14-5	11-6	8-7	6-6
2-#6	40,000	12-4	14-2	11-4	8-5	5-7
60,000	14-9	17-0	13-6	10-0	6-6
Center distance Ak, l	3-9	4-11	3-2	1-9	1-0
16	Span without stirrupsi, j	7-1	9-0	6-8	4-9	3-9
1-#4	40,000	5-11	7-0	5-8	4-3	3-3
60,000	7-3	8-7	6-11	5-2	3-11
1-#5	40,000	7-4	8-9	7-0	5-3	4-0
60,000	9-0	10-8	8-7	6-5	4-11

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	8-4	9-11	7-11	5-11	4-6
60,000	10-2	12-0	9-8	7-3	5-6
2-#5	40,000	10-4	12-3	9-10	7-4	5-8
60,000	14-4	17-1	13-8	10-3	7-10
2-#6	40,000	14-1	16-9	13-5	10-1	7-0
60,000	17-0	20-2	16-2	12-0	8-0
Center distancek, l	4-9	6-8	4-4	2-5	1-5
20	Span without stirrupsi, j	8-7	11-4	8-5	6-1	4-10
1-#4	40,000	6-5	7-10	6-4	4-9	3-8
60,000	7-10	9-7	7-9	5-10	4-5
1-#5	40,000	8-0	9-9	7-11	5-11	4-6
60,000	9-9	11-11	9-8	7-3	5-6

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-0	11-1	8-11	6-9	5-2
60,000	11-0	13-6	10-11	8-2	6-3
2-#5	40,000	11-3	13-9	11-1	8-4	6-5
60,000	15-8	19-2	15-6	11-8	8-11
2-#6	40,000	15-5	18-10	15-2	11-5	8-6
60,000	18-7	22-9	18-5	13-10	9-5
Center distance Ak, l	5-7	8-4	5-5	3-1	1-10
24	Span without stirrupsi, j	9-11	13-7	10-2	7-5	5-10
1-#5	40,000	8-6	10-8	8-8	6-6	5-0
60,000	10-5	13-0	10-7	8-0	6-1

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-7	12-1	9-9	7-5	5-8
60,000	11-9	14-9	11-11	9-0	6-11
2-#5	40,000	12-0	15-0	12-2	9-2	7-1
60,000	14-7	18-3	14-10	11-2	8-7
2-#6	40,000	14-3	17-11	14-7	11-0	8-5
60,000	19-11	25-0	20-3	15-3	10-10
Center distance Ak, l	6-3	9-11	6-6	3-9	2-2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

Note: Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shown in shaded cells shall be equal to or greater than that required for lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups.

a.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness.

b.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note j.

c.	Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

j.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

k.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the clear span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

m.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel clear spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(6)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 6-INCH-THICK WAFFLE-GRID LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, o

MAXIMUM ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND MAXIMUM FLOOR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF
LINTEL	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8i	Span without stirrupsk, l	2-7	2-9	2-1	2-0	2-0
1-#4	40,000	5-2	5-5	4-3	3-3	2-4
60,000	5-9	6-3	4-3	3-3	2-4
1-#5	40,000	5-9	6-3	4-3	3-3	2-4
60,000	5-9	6-3	4-3	3-3	2-4

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	5-9	6-3	4-3	3-3	2-4
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Am, n	0-9	0-10	0-6	0-5	STL
12i	Span without stirrupsk, l	2-11	3-1	2-7	2-4	2-1
1-#4	40,000	5-9	6-2	4-10	4-1	3-2
60,000	8-0	8-7	6-9	5-5	3-11
1-#5	40,000	8-1	8-9	6-11	5-5	3-11
60,000	9-1	10-3	7-0	5-5	3-11

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-1	9-9	7-0	5-5	3-11
Center distance Am, n	1-3	1-5	0-11	0-8	STL
Span without stirrupsk, l	4-0	4-4	3-7	3-3	2-10
16i	1-#4	40,000	6-7	7-3	5-9	4-10	3-9
60,000	8-0	8-10	7-0	5-11	4-7
1-#5	40,000	8-2	9-0	7-2	6-0	4-8
60,000	11-5	12-6	9-9	7-7	5-6

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-7	11-7	9-3	7-7	5-6
60,000	12-2	14-0	9-9	7-7	5-6
2-#5	40,000	12-2	14-2	9-9	7-7	5-6
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Am, n	1-8	2-0	1-3	0-11	STL
20i	Span without stirrupsk, l	5-0	5-6	4-7	4-1	3-8
1-#4	40,000	7-2	8-2	6-6	5-6	4-3
60,000	8-11	9-11	7-11	6-8	5-2
1-#5	40,000	9-1	10-2	8-1	6-10	5-4
60,000	12-8	14-2	11-3	9-6	7-1

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-3	11-5	9-1	7-8	6-0
60,000	14-3	15-11	12-5	9-9	7-1
2-#5	40,000	14-6	16-3	12-1	9-6	6-11
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Am, n	2-0	2-6	1-7	1-1	STL
24wj	Span without stirrupsk, l	6-0	6-8	5-7	5-0	4-6
1-#4	40,000	7-11	9-0	7-2	6-0	4-8
60,000	9-8	10-11	8-9	7-4	5-9
1-#5	40,000	9-10	11-2	8-11	7-6	5-10
60,000	12-0	13-7	10-10	9-2	7-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	11-1	12-7	10-1	8-6	6-7
60,000	15-6	17-7	14-0	11-10	8-7
2-#5	40,000	15-6	17-11	13-4	10-7	7-10
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance Am, n	2-4	3-0	1-11	1-4	STL

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	Where lintels are formed with waffle-grid forms, form material shall be removed, if necessary, to create top and bottom flanges of the lintel that are not less than 3 inches in depth (in the vertical direction), are not less than 5 inches in width for 6-inch-nominal waffle-grid forms and not less than 7 inches in width for 8-inch-nominal waffle-grid forms. See Figure R608.8(3). Flat form lintels shall be permitted in place of waffle-grid lintels. See Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

b.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thicknesses and minimum dimensions and spacing of cores.

c.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Notes l and n. Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required. STL - stirrups required throughout lintel.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Lintels less than 24 inches in depth with stirrups shall be formed from flat-walls forms [see Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5)], or, if necessary, form material shall be removed from waffle-grid forms so as to provide the required cover for stirrups. Allowable spans for lintels formed with flat-wall forms shall be determined from Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

j.	Where stirrups are required for 24-inch deep lintels, the spacing shall not exceed 12 inches on center.

k.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

m.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

n.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

o.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(7)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 8-INCH-THICK WAFFLE-GRID LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, o

MAXIMUM ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND MAXIMUM FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF
LINTEL	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
8i	Span with stirrupsk, l	2-6	2-9	2-1	2-0	2-0
1-#4	40,000	4-5	4-9	3-9	3-0	2-3
60,000	5-6	6-2	4-3	3-1	2-3
1-#5	40,000	5-6	6-2	4-3	3-1	2-3
Center distance Am, n	0-9	0-10	0-6	0-4	STL
12i	Span without stirrupsk, l	2-10	3-1	2-7	2-3	2-0
1-#4	40,000	5-7	6-1	4-10	3-11	3-0
60,000	6-9	7-5	5-11	4-9	3-8
1-#5	40,000	6-11	7-7	6-0	4-10	3-9
60,000	8-8	10-1	7-0	5-2	3-9

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	8-8	9-10	7-0	5-2	3-9
60,000	8-8	10-1	7-0	5-2	3-9
Center distance Am, n	1-2	1-5	0-11	0-7	STL
16i	Span without stirrupsk, l	3-10	4-3	3-7	3-2	2-10
1-#4	40,000	6-5	7-2	5-9	4-8	3-7
60,000	7-9	8-9	7-0	5-8	4-4
1-#5	40,000	7-11	8-11	7-1	5-9	4-5
60,000	9-8	10-11	8-8	7-0	5-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-0	10-1	8-0	6-6	5-0
60,000	11-5	13-10	9-8	7-2	5-2
Center distance Am, n	1-6	1-11	1-3	0-10	STL
20i	Span without stirrupsk, l	4-10	5-5	4-7	4-0	3-7
1-#4	40,000	7-0	8-1	6-5	5-3	4-1
60,000	8-7	9-10	7-10	6-5	4-11
1-#5	40,000	8-9	10-1	8-0	6-6	5-1
60,000	10-8	12-3	9-10	8-0	6-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	9-10	11-4	9-1	7-4	5-8
60,000	12-0	13-10	11-0	9-0	6-8
2-#5	40,000	12-3	14-1	11-3	8-11	6-6
60,000	14-0	17-6	12-3	9-1	6-8
Center distance Am, n	1-10	2-5	1-7	1-0	STL
24j	Span without stirrupsk, l	5-9	6-7	5-6	4-11	4-5
1-#4	40,000	7-6	8-10	7-1	5-9	4-6
60,000	9-2	10-9	8-8	7-1	5-6
1-#5	40,000	9-5	11-0	8-10	7-2	5-7
60,000	11-5	13-5	10-9	8-9	6-10

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	10-7	12-5	10-0	8-1	6-3
60,000	12-11	15-2	12-2	9-11	7-8
2-#5	40,000	13-2	15-6	12-5	9-11	7-5
60,000	16-3	21-0	14-10	11-1	8-1
2-#6	40,000	14-4	18-5	13-2	9-11	7-5
Center distance Am, n	2-1	2-11	1-10	1-3	STL

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	Where lintels are formed with waffle-grid forms, form material shall be removed, if necessary, to create top and bottom flanges of the lintel that are not less than 3 inches in depth (in the vertical direction), are not less than 5 inches in width for 6-inch-nominal waffle-grid forms and not less than 7 inches in width for 8-inch-nominal waffle-grid forms. See Figure R608.8(3). Flat form lintels shall be permitted in lieu of waffle-grid lintels. See Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

b.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thicknesses and minimum dimensions and spacing of cores.

c.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Notes l and n. Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.8.2 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required. STL - stirrups required throughout lintel.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Lintels less than 24 inches in depth with stirrups shall be formed from flat-walls forms [see Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5)], or, if necessary, form material shall be removed from waffle-grid forms so as to provide the required cover for stirrups. Allowable spans for lintels formed with flat-wall forms shall be determined from Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

j.	Where stirrups are required for 24-inch deep lintels, the spacing shall not exceed 12 inches on center.

k.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than d/2.

l.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

m.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

n.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

o.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(8)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR 6-INCH-THICK SCREEN-GRID LINTELS IN LOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, f, p

ROOF CLEAR SPAN 40 FEET AND FLOOR CLEAR SPAN 32 FEET

LINTEL DEPTH,
D g
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE IN TOP AND
BOTTOM OF LINTEL
	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTHh, fy
(psi)	DESIGN LOADING CONDITION DETERMINED FROM TABLE R608.8(1)
1	2	3	4	5
Maximum clear span of lintel (feet - inches)
12i,j	Span without stirrups	2-9	2-11	2-5	2-3	2-0
16i,j	Span without stirrups	3-9	4-0	3-5	3-1	2-9
20i,j	Span without stirrups	4-9	5-1	4-4	4-0	3-7
24k	Span without stirrupsl, m	5-8	6-3	5-3	4-10	4-4
1-#4	40,000	7-11	9-0	7-2	6-1	4-9
60,000	9-9	11-0	8-9	7-5	5-9
1-#5	40,000	9-11	11-2	8-11	7-7	5-11
60,000	12-1	13-8	10-10	9-3	7-2

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	11-2	12-8	10-1	8-7	6-8
60,000	15-7	17-7	13-4	10-8	7-11
2-#5	40,000	14-11	18-0	12-10	10-3	7-8
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
Center distance An, o	2-0	2-6	1-7	1-2	STL

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	Where lintels are formed with screen-grid forms, form material shall be removed if necessary to create top and bottom flanges of the lintel that are not less than 5 inches in width and not less than 2.5 inches in depth (in the vertical direction). See Figure R608.8(4). Flat form lintels shall be permitted in lieu of screen-grid lintels. See Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

b.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness and minimum dimensions and spacings of cores.

c.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Notes m and o. Table values are based on uniform loading. See Section R608.7.2.1 for lintels supporting concentrated loads.

d.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

e.	Reserved.

f.	DR indicates design required. STL indicates stirrups required throughout lintel.

g.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

h.	Stirrups shall be fabricated from reinforcing bars with the same yield strength as that used for the main longitudinal reinforcement.

i.	Stirrups are not required for lintels less than 24 inches in depth fabricated from screen-grid forms. Top and bottom reinforcement shall consist of a No. 4 bar having a yield strength of 40,000 psi or 60,000 psi.

j.	Lintels between 12 and 24 inches in depth with stirrups shall be formed from flat-wall forms [see Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5)], or form material shall be removed from screen-grid forms to provide a concrete section comparable to that required for a flat wall. Allowable spans for flat lintels with stirrups shall be determined from Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

k.	Where stirrups are required for 24-inch deep lintels, the spacing shall not exceed 12 inches on center.

l.	Allowable clear span without stirrups applicable to all lintels of the same depth, D. Top and bottom reinforcement for lintels without stirrups shall be not less than the least amount of reinforcement required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups. All other spans require stirrups spaced at not more than 12 inches.

m.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, clear spans for lintels without stirrups shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05. If the increased span exceeds the allowable clear span for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition with stirrups, the top and bottom reinforcement shall be equal to or greater than that required for a lintel of the same depth and loading condition that has an allowable clear span that is equal to or greater than that of the lintel without stirrups that has been increased.

n.	Center distance, A, is the center portion of the span where stirrups are not required. This is applicable to all longitudinal bar sizes and steel yield strengths.

o.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, center distance, A, shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.10.

p.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information only.

TABLE R608.8(9)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR FLAT LINTELS WITHOUT STIRRUPS IN NONLOAD-BEARING WALLSa, b, c, d, e, g, h

LINTEL DEPTH,
D f
(inches)	NUMBER OF
BARS AND BAR
SIZE	STEEL YIELD
STRENGTH, fy
(psi)	NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (inches)
4	6	8	10
Lintel Supporting
Concrete
Wall
	Light-
framed
Gable	Concrete
Wall
	Light-
framed
Gable	Concrete
Wall
	Light-
framed
Gable	Concrete
Wall
	Light-
framed
Gable
Maximum Clear Span of Lintel (feet - inches)
8	1-#4	40,000	10-11	11-5	9-7	11-2	7-10	9-5	7-3	9-2
60,000	12-5	11-7	10-11	13-5	9-11	13-2	9-3	12-10
1-#5	40,000	12-7	11-7	11-1	13-8	10-1	13-5	9-4	13-1
60,000	DR	DR	12-7	16-4	11-6	14-7	10-9	14-6

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	DR	DR	12-0	15-3	10-11	15-0	10-2	14-8
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	12-2	15-3	11-7	15-3
2-#5	40,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	12-7	16-7	11-9	16-7
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	13-3	16-7
2-#6	40,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	13-2	17-8
60,000	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR
12	1-#4	40,000	11-5	9-10	10-6	12-0	9-6	11-6	8-9	11-1
60,000	11-5	9-10	11-8	13-3	10-11	14-0	10-1	13-6
1-#5	40,000	11-5	9-10	11-8	13-3	11-1	14-4	10-3	13-9
60,000	11-5	9-10	11-8	13-3	11-10	16-0	11-9	16-9

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	DR	DR	11-8	13-3	11-10	16-0	11-2	15-6
60,000	DR	DR	11-8	13-3	11-10	16-0	11-11	18-4
2-#5	40,000	DR	DR	11-8	13-3	11-10	16-0	11-11	18-4
60,000	DR	DR	11-8	13-3	11-10	16-0	11-11	18-4
16	1-#4	40,000	13-6	13-0	11-10	13-8	10-7	12-11	9-11	12-4
60,000	13-6	13-0	13-8	16-7	12-4	15-9	11-5	15-0
1-#5	40,000	13-6	13-0	13-10	17-0	12-6	16-1	11-7	15-4
60,000	13-6	13-0	13-10	17-1	14-0	19-7	13-4	18-8

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	13-6	13-0	13-10	17-1	13-8	18-2	12-8	17-4
60,000	13-6	13-0	13-10	17-1	14-0	20-3	14-1	—
2-#5	40,000	13-6	13-0	13-10	17-1	14-0	20-3	14-1	—
60,000	DR	DR	13-10	17-1	14-0	20-3	14-1	—
20	1-#4	40,000	14-11	15-10	13-0	14-10	11-9	13-11	10-10	13-2
60,000	15-3	15-10	14-11	18-1	13-6	17-0	12-6	16-2
1-#5	40,000	15-3	15-10	15-2	18-6	13-9	17-5	12-8	16-6
60,000	15-3	15-10	15-8	20-5	15-9	—	14-7	20-1

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	15-3	15-10	15-8	20-5	14-11	—	13-10	—
60,000	15-3	15-10	15-8	20-5	15-10	—	15-11	—
2-#5	40,000	15-3	15-10	15-8	20-5	15-10	—	15-11	—
60,000	15-3	15-10	15-8	20-5	15-10	—	15-11	—
24	1-#4	40,000	16-1	17-1	13-11	15-10	12-7	14-9	11-8	13-10
60,000	16-11	18-5	16-1	19-3	14-6	18-0	13-5	17-0
1-#5	40,000	16-11	18-5	16-3	19-8	14-9	18-5	13-8	17-4
60,000	16-11	18-5	17-4	—	17-0	—	15-8	—

2-#4
1-#6	40,000	16-11	18-5	17-4	—	16-1	—	14-10	—
60,000	16-11	18-5	17-4	—	17-6	—	17-1	—
2-#5	40,000	16-11	18-5	17-4	—	17-6	—	17-4	—
60,000	16-11	18-5	17-4	—	17-6	—	17-8	—

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness.

b.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note e.

c.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2 inch, whichever is less.

d.	Linear interpolation between lintels depths, D, is permitted provided the two cells being used to interpolate are shaded.

e.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, spans in cells that are shaded shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05.

f.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

g.	DR indicates design required.

h.	The maximum clear opening width between two solid wall segments shall be 18 feet. See Section R608.7.2.1. Lintel spans in the table greater than 18 feet are shown for interpolation and information purposes only.

TABLE R608.8(10)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CLEAR SPANS FOR WAFFLE-GRID AND SCREEN-GRID LINTELS WITHOUT STIRRUPS IN NONLOAD-BEARING WALLSc, d, e, f, g

LINTEL DEPTHh,
D
(inches)	FORM TYPE AND NOMINAL WALL THICKNESS (inches)
6-inch Waffle-grida	8-inch Waffle-grida	6-inch Screen-gridb
Lintel supporting
Concrete Wall	Light-framed Gable	Concrete Wall	Light-framed Gable	Concrete Wall	Light-framed Gable
Maximum Clear Span of Lintel (feet - inches)
8	10-3	8-8	8-8	8-3	—	—
12	9-2	7-6	7-10	7-1	8-8	6-9
16	10-11	10-0	9-4	9-3	—	—
20	12-5	12-2	10-7	11-2	—	—
24	13-9	14-2	11-10	12-11	13-0	12-9

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, Grade 40 = 280 MPa, Grade 60 = 420 MPa.

a.	Where lintels are formed with waffle-grid forms, form material shall be removed, if necessary, to create top and bottom flanges of the lintel that are not less than 3 inches in depth (in the vertical direction), are not less than 5 inches in width for 6-inch waffle-grid forms and not less than 7 inches in width for 8-inch waffle-grid forms. See Figure R608.8(3). Flat form lintels shall be permitted in lieu of waffle-grid lintels. See Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

b.	Where lintels are formed with screen-grid forms, form material shall be removed if necessary to create top and bottom flanges of the lintel that are not less than 5 inches in width and not less than 2.5 inches in depth (in the vertical direction). See Figure R608.8(4). Flat form lintels shall be permitted in lieu of screen-grid lintels. See Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5).

c.	See Table R608.3 for tolerances permitted from nominal thickness and minimum dimensions and spacing of cores.

d.	Table values are based on concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 2,500 psi. See Note g.

e.	Deflection criterion is L/240, where L is the clear span of the lintel in inches, or 1/2-inch, whichever is less.

f.	Top and bottom reinforcement shall consist of a No. 4 bar having a minimum yield strength of 40,000 psi.

g.	Where concrete with a minimum specified compressive strength of 3,000 psi is used, spans in shaded cells shall be permitted to be multiplied by 1.05.

h.	Lintel depth, D, is permitted to include the available height of wall located directly above the lintel, provided that the increased lintel depth spans the entire length of the lintel.

R608.8.1 Reinforcement around openings.

Reinforcement shall be provided around openings in walls equal to or greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width in accordance with this section and Figure R608.8(1), in addition to the minimum wall reinforcement required by Sections R404.1.3, R608.6 and R608.7. Vertical wall reinforcement required by this section is permitted to be used as reinforcement at the ends of solid wall segments required by Section R608.7.2.2.2 provided it is located in accordance with Section R608.8.1.2. Wall openings shall have a minimum depth of concrete over the width of the opening of 8 inches (203 mm) in flat walls and waffle-grid walls, and 12 inches (305 mm) in screen-grid walls. Wall openings in waffle-grid and screen-grid walls shall be located such that not less than one-half of a vertical core occurs along each side of the opening.

R608.8.1.1 Horizontal reinforcement.

Lintels complying with Section R608.8.2 shall be provided above wall openings equal to or greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width.

Exception: Continuous horizontal wall reinforcement placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the wall story as required in Sections R404.1.2.2 and R608.6.2 is permitted in lieu of top or bottom lintel reinforcement required by Section R608.8.2 provided that the continuous horizontal wall reinforcement meets the location requirements specified in Figures R608.8(2), R608.8(3), and R608.8(4) and the size requirements specified in Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(10).

Openings equal to or greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width shall have not less than one No. 4 bar placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of the bottom of the opening. See Figure R608.8(1).

Horizontal reinforcement placed above and below an opening shall extend beyond the edges of the opening the dimension required to develop the bar in tension in accordance with Section R608.5.4.4.

R608.8.1.2 Vertical reinforcement.

Not less than one No. 4 bar [Grade 40 (280 MPa)] shall be provided on each side of openings equal to or greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width. The vertical reinforcement required by this section shall extend the full height of the wall story and shall be located within 12 inches (305 mm) of each side of the opening. The vertical reinforcement required on each side of an opening by this section is permitted to serve as reinforcement at the ends of solid wall segments in accordance with Section R608.7.2.2.2, provided it is located as required by the applicable detail in Figure R608.7(2). Where the vertical reinforcement required by this section is used to satisfy the requirements of Section R608.7.2.2.2 in waffle- and screen-grid walls, a concrete flange shall be created at the ends of the solid wall segments in accordance with Table R608.7(4), Note e. In the top-most story, the reinforcement shall terminate in accordance with Section R608.6.4.

R608.8.2 Lintels.

Lintels shall be provided over all openings equal to or greater than 2 feet (610 mm) in width. Lintels with uniform loading shall conform to Sections R608.8.2.1 and R608.8.2.2, or Section R608.8.2.3. Lintels supporting concentrated loads, such as from roof or floor beams or girders, shall be designed in accordance with ACI 318.

R608.8.2.1 Lintels designed for gravity load-bearing conditions.

Where a lintel will be subjected to gravity load condition 1 through 5 of Table R608.8(1), the clear span of the lintel shall not exceed that permitted by Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(8). The maximum clear span of lintels with and without stirrups in flat walls shall be determined in accordance with Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(5), and constructed in accordance with Figure R608.8(2). The maximum clear span of lintels with and without stirrups in waffle-grid walls shall be determined in accordance with Tables R608.8(6) and R608.8(7), and constructed in accordance with Figure R608.8(3). The maximum clear span of lintels with and without stirrups in screen-grid walls shall be determined in accordance with Table R608.8(8), and constructed in accordance with Figure R608.8(4).

Where required by the applicable table, No. 3 stirrups shall be installed in lintels at a maximum spacing of d/2 where d equals the depth of the lintel, D, less the cover of the concrete as shown in Figures R608.8(2) through R608.8(4). The smaller value of d computed for the top and bottom bar shall be used to determine the maximum stirrup spacing. Where stirrups are required in a lintel with a single bar or two bundled bars in the top and bottom, they shall be fabricated like the letter “c” or “s” with 135-degree (2.36 rad) standard hooks at each end that comply with Section R608.5.4.5 and Figure R608.5.4(3) and installed as shown in Figures R608.8(2) through R608.8(4). Where two bars are required in the top and bottom of the lintel and the bars are not bundled, the bars shall be separated by not less than 1 inch (25 mm). The free end of the stirrups shall be fabricated with 90- or 135-degree (1.57 or 2.36 rad) standard hooks that comply with Section R608.5.4.5 and Figure R608.5.4(3) and installed as shown in Figures R608.8(2) and R608.8(3). For flat, waffle-grid and screen-grid lintels, stirrups are not required in the center distance, A, portion of spans in accordance with Figure R608.8(1) and Tables R608.8(2) through R608.8(8). See Section R608.8.2.2, Item 5, for requirement for stirrups through out lintels with bundled bars.

R608.8.2.2 Bundled bars in lintels.

It is permitted to bundle two bars in contact with each other in lintels if all of the following are observed:

1.	Bars equal to or less than No. 6 are bundled.

2.	Where the wall thickness is not sufficient to provide not less than 3 inches (76 mm) of clear space beside bars (total on both sides) oriented horizontally in a bundle, the bundled bars shall be oriented in a vertical plane.

3.	Where vertically oriented bundled bars terminate with standard hooks to develop the bars in tension beyond the support (see Section R608.5.4.4), the hook extensions shall be staggered to provide not less than 1 inch (25 mm) clear spacing between the extensions.

4.	Bundled bars shall not be lap spliced within the lintel span and the length on each end of the lintel that is required to develop the bars in tension.

5.	Bundled bars shall be enclosed within stirrups throughout the length of the lintel. Stirrups and the installation thereof shall comply with Section R608.8.2.1.

R608.8.2.3 Lintels without stirrups designed for nonload-bearing conditions.

The maximum clear span of lintels without stirrups designed for nonload-bearing conditions of Table R608.8(1).1 shall be determined in accordance with this section. The maximum clear span of lintels without stirrups in flat walls shall be determined in accordance with Table R608.8(9), and the maximum clear span of lintels without stirrups in walls of waffle-grid or screen-grid construction shall be determined in accordance with Table R608.8(10).

R608.9 Requirements for connections–general.

Concrete walls shall be connected to footings, floors, ceilings and roofs in accordance with this section.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(1)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(1)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED
(mph)

115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						
12	24						
12	36						
12	48						
16	16						
16	32						
16	48						
19.2	19.2						
19.2	38.4						

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(1). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded and prohibited where shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(2)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(2)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115b	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						
12	24						
12	36						
12	48						
16	16						
16	32						
16	48						
19.2	19.2						
19.2	38.4						
24	24						
24	48						

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(2). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded and prohibited where shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(3)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL FRAMING, PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(3)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24					6	6
12	36					6	6
12	48				6	6	6
16	16					6	6A
16	32				6	6	6A
16	48			6	6	6	6A
19.2	19.2				6A	6A	6B
19.2	38.4			6	6A	6A	6B
24	24			6A	6B	6B	6B
24	48		6	6A	6B	6B	8B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(3). Use of this detail is permitted where cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions in Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Numbers 6 and 8 indicate minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(3). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “A” indicates that a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate is required. Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(4)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(4)

WOOD-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24					6	6
12	36					6	6
12	48				6	6	6
16	16					6	6A
16	32				6	6	6A
16	48			6	6	6	6A
19.2	19.2				6A	6A	6B
19.2	38.4			6	6A	6A	6B
24	24			6A	6B	6B	6B
24	48		6	6A	6B	6B	8B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(4). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Numbers 6 and 8 indicate minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(4). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “A” indicates that a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate is required. Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(5)

COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(5)

COLD-FORMED STEEL-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b, c

ANCHOR BOLT
SPACING
(inches)	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						
12	24						
12	36						
12	48						
16	16						
16	32						
16	48						
19.2	19.2						
19.2	38.4						
24	24						
24	48						

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.4470 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(5). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(6)

COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(6)

COLD-FORMED STEEL-FRAMED FLOOR TO SIDE OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b, c

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						
12	24						
12	36						
12	48						
16	16						
16	32						
16	48						
19.2	19.2						
19.2	38.4						
24	24						
24	48						

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(6). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(7)

COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(7)

COLD-FORMED STEEL-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
(mph)

115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24					6	6
16	16					6	6A
16	32				6	6	6A
19.2	19.2				6A	6A	6B
19.2	38.4			6	6A	6A	6B
24	24			6A	6B	6B	6B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(7). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Number 6 indicates minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(7). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “A” indicates that a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate is required. Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(8)

COLD-FORMED STEEL FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(8)

COLD-FORMED STEEL-FRAMED FLOOR TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
(mph)

115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24					6	6
16	16					6	6A
16	32				6	6	6A
19.2	19.2				6A	6A	6B
19.2	38.4			6	6A	6A	6B
24	24			6A	6B	6B	6B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(8). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Number 6 indicates minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(8). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “A” indicates that a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate is required. Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(9)

WOOD-FRAMED ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(9)

WOOD-FRAMED ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24						6
12	36					6	6
12	48				6	6	6
16	16					6	6
16	32					6	6
16	48				6	6	6
19.2	19.2					6	6
19.2	38.4				6	6	
24	24				6		
24	48			6	8B		

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(9). Use of this detail is permitted where cell a is not shaded, prohibited where shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Numbers 6 and 8 indicate minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(9). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(10)

WOOD-FRAMED ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(10)

WOOD-FRAMED ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24						6
12	36					6	6
12	48				6	6	6
16	16					6	6
16	32					6	6
16	48				6	6	6
19.2	19.2					6	6
19.2	38.4				6	6	
24	24				6		
24	48			6	8B		

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(10). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded, prohibited where shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Numbers 6 and 8 indicate minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(10). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(11)

COLD-FORMED STEEL ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULAR

TABLE R608.9(11)

WOOD-FRAMED ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PERPENDICULARa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24						6
16	16					6	6
16	32					6	6
19.2	19.2					6	6
19.2	38.4				6	6	6
24	24				6	6A	6B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(11). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in unshaded cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Number 6 indicates minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(11). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “A” indicates that a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate is required. Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt and a minimum nominal 3 × 6 sill plate are required.

For SI: 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound-force = 4.448 N.

FIGURE R608.9(12)

COLD-FORMED STEEL ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLEL

TABLE R608.9(12)

COLD-FORMED STEEL ROOF TO TOP OF CONCRETE WALL, FRAMING PARALLELa, b, c, d, e

ANCHOR BOLT SPACING
(inches)
	TENSION TIE SPACING
(inches)
	BASIC WIND SPEED (mph) AND WIND EXPOSURE CATEGORY
115B	120B	130B	140B	150B	160B
		110C	119C	127C	136C
			110D	117D	125D
12	12						6
12	24						6
16	16					6	6
16	32					6	6
19.2	19.2					6	6
19.2	38.4				6	6	6
24	24				6	6	6B

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is for use with the detail in Figure R608.9(12). Use of this detail is permitted where a cell is not shaded.

b.	Wall design per other provisions of Section R608 is required.

c.	For wind design, minimum 4-inch-nominal wall is permitted in cells that do not contain a number.

d.	Number 6 indicates minimum permitted nominal wall thickness in inches necessary to develop required strength (capacity) of connection. As a minimum, this nominal thickness shall occur in the portion of the wall indicated by the cross-hatching in Figure R608.9(12). For the remainder of the wall, see Note b.

e.	Letter “B” indicates that a 5/8-inch-diameter anchor bolt is required.

R608.9.1 Connections between concrete walls and light-framed floor, ceiling and roof systems.

Connections between concrete walls and light-framed floor, ceiling and roof systems using the prescriptive details of Figures R608.9(1) through R608.9(12) shall comply with this section and Sections R608.9.2 and R608.9.3.

R608.9.1.1 Anchor bolts.

Anchor bolts used to connect light-framed floor, ceiling and roof systems to concrete walls in accordance with Figures R608.9(1) through R608.9(12) shall have heads, or shall be rods with threads on both ends with a hex or square nut on the end embedded in the concrete. Bolts and threaded rods shall comply with Section R608.5.2.2. Anchor bolts with J- or L-hooks shall not be used where the connection details in these figures are used.

R608.9.1.2 Removal of stay-in-place form material at bolts.

Holes in stay-in-place forms for installing bolts for attaching face-mounted wood ledger boards to the wall shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter for forms not greater than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in thickness, and increased 1 inch (25 mm) in diameter for each 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) increase in form thickness. Holes in stay-in-place forms for installing bolts for attaching face-mounted cold-formed steel tracks to the wall shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) square. The wood ledger board or steel track shall be in direct contact with the concrete at each bolt location.

Exception: A vapor retarder or other material less than or equal to 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) in thickness is permitted to be installed between the wood ledger or cold-formed track and the concrete.

R608.9.2 Connections between concrete walls and light-framed floor systems.

Connections between concrete walls and light-framed floor systems shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.	For floor systems of wood frame construction, the provisions of Section R608.9.1 and the prescriptive details of Figures R608.9(1) through R608.9(4), where permitted by the tables accompanying those figures. Portions of connections of wood-framed floor systems not noted in the figures shall be in accordance with Section R502, or AWC WFCM, if applicable. Wood framing members shall be of a species having a specific gravity equal to or greater than 0.42.

2.	For floor systems of cold-formed steel construction, the provisions of Section R608.9.1 and the prescriptive details of Figures R608.9(5) through R608.9(8), where permitted by the tables accompanying those figures. Portions of connections of cold-formed-steel framed floor systems not noted in the figures shall be in accordance with Section R505, or AISI S230, if applicable.

3.	Proprietary connectors selected to resist loads and load combinations in accordance with Appendix A (ASD) or Appendix B (LRFD) of PCA 100.

4.	An engineered design using loads and load combinations in accordance with Appendix A (ASD) or Appendix B (LRFD) of PCA 100.

5.	An engineered design using loads and material design provisions in accordance with this code, or in accordance with ASCE 7, ACI 318, and AWC NDS for wood frame construction or AISI S100 for coldformed steel frame construction.

R608.9.3 Connections between concrete walls and light-framed ceiling and roof systems.

Connections between concrete walls and light-framed ceiling and roof systems shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.	For ceiling and roof systems of wood frame construction, the provisions of Section R608.9.1 and the prescriptive details of Figures R608.9(9) and R608.9(10), where permitted by the tables accompanying those figures. Portions of connections of wood-framed ceiling and roof systems not noted in the figures shall be in accordance with Section R802, or AWC WFCM, if applicable. Wood framing members shall be of a species having a specific gravity equal to or greater than 0.42.

2.	For ceiling and roof systems of cold-formed-steel construction, the provisions of Section R608.9.1 and the prescriptive details of Figures R608.9(11) and R608.9(12), where permitted by the tables accompanying those figures. Portions of connections of cold-formed-steel framed ceiling and roof systems not noted in the figures shall be in accordance with Section R804, or AISI S230, if applicable.

3.	Proprietary connectors selected to resist loads and load combinations in accordance with Appendix A (ASD) or Appendix B (LRFD) of PCA 100.

4.	An engineered design using loads and load combinations in accordance with Appendix A (ASD) or Appendix B (LRFD) of PCA 100.

5.	An engineered design using loads and material design provisions in accordance with this code, or in accordance with ASCE 7, ACI 318, and AWC NDS for wood-frame construction or AISI

R608.10 Floor, roof and ceiling diaphragms.

Floors and roofs in buildings with exterior walls of concrete shall be designed and constructed as diaphragms. Where gable-end walls occur, ceilings shall be designed and constructed as diaphragms. The design and construction of floors, roofs and ceilings of wood framing or cold-formed-steel framing serving as diaphragms shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code, or AWC WFCM or AISI S230, if applicable. Wood framing members shall be of a species having a specific gravity equal to or greater than 0.42.

SECTION R609
EXTERIOR WINDOWS AND DOORS
R609.1 General.

This section prescribes performance and construction requirements for exterior windows and doors installed in walls. Windows and doors shall be installed and flashed in accordance with the fenestration manufacturer’s written instructions. Window and door openings shall be flashed in accordance with Section R703.4. Written installation instructions shall be provided by the fenestration manufacturer for each window or door.

R609.2 Performance.

Exterior windows and doors shall be designed to resist the design wind loads specified in Table R301.2(2) adjusted for height and exposure in accordance with Table R301.2(3) or determined in accordance with ASCE 7 using the allowable stress design load combinations of ASCE 7. Design wind loads for exterior glazing not part of a labeled assembly shall be permitted to be determined in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

R609.2.1 Custom doors.

Custom (one-of-a-kind) exterior door assemblies shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory or be designed and engineered in accordance with accepted engineering practices by a Florida registered design professional. Signed and sealed copies of the rational analysis and calculations shall be provided to the building official upon permit application.

R609.3 Testing and labeling.

Exterior windows and sliding doors shall be tested by an approved independent laboratory, and bear a label identifying manufacturer, performance characteristics and approved inspection agency to indicate compliance with AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 or TAS 202 (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202 and ASTM E1300). Exterior side-hinged doors shall be tested and labeled as conforming to AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440 or ANSI/WMA 100, or comply with Section R609.5. Exterior windows and doors shall be labeled with a permanent label, marking, or etching providing traceability to the manufacturer and product. The following shall also be required either n a permanent label or on a temporary supplemental label applied by the manufacturer: information identifying the manufacturer, the product model/series number, positive and negative design pressure rating, product maximum size tested, impact-resistance rating if applicable, Florida product approval number or Miami-Dade product approval number applicable test standard(s), and approved product certification agency, testing laboratory, evaluation entity or Miami-Dade product approval.

The labels are limited to one design pressure rating per reference standard. The temporary supplemental label shall remain on the window or door until final approval by the building official.

Exceptions:

1.	Door assemblies installed in nonhabitable areas where the door assembly and area are designed to accept water infiltration need not be tested for water infiltration.

2.	Door assemblies installed where the overhang (OH) ratio is equal to or more than 1 need not be tested for water infiltration. The overhang ratio shall be calculated by the following equation:

OH ratio = OH Length/OH Height

Where:

OH length = The horizontal measure of how far an overhang over a door projects out from door surface.

OH height = The vertical measure of the distance from the door sill to the bottom of the overhang over a door.

3.	Decorative glazed openings.

4.	Pass-through windows for serving from a single-family kitchen, where protected by a roof overhang of 5 feet (1.5 m) or more shall be exempted from the requirements of the water infiltration test.

R609.3.1 Comparative analysis.

Structural wind load design pressures for window and door units different than the size tested in accordance with Section R609.3 shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested unit where determined in accordance with one of the following comparative analysis methods:

1.	Structural wind load design pressures for window and door units other than the size tested in accordance with Section R609.3 shall be permitted to be different than the design value of the tested unit provided such different pressures are determined by accepted engineering analysis. All components of the alternate size assembly shall be the same as the tested or labeled assembly: however, lineal components shall be permitted to vary in length compared to the tested or labeled assembly.

Exceptions:

1.	Operable windows and doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

a.	For windows and doors (other than sliding or bi-fold), the frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

b.	For sliding or bi-fold doors, the panel area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the panel area of the tested approved unit.

c.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

d.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the proportional deflection for fiber stress of the intermediate members of the approved unit.

e.	Shall not exceed 100 percent of the concentrated load at the juncture of the intermediate members and the frame of the approved unit.

f.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

g.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested per TAS 201 and TAS 203 or ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 where applicable.

2.	Nonoperable windows and doors rated in this manner shall comply with the following:

a.	The frame area of the alternate size unit shall not exceed the frame area of the tested approved unit.

b.	Shall vary from the tested approved unit only in width, height or load requirements.

c.	The maximum uniform load distribution (ULD) of any side shall be equal to the uniform load carried by the side divided by the length of the side.

d.	The ULD of any member shall not exceed the ULD of the corresponding member of the tested approved unit.

e.	The ULD of each member shall be calculated in accordance with standard engineering analysis.

f.	Shall not exceed the air and water infiltration resistance of the tested approved unit.

g.	Shall not exceed the maximum cyclic pressure of the tested approved unit when tested per TAS 201 and TAS 203 or ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 where applicable.

2.	In accordance with WDMA I.S.11 or AAMA 2502.

R609.4 Garage doors.

Garage doors shall be tested for determination of structural performance under uniform static air pressure difference in accordance with ANSI/DASMA 108, ASTM E330 Procedure A, or TAS 202. For garage doors tested in accordance with ASTM E330, acceptance criteria shall be in accordance with ANSI/DASMA 108. (HVHZ shall comply with TAS 202.) Design pressures shall be determined from Table 301.2(4) or ASCE 7. The design pressures, as determined from ASCE 7, are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6.

R609.4.1 Garage door labeling.

Garage doors shall be labeled with a permanent label provided by the garage door manufacturer. The label shall identify the garage door manufacturer, the garage door model/series number, the positive and negative design pressure rating, indicate impact rated if applicable, the installation instruction drawing reference number, the Florida product approval or Miami-Dade product approval number if applicable, and the applicable test standards. The required garage door components for an approved garage door assembly may be indicated using a checklist form on the label. If a checklist format is used on the label, the door installer or the garage door manufacturer shall mark the selected components on the checklist that are required to assemble an approved garage door system. The installation instructions shall be provided and available on the job site.

R609.5 Other exterior window and door assemblies.

Exterior windows and door assemblies not included within the scope of Section R609.3 or R609.4 shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E330. Glass in assemblies covered by this exception shall comply with Section R308.5.

R609.6 Wind-borne debris protection.

Protection of exterior glazed openings in buildings located in wind-borne debris regions shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.

R609.6.1 Fenestration testing and labeling.

Fenestration shall be tested by an approved independent laboratory, listed by an approved entity, and bear a label identifying manufacturer, performance characteristics, and approved inspection agency to indicate compliance with the requirements of the following specification(s):

1.	ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996; or

2.	AAMA 506.

R609.7 Anchorage methods.

The methods cited in this section apply only to anchorage of window and glass door assemblies to the main force-resisting system.

R609.7.1 Anchoring requirements.

Window and glass door assemblies shall be anchored in accordance with the published manufacturer’s recommendations to achieve the design pressure specified. Substitute anchoring systems used for substrates not specified by the fenestration manufacturer shall provide equal or greater anchoring performance as demonstrated by accepted engineering practice.

R609.7.2 Anchorage details.

Products shall be anchored in accordance with the minimum requirements illustrated in Figures R609.7.2(1), R609.7.2(2), R609.7.2(3), R609.7.2(4), R609.7.2(5), R609.7.2(6), R609.7.2(7) and R609.7.2(8).

FIGURE R609.7.2(1)

THROUGH THE FRAME

FIGURE R609.7.2(2)

FRAME CLIP

FIGURE R609.7.2(3)

THROUGH THE FRAME

FIGURE R609.7.2(4)

FRAME CLIP

FIGURE R609.7.2(5)

THROUGH THE FLANGE

FIGURE R609.7.2(6)

THROUGH THE FLANGE

FIGURE R609.7.2(7)

FRAME CLIP

FIGURE R609.7.2(8)

THROUGH THE FLANGE

R609.7.2.1 Masonry, concrete or other structural substrate.

Where the wood shim or buck thickness is less than 11/2 inches (38 mm), window and glass door assemblies shall be anchored through the jamb, or by jamb clip and anchors shall be embedded directly into the masonry, concrete or other substantial substrate material. Unless otherwise tested, bucks shall extend beyond the interior face of the window or door frame such that full support of the frame is provided. Anchors shall adequately transfer load from the window or door frame into the rough opening substrate [see Figures R609.7.2(1) and R6097.2(2)].

Where the wood shim or buck thickness is 11/2 inches (38 mm) or more, and the buck is securely fastened to the masonry, concrete or other substantial substrate, window and glass door assemblies shall be anchored through the jamb, or by jamb clip, or through the flange to the secured wood buck. Unless otherwise tested, bucks shall extend beyond the interior face of the window or door frame such that full support of the frame is provided. Anchors shall be embedded into the secured wood buck to adequately transfer load from the window or door frame assembly [see Figures R609.7.2(3), R6097.2(4) and R609.7.2(5)].

R609.7.2.2 Wood or other approved framing material.

Where the framing material is wood or other approved framing material, window and glass door assemblies shall be anchored through the frame, or by frame clip, or through the flange. Anchors shall be embedded into the frame construction to adequately transfer load [see Figures R609.7.2(6), R609.7.2(7) and R609.7.2(8)].

R609.8 Mullions.

Mullions shall be tested by an approved testing laboratory in accordance with AAMA 450, or be engineered in accordance with accepted engineering practice. Mullions tested as stand-alone units or qualified by engineering shall use performance criteria cited in Sections R609.8.1, R609.8.2 and R609.8.3. Mullions qualified by an actual test of an entire assembly shall comply with Sections R609.8.1 and R609.8.3.

R609.8.1 Load transfer.

Mullions shall be designed to transfer the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to the rough opening substrate.

R609.8.2 Deflection.

Mullions shall be capable of resisting the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to be supported without deflecting more than L/175, for spans up to and including 13 foot 6 inches, and L/240 + 1/4 inch for spans over 13 foot 6 inches, where L is the span of the mullion in inches.

R609.8.3 Structural safety factor.

Mullions shall be capable of resisting a load of 1.5 times the design pressure loads applied by the window and door assemblies to be supported without exceeding the appropriate material stress levels. If tested by an approved laboratory, the 1.5 times the design pressure load shall be sustained for 10 seconds, and the permanent deformation shall not exceed 0.4 percent of the mullion span after the 1.5 times design pressure load is removed.

R609.9 Masonry rough openings.

Masonry rough opening dimensions shall be within the tolerances specified in Section R606.3.1.1 and, in addition, shall provide for a window perimeter sealant joint a maximum of 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in width.

R609.10 Door components.

Substitution of door components shall comply with either:

1.	ANSI/WMA 100; or

2.	Be evaluated by an approved product evaluation entity, certification agency, testing laboratory, or engineer and may be interchangeable in exterior door assemblies if the components provide equal or greater structural performance as demonstrated by accepted engineering practices.

R609.11 Impact-resistant coverings.
R609.11.1

Impact-resistant coverings shall be tested at 1.5 times the design pressure (positive or negative) expressed in pounds per square feet as determined by the Florida Building Code, Building Section 1609 for which the specimen is to be tested. The design pressures, as determined from Section 1609 of the Florida Building Code, Building or ASCE 7, are permitted to be multiplied by 0.6.

R609.11.1.1

Impact-resistant coverings shall be labeled in accordance with the provisions of Section R609.11.

R609.11.2 Labels.

A permanent label shall be provided by the product approval holder on all impact-resistant coverings.

R609.11.2.1

The following information shall be included on the labels on impact-resistant coverings:

1.	Product approval holder name and address.

2.	All applicable methods of approval. Methods of approval include, but, are not limited to Miami-Dade NOA; Florida Building Commission, TDI Product Evaluation; ICC-ES.

3.	The test standard or standards specified in Section R301.2.1.2, including standards referenced within the test standards specified in Section R301.2.1.2 used to demonstrate code compliance.

4.	For products with a Florida product approval number or a Miami-Dade County Building and Neighborhood Compliance Department Notice of Acceptance Number (NOA), such numbers shall be included on the label.

R609.11.3 Location of label.

The location of the label on the impact-resistant covering shall be as follows:

1.	Accordions: Bottom of the locking bar or center mate facing the exterior or outside.

2.	Rollup: On the bottom of the hood facing the exterior or outside or on the bottom slat facing the exterior or outside.

3.	Bahama Awning or Colonial Hinged: On the bottom, placed on the back of the shutter.

4.	Panels: For metal and plastic panels the label may be embossed or printed spaced not more than every 3 lineal feet (914 mm) on each panel. The label shall be applied by the holder of the product approval and shall face the exterior or outside.

5.	Framed products: The label shall be on the side or bottom facing the exterior or outside.

6.	Labels on all other products shall face the exterior or outside.

R609.11.4 Installation.

All impact-resistant coverings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and in accordance with the product approval. Installation instructions shall be provided and shall be available to inspection personnel on the job site. Opening protection components, fasteners, and other parts evaluated by an approved product evaluation entity, certification agency, testing laboratory, architect, or engineer and approved by the holder of the product approval may be interchangeable in opening protection assemblies provided that the opening protection component(s) provide equal or greater structural performance and durability as demonstrated by testing in accordance with approved test standards.

SECTION R610
STRUCTURAL INSULATED
PANEL WALL CONSTRUCTION
R610.1 General.

Structural insulated panel (SIP) walls shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of this section. Where the provisions of this section are used to design structural insulated panel walls, project drawings, typical details and specifications are not required to bear the seal of the architect or engineer responsible for design, unless otherwise required by the state law of the jurisdiction having authority.

R610.2 Applicability limits.

The provisions of this section shall control the construction of exterior structural insulated panel walls and interior load-bearing structural insulated panel walls for buildings not greater than 60 feet (18 288 mm) in length perpendicular to the joist or truss span, not greater than 40 feet (12 192 mm) in width parallel to the joist or truss span and not greater than two stories in height with each wall not greater than 10 feet (3048 mm) high. Exterior walls installed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be considered as load-bearing walls. Structural insulated panel walls constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be limited to sites where the ultimate design wind speed (Vult) is not greater than 155 miles per hour (69 m/s), Exposure B or 140 miles per hour (63 m/s) Exposure C.

R610.3 Materials.

SIPs shall comply with the requirements of ANSI/APA PRS 610.1:

R610.3.1 Lumber.

The minimum lumber framing material used for SIPs prescribed in this document is NLGA graded No. 2 Spruce-pine-fir. Substitution of other wood species/grades that meet or exceed the mechanical properties and specific gravity of No. 2 Spruce-pine-fir shall be permitted.

R610.3.2 SIP screws.

Screws used for the erection of SIPs as specified in Section R610.5 shall be fabricated from steel, shall be provided by the SIP manufacturer and shall be sized to penetrate the wood member to which the assembly is being attached by not less than 1 inch (25 mm). The screws shall be corrosion resistant and have a minimum shank diameter of 0.188 inch (4.7 mm) and a minimum head diameter of 0.620 inch (15.5 mm).

R610.3.3 Nails.

Nails specified in Section R610 shall be common or galvanized box unless otherwise stated.

R610.4 SIP wall panels.

SIPs shall comply with Figure R610.4 and shall have minimum panel thickness in accordance with Tables R610.5(1) and R610.5(2) for above-grade walls. SIPs shall be identified by grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency in accordance with ANSI/APA PRS 610.1.

FIGURE R610.4

SIP WALL PANEL

R610.5 Wall construction.

Exterior walls of SIP construction shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section and Tables R610.5(1) and R610.5(2) and Figures R610.5(1) through R610.5(5). SIP walls shall be fastened to other wood building components in accordance with Section R602.3.

Framing shall be attached in accordance with Section R602.3 unless otherwise provided for in Section R610.

TABLE R610.5(1)

MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR SIP WALL SUPPORTING SIP OR LIGHT-FRAME ROOF ONLY (inches)a

BUILDING WIDTH (ft)
ULTIMATE DESIGN
WIND SPEED
Vult (mph)	24	28	32	36	40
Exp. B	Exp. C	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)
8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10
110	—	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5
115	—	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5
130	110	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	4.5	DR
140	120	4.5	6.5	DR	4.5	6.5	DR	4.5	DR	DR	4.5	DR	DR	4.5	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

DR = design required.

a.	Design assumptions:

Maximum deflection criteria: L/240.

Maximum roof dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum roof live load: 70 psf.

Maximum ceiling dead load: 5 psf.

Maximum ceiling live load: 20 psf.

Wind loads based on Table R301.2 (2).

Strength axis of facing material applied vertically.

TABLE R610.5(2)

MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR SIP WALL SUPPORTING SIP OR LIGHT-FRAME ONE STORY AND ROOF ONLY (inches)a

BUILDING WIDTH (ft)
ULTIMATE DESIGN
WIND SPEED
Vult (mph)	24	28	32	36	40
Exp. B	Exp. C	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)	Wall Height (feet)
8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10	8	9	10
110	—	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	4.5	DR
115	—	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	DR	DR
130	110	4.5	4.5	6.5	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	4.5	DR	4.5	DR	DR	4.5	DR	DR
140	120	4.5	6.5	DR	4.5	DR	DR	4.5	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

DR = Design required.

a.	Design assumptions:

Maximum deflection criteria: L/240.

Maximum roof dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum roof live load: 70 psf.

Maximum ceiling dead load: 5 psf.

Maximum ceiling live load: 20 psf.

Maximum second-floor dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum second-floor live load: 30 psf.

Maximum second-floor dead load from walls: 10 psf.

Maximum first-floor dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum first-floor live load: 40 psf.

Wind loads based on Table R301.2 (2).

Strength axis of facing material applied vertically.

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

Note: Figures illustrate SIP-specific attachment requirements. Other connections shall be made in accordance with Section R602.3, as appropriate.

FIGURE R610.5(1)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HEIGHT OF SIP WALLS

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

Note: Figures illustrate SIP-specific attachment requirements. Other connections shall be made in accordance with Section R602.3, as appropriate.

FIGURE R610.5(2)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HEIGHT OF SIP WALLS

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

Note: Figures illustrate SIP-specific attachment requirements. Other connections shall be made in accordance with Section R602.3, as appropriate.

FIGURE R610.5(3)

TRUSSED ROOF TO TOP PLATE CONNECTION

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

Note: Figures illustrate SIP-specific attachment requirements. Other connections shall be made in accordance with Section R602.3, as appropriate.

FIGURE R610.5(4)

SIP WALL-TO-WALL PLATFORM FRAME CONNECTION

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

Note: Figures illustrate SIP-specific attachment requirements. Other connections shall be made in accordance with Section R602.3, as appropriate. I-joist floor shown for illustration only.

FIGURE R610.5(5)

SIP WALL-TO-WALL HANGING FLOOR CONNECTION

R610.5.1 Top plate connection.

SIP walls shall be capped with a double top plate installed to provide overlapping at corner, intersections and splines in accordance with Figure R610.5.1. The double top plates shall be made up of a single 2 by top plate having a width equal to the width of the panel core, and shall be recessed into the SIP below. Over this top plate a cap plate shall be placed. The cap plate width shall match the SIP thickness and overlap the facers on both sides of the panel. End joints in top plates shall be offset not less than 24 inches (610 mm).

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

Notes:

1.	Top plates shall be continuous over header.

2.	Lower 2x top plate shall have a width equal to the SIP core width and shall be recessed into the top edge of the panel. Cap plate shall be placed over the recessed top plate and shall have a width equal to the SIPs width.

3.	SIP facing surfaces shall be nailed to framing and cripples with 8d common or galvanized box nails spaced 6 inches on center.

FIGURE R610.5.1

SIP WALL FRAMING CONFIGURATION

R610.5.2 Bottom (sole) plate connection.

SIP walls shall have full bearing on a sole plate having a width equal to the nominal width of the foam core. Where SIP walls are supported directly on continuous foundations, the wall wood sill plate shall be anchored to the foundation in accordance with Figure R610.5.2 and Section R403.1.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R610.5.2

SIP WALL TO CONCRETE SLAB FOR FOUNDATION WALL ATTACHMENT

R610.5.3 Panel-to-panel connection.

SIPs shall be connected at vertical in-plane joints in accordance with Figure R610.8 or by other approved methods.

R610.5.4 Corner framing.

Corner framing of SIP walls shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R610.5.4.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R610.5.4

SIP CORNER FRAMING DETAIL

R610.5.5 Wall bracing.

SIP walls shall be braced in accordance with Section R602.3. SIP walls shall be considered continuous wood structural panel sheathing (Bracing Method CS-WSP) for purposes of computing required bracing. SIP walls shall meet the requirements of Section R602.3 except that SIP corners shall be fabricated as shown in Figure R610.8. Where SIP walls are used for wall bracing, the SIP bottom plate shall be attached to wood framing below in accordance with Section R602.3.

R610.6 Interior load-bearing walls.

Interior load-bearing walls shall be constructed as specified for exterior walls.

R610.7 Drilling and notching.

The maximum vertical chase penetration in SIPs shall have a maximum side dimension of 2 inches (51 mm) centered in the panel. Vertical chases shall have a minimum spacing of 24 inches (610 mm) on center. A maximum of two horizontal chases shall be permitted in each wall panel—one at 14 inches (360 mm) plus or minus 2 inches (51 mm) from the bottom of the panel and one at 48 inches (1220 mm) plus or minus 2 inches (51 mm) from the bottom edge of the SIPs panel. Additional penetrations are permitted where justified by analysis.

R610.8 Headers.

SIP headers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Table R610.8 and Figure R610.5.1. SIP headers shall be continuous sections without splines. Headers shall be not less than 117/8 inches (302 mm) deep. Headers longer than 4 feet (1219 mm) shall be constructed in accordance with Section R602.3. The strength axis of the factors on the header shall be oriented horizontally.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R610.8

TYPICAL SIP WALL PANEL-TO-PANEL CONNECTION DETAILS

TABLE R610.8

MAXIMUM SPANS FOR 117/8-INCH OR DEEPER SIP HEADERS (feet)a, c, d

LOAD CONDITION	BUILDINGb width (feet)
24	28	32	36	40
Supporting roof only	4	4	4	4	2
Supporting roof and one-story	2	2	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

DR = Design Required.

a.	Design assumptions:

Maximum deflection criterion: L/240.

Maximum roof dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum ceiling load: 5 psf.

Maximum ceiling live load: 20 psf.

Maximum second-floor live load: 30 psf.

Maximum second-floor dead load: 10 psf.

Maximum second-floor dead load from walls: 10 psf.

Maximum first-floor dead load: 10 psf.

Wind load based on Table R301.2(2).

Strength axis of facing material applied horizontally.

b.	Building width is in the direction of horizontal framing members supported by the header.

c.	The table provides for roof slopes between 3:12 and 12:12.

d.	The maximum roof overhang is 24 inches (610 mm).

R610.8.1 Wood structural panel box headers.

Wood structural panel box headers shall be allowed where SIP headers are not applicable. Wood structural panel box headers shall be constructed in accordance with Section R602.3.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-7]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 7
WALL COVERING
SECTION R701
GENERAL
R701.1 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the interior and exterior wall covering for buildings.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44.

R701.2 Installation.

Products sensitive to adverse weather shall not be installed until adequate weather protection for the installation is provided. Exterior sheathing shall be dry before applying exterior cover.

SECTION R702
INTERIOR COVERING
R702.1 General.

Interior coverings or wall finishes shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and Table R702.1(1), Table R702.1(2), Table R702.1(3) and Table R702.3.5. Interior masonry veneer shall comply with the requirements of Section R703.7.1 for support and Section R703.7.4 for anchorage, except an airspace is not required. Interior finishes and materials shall conform to the flame spread and smoke-development requirements of Section R302.9.

TABLE R702.1(1)

THICKNESS OF PLASTER

PLASTER BASE	FINISHED THICKNESS OF PLASTER FROM FACE OF LATH, MASONRY, CONCRETE (inches)
Gypsum Plaster	Cement Plaster
Expanded metal lath	5/8, minimuma	5/8, minimuma
Wire lath	5/8, minimuma	3/4, minimum (interior)b
7/8, minimum (exterior)b
Gypsum lathg	1/2, minimum	3/4, minimum (interior)b
Masonry wallsc	1/2, minimum	1/2, minimum
Monolithic concrete wallsc, d	5/8, maximum	7/8, maximum
Monolithic concrete ceilingsc, d	3/8, maximume	1/2, maximum
Gypsum veneer basef, g	1/16, minimum	3/4, minimum (interior)b
Gypsum sheathingg	—	3/4, minimum (interior)b
7/8, minimum (exterior)b

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Where measured from back plane of expanded metal lath, exclusive of ribs, or self-furring lath, plaster thickness shall be 3/4 inch minimum.

b.	Where measured from face of support or backing.

c.	Because masonry and concrete surfaces vary in plane, thickness of plaster need not be uniform.

d.	Where applied over a liquid bonding agent, finish coat shall be permitted to be applied directly to concrete surface.

e.	Approved acoustical plaster shall be permitted to be applied directly to concrete or over base coat plaster, beyond the maximum plaster thickness shown.

f.	Attachment shall be in accordance with Table R702.3.5.

g.	Where gypsum board is used as a base for cement plaster, a water-resistive barrier complying with Section R703.2 shall be provided.

TABLE R702.1(2)

GYPSUM PLASTER PROPORTIONSa

NUMBER	COAT	PLASTER BASE OR LATH	MAXIMUM VOLUME AGGREGATE PER 100 POUNDS NEAT PLASTERb
(cubic feet)

Damp Loose Sanda	Perlite or Vermiculitec
Two-coat work	Base coat	Gypsum lath	2.5	2
Base coat	Masonry	3	3
Three-coat work	First coat	Lath	2d	2
Second coat	Lath	3d	2e
First and second coats	Masonry	3	3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m3, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	Wood-fibered gypsum plaster shall be mixed in the proportions of 100 pounds of gypsum to not more than 1 cubic foot of sand where applied on masonry or concrete.

b.	Where determining the amount of aggregate in set plaster, a tolerance of 10 percent shall be allowed.

c.	Combinations of sand and lightweight aggregate shall be permitted to be used, provided the volume and weight relationship of the combined aggregate to gypsum plaster is maintained.

d.	If used for both first and second coats, the volume of aggregate shall be permitted to be 2.5 cubic feet.

e.	Where plaster is 1 inch or more in total thickness, the proportions for the second coat may be increased to 3 cubic feet.

TABLE R702.1(3)

CEMENT PLASTER PROPORTIONS, PARTS BY VOLUME

COAT	CEMENT
PLASTER
TYPE	CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS	VOLUME OF AGGREGATE PER
SUM OF SEPARATE VOLUMES OF
CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALSb
Portland Cement Type I, II or III or
Blended Hydraulic Cement Type
IP, IS(S<70), IL or IT(S<70); or
Hydraulic Cement Type GU, HE,
MS, HS or MH	Plastic
Cement
	Masonry Cement
Type M, S or N
	Lime
First	Portland or
blended
	1			3/4 - 11/2a	21/2 - 4
Masonry				1	21/2 - 4
Plastic		1			21/2 - 4
Second	Portland or
blended
	1			3/4 - 11/2	3 - 5
Masonry			1		3 - 5
Plastic		1			3 - 5
Finish	Portland or
blended
	1			3/4 - 2	11/2 - 3
Masonry			1		11/2 - 3
Plastic		1			11/2 - 3

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	Lime by volume of 0 to 3/4 shall be used where the plaster will be placed over low-absorption surfaces such as dense clay tile or brick.

b.	The same or greater sand proportion shall be used in the second coat than used in the first coat.

R702.2 Interior plaster.
R702.2.1 Gypsum plaster.

Gypsum plaster materials shall conform to ASTM C5, C22, C28, C35, C59, C61, C587, C631, C847, C 933, C1032 and C1047, and shall be installed or applied in compliance with ASTM C843 and C844. Gypsum lath or gypsum base for veneer plaster shall conform to ASTM C1396. Plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over metal lath and not less than two coats where applied over other bases permitted by this section, except that veneer plaster shall be applied in one coat not to exceed 3/16 inch (4.76 mm) thickness, provided the total thickness is in accordance with Table R702.1(1).

R702.2.2 Cement plaster.

Cement plaster materials shall conform to ASTM C91 (Type M, S or N), C150 (Type I, II and III), C595 [Type IP, I (PM), IS and I (SM), C847, C897, C926, C933, C1032, C1047 and C 1328, and shall be installed or applied in compliance with ASTM C1063. Gypsum lath shall conform to ASTM C1396. Plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over metal lath and not less than two coats where applied over other bases permitted by this section, except that veneer plaster shall be applied in one coat not to exceed 3/16 inch (4.76 mm) thickness, provided the total thickness is in accordance with Table R702.1(1).

R702.2.2.1 Application.

Each coat shall be kept in a moist condition for not less than 24 hours prior to application of the next coat.

Exception: Applications installed in accordance with ASTM C926.

R702.2.2.2 Curing.

The finish coat for two-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the first coat. For three-coat cement plaster, the second coat shall not be applied sooner than 24 hours after application of the first coat. The finish coat for three-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the second coat.

R702.2.3 Support.

Support spacing for gypsum or metal lath on walls or ceilings shall not exceed 16 inches (406 mm) for 3/8-inch-thick (9.5 mm) or 24 inches (610 mm) for 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) plain gypsum lath. Gypsum lath shall be installed at right angles to support framing with end joints in adjacent courses staggered by not less than one framing space.

R702.3 Gypsum board and gypsum panel products.
R702.3.1 Materials.

Gypsum board and gypsum panel product materials and accessories shall conform to ASTM C22, C475, C514, C1002, C1047, C1177, C1178, C1278, C1396 or C1658 and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section. Adhesives for the installation of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall conform to ASTM C557.

R702.3.2 Wood framing.

Wood framing supporting gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nominal thickness in the least dimension except that wood furring strips not less than 1-inch by 2-inch (25 mm by 51 mm) nominal dimension shall be permitted to be used over solid backing or framing spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center.

R702.3.3 Cold-formed steel framing.

Cold-formed steel framing supporting gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be not less than 11/4 inches (32 mm) wide in the least dimension. Nonload-bearing cold-formed steel framing shall comply with AISI S220. Load-bearing cold-formed steel framing shall comply with AISI S240.

R702.3.4 Insulating concrete form walls.

Foam plastics for insulating concrete form walls constructed in accordance with Sections R404.1.2 and R608 on the interior of habitable spaces shall be protected in accordance with Section R316.4. Use of adhesives in conjunction with mechanical fasteners is permitted. Adhesives used for interior and exterior finishes shall be compatible with the insulating form materials.

R702.3.5 Application.

Supports and fasteners used to attach gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall comply with Table R702.3.5. Gypsum sheathing shall be attached to exterior walls in accordance with Section R602.3. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be applied at right angles or parallel to framing members. All edges and ends of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall occur on the framing members, except those edges and ends that are perpendicular to the framing members. Interior gypsum board shall not be installed where it is directly exposed to the weather or to water.

TABLE R702.3.5

MINIMUM THICKNESS AND APPLICATION OF GYPSUM BOARD AND GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS

THICKNESS OF
GYPSUM
BOARD OR
GYPSUM
PANEL
PRODUCTS
(inches)	APPLICATION	ORIENTATION OF
GYPSUM BOARD
OR GYPSUM
PANEL
PRODUCTS TO
FRAMING
	MAXIMUM
SPACING
OF
FRAMING
MEMBERS
(inches o.c.)
	MAXIMUM SPACING
OF FASTENERS
(inches)	SIZE OF NAILS FOR APPLICATION
TO WOOD FRAMINGc

Nailsa	Screwsb
Application without adhesive
3/8	Ceilingd	Perpendicular	16	7	12	13 gage, 11/4″ long, 19/64″ head; 0.098″ diameter,
11/4″ long, ring shank; or 4d cooler nail,
0.080″ diameter, 13/8″ long, 7/32″ head.
Wall	Either direction	16	8	16
1/2	Ceiling	Either direction	16	7	12	13 gage, 13/8″ long, 19/64″ head; 0.098″ diameter,
11/4″ long, ring shank; 5d cooler nail, 0.086″
diameter, 15/8″ long, 15/64″ head; or gypsum
board nail, 0.086″ diameter, 15/8″ long, 9/32″ head.

Ceilingd	Perpendicular	24	7	12
Wall	Either direction	24	8	12
Wall	Either direction	16	8	16
5/8	Ceiling	Either direction	16	7	12	13 gage, 15/8″ long, 19/64″ head; 0.098″ diameter,
13/8″ long, ring shank; 6d cooler nail, 0.092″
diameter, 17/8″ long, 1/4″ head; or gypsum board
nail, 0.0915″ diameter, 17/8″ long, 19/64″ head.

Ceiling	Perpendicular	24	7	12
Type X at
garage ceiling
beneath
habitable rooms
	Perpendicular	24	6	6	17/8″ long 0.099″ diameter galvanized nails or
equivalent drywall screws. Screws shall comply
with Section R702.3.5.1
Wall	Either direction	24	8	12	13 gage, 15/8″ long, 19/64″ head; 0.098″ diameter,
13/8″ long, ring shank; 6d cooler nail, 0.092″
diameter, 17/8″ long, 1/4″ head; or gypsum board
nail, 0.0915″ diameter, 17/8″ long, 19/64″ head.

Wall	Either direction	16	8	16
Application with adhesive
3/8	Ceilingd	Perpendicular	16	16	16	Same as above for 3/8″ gypsum board and
gypsum panel products.

Wall	Either direction	16	16	24
1/2 or 5/8	Ceiling	Either direction	16	16	16	Same as above for 1/2″ and 5/8″ gypsum board and gypsum panel products, respectively.
Ceilingd	Perpendicular	24	12	16
Wall	Either direction	24	16	24
Two 3/8 layers	Ceiling	Perpendicular	16	16	16	Base ply nailed as above for 1/2″ gypsum board
and gypsum panel products; face ply installed
with adhesive.
Wall	Either direction	24	24	24

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	For application without adhesive, a pair of nails spaced not less than 2 inches apart or more than 21/2 inches apart shall be permitted to be used with the pair of nails spaced 12 inches on center.

b.	Screws shall be in accordance with Section R702.3.5.1. Screws for attaching gypsum board or gypsum panel products to structural insulated panels shall penetrate the wood structural panel facing not less than 7/16 inch.

c.	Where cold-formed steel framing is used with a clinching design to receive nails by two edges of metal, the nails shall be not less than 5/8 inch longer than thegypsum board or gypsum panel product thickness and shall have ringed shanks. Where the cold-formed steel framing has a nailing groove formed to receivethe nails, the nails shall have barbed shanks or be 0.086 inch diameter, 15/8 inches long, 15/64-inch head for 1/2-inch gypsum board or gypsum panel product;and 0.099 inch diameter, 17/8 inches long, 15/64-inch head for 5/8-inch gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

d.	Three-eighths-inch-thick single-ply gypsum board or gypsum panel product shall not be used on a ceiling where a water-based textured finish is to be applied, or where it will be required to support insulation above a ceiling. On ceiling applications to receive a water-based texture material, either hand or spray applied, the gypsum board or gypsum panel product shall be applied perpendicular to framing. Where applying a water-based texture material, the minimum gypsum board thickness shall be increased from 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch for 16-inch on center framing, and from 1/2 inch to 5/8 inch for 24-inch on center framing or 1/2-inch sag-resistant gypsum ceiling board shall be used.

R702.3.5.1 Screw fastening.

Screws for attaching gypsum board and gypsum panel products to wood framing shall be Type W or Type S in accordance with ASTM C1002 and shall penetrate the wood not less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm). Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be attached to cold-formed steel framing with minimum No. 6 screws. Screws for attaching gypsum board and gypsum panel products to cold-formed steel framing less than 0.033 inch (1 mm) thick shall be Type S in accordance with ASTM C1002 or bugle head style in accordance with ASTM C1513 and shall penetrate the steel not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Screws for attaching gypsum board and gypsum panel products to cold-formed steel framing 0.033 inch to 0.112 inch (1 mm to 3 mm) thick shall be in accordance with ASTM C954 or bugle head style in accordance with ASTM C1513. Screws for attaching gypsum board and gypsum panel products to structural insulated panels shall penetrate the wood structural panel facing not less than 7/16 inch (11.1 mm).

R702.3.6 Horizontal gypsum board diaphragm ceilings.

Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be permitted on wood joists to create a horizontal diaphragm in accordance with Table R702.3.6. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be installed perpendicular to ceiling framing members. End joints of adjacent courses of board and panels shall not occur on the same joist. The maximum allowable diaphragm proportions shall be 11/2:1 between shear resisting elements. Rotation or cantilever conditions shall not be permitted. Gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall not be used in diaphragm ceilings to resist lateral forces imposed by masonry or concrete construction. Perimeter edges shall be blocked using wood members not less than 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) nominal dimension. Blocking material shall be installed flat over the top plate of the wall to provide a nailing surface not less than 2 inches (51 mm) in width for the attachment of the gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

TABLE R702.3.6

ALLOWABLE (ASD) SHEAR CAPACITY FOR HORIZONTAL WOOD-FRAMED GYPSUM BOARD DIAPHRAGM CEILING ASSEMBLIES

MATERIAL	THICKNESS OF MATERIAL
(min.) (inch)
	SPACING OF
FRAMING MEMBERS
(max.) (inch)	SHEAR VALUEa, b
(plf of ceiling)
	MINIMUM
FASTENER SIZEc, d

Gypsum board
or gypsum panel product
	1/2	16 o.c.	90	5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64-inch head
Gypsum board
or gypsum panel product
	1/2	24 o.c.	70	5d cooler or wallboard nail;
15/8-inch long; 0.086-inch shank;
15/64-inch head

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per linear foot = 1.488 kg/m.

a.	Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term loading caused by wind loading. Values shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b.	Reserved.

c.	11/4-inch, No. 6 Type S or W screws shall be permitted to be substituted for the listed nails.

d.	Fasteners shall be spaced not more than 7 inches on center at all supports, including perimeter blocking, and not less than 3/8 inch from the edges and ends of the gypsum board.

R702.3.7 Water-resistant gypsum backing board.

Gypsum board used as the base or backer for adhesive application of ceramic tile or other required nonabsorbent finish material shall conform to ASTM C1396, C1178 or C1278. Use of water-resistant gypsum backing board shall be permitted on ceilings. Water-resistant gypsum board shall not be installed over a Class I or II vapor retarder in a shower or tub compartment. Cut or exposed edges, including those at wall intersections, shall be sealed as recommended by the manufacturer.

R702.3.7.1 Limitations.

Water-resistant gypsum backing board shall not be used where there will be direct exposure to water, or in areas subject to continuous high humidity.

R702.4 Ceramic tile.
R702.4.1 General.

Ceramic tile surfaces shall be installed in accordance with ANSI A108.1, A108.4, A108.5, A108.6, A108.11, A118.1, A118.3, A136.1 and A137.1.

R702.4.2 Backer boards.

Materials used as backers for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall panels in shower areas shall be of materials listed in Table R702.4.2, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

TABLE R702.4.2

BACKER BOARD MATERIALS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Glass mat gypsum backing panel	ASTM C1178
Fiber-reinforced gypsum panels	ASTM C1278
Nonasbestos fiber-cement backer board	ASTM C1288 or ISO 8336, Category C
Nonasbestos fiber mat reinforced cementitious backer units	ASTM C1325
R702.5 Other finishes.

Wood veneer paneling and hardboard paneling shall be placed on wood or cold-formed steel framing spaced not more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center. Wood veneer and hard board paneling less than 1/4-inch (6 mm) nominal thickness shall not have less than a 3/8-inch (10 mm) gypsum board or gypsum panel product backer. Wood veneer paneling not less than 1/4-inch (6 mm) nominal thickness shall conform to ANSI/HPVA HP-1. Hardboard paneling shall conform to CPA/ANSI A135.5.

R702.6 Wood shakes and shingles.

Wood shakes and shingles shall conform to CSSB Grading Rules for Wood Shakes and Shingles and shall be permitted to be installed directly to the studs with maximum 24 inches (610 mm) on-center spacing.

R702.6.1 Attachment.

Nails, staples or glue are permitted for attaching shakes or shingles to the wall, and attachment of the shakes or shingles directly to the surface shall be permitted provided the fasteners are appropriate for the type of wall surface material. Where nails or staples are used, two fasteners shall be provided and shall be placed so that they are covered by the course above.

R702.6.2 Furring strips.

Where furring strips are used, they shall be 1 inch by 2 inches or 1 inch by 3 inches (25 mm by 51 mm or 25 mm by 76 mm), spaced a distance on center equal to the desired exposure, and shall be attached to the wall by nailing through other wall material into the studs.

R702.7 Vapor retarders.

Vapor retarder materials shall be classified in accordance with Table R702.7(1). A vapor retarder shall be provided on the interior side of frame walls of the class indicated in Table R702.7(2), including compliance with Table R702.7(3) or Table R702.7(4) where applicable. An approved design using accepted engineering practice for hygrothermal analysis shall be permitted as an alternative. The climate zone shall be determined in accordance with Section R301.1 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

Exceptions:

1.	Basement walls.

2.	Below-grade portion of any wall.

3.	Construction where moisture accumulation, condensation, orfreezing of moisture will not damage the materials.

4.	A vapor retarder shall not be required in ClimateZones 1, 2 and 3.

R702.7.1 Spray foam plastic insulation for moisturecontrol with Class II and III vapor retarders.

For purposes of compliance with Tables R702.7(3) and R702.7(4), spray foam with a maximum permeance of 1.5 perms at the installed thickness applied to the interior side of wood structural panels, fiberboard, insulating sheathing or gypsum shall be deemed to meet the continuous insulation moisture control requirement in accordance with one of the following conditions:

1.	The spray foam R-value is equal to or greater thanthe specified continuous insulation R-value.

2.	The combined R-value of the spray foam and continuous insulation is equal to or greater than the specified continuous insulation R-value.

TABLE R702.7(1)

VAPOR RETARDER MATERIALS AND CLASSES

CLASS	ACCEPTABLE MATERIALS
I	Sheet polyethylene, nonperforated aluminum foil, or other approved materials with a perm rating of less than or equal to 0.1.
II	Kraft-faced fiberglass batts, vapor retarder paint, or other approved materials applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions for a perm rating greater than 0.1 and less than or equal to 1.0.
III	Latex paint, enamel paint or other approved materials applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions for a perm rating of greater than 1.0 and less than or equal to 10.0.

TABLE R702.7(2)

VAPOR RETARDER OPTIONS

CLIMATE ZONE	VAPOR RETARDER CLASS
CLASS Ia	CLASS IIa	CLASS III
1, 2	Not Permitted	Not Permitted	Permitted
3, 4 (except Marine 4)	Not Permitted	Permittedc	Permitted
Marine 4, 5, 6, 7, 8	Permittedb	Permittedc	See Table R702.7(3)

a.	Class I and II vapor retarders with vapor permeance greater than 1 permwhen measured by ASTM E96 water method (Procedure B) shall beallowed on the interior side of any frame wall in all climate zones.

b.	Use of a Class I interior vapor retarder in frame walls with a Class I vaporretarder on the exterior side shall require an approved design.

c.	Where a Class II vapor retarder is used in combination with foam plasticinsulating sheathing or insulated siding installed as continuous insulationon the exterior side of frame walls, the continuous insulation shall complywith Table R702.7(4) and the Class II vapor retarder shall have a vaporpermeance greater than 1 perm when measured by ASTM E96 watermethod (Procedure B).

TABLE R702.7(3)

CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS

CLIMATE
ZONE
	CLASS III VAPOR RETARDERS PERMITTED FOR:a, b
Marine 4	Vented cladding over wood structural panels.
Vented cladding over fiberboard.
Vented cladding over gypsum.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 2.5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 3.75 over 2 × 6 wall.
5	Vented cladding over wood structural panels.
Vented cladding over fiberboard.
Vented cladding over gypsum.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 6 wall.
6	Vented cladding over fiberboard.
Vented cladding over gypsum.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 11.25 over 2 × 6 wall.
7	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 10 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 15 over 2 × 6 wall.
8	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 12.5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 20 over 2 × 6 wall.

For SI: 1 pound per cubic foot = 16 kg/m3.

a.	Vented cladding shall include vinyl, polypropylene, or horizontal aluminum siding, brick veneer with a clear airspace as specified in Table R703.8.4(1), or other approved vented claddings.

b.	The requirements in this table apply only to insulation used to control moisture in order to permit the use of Class III vapor retarders. The insulation materials used to satisfy this option also contribute to but do not supersede the thermal envelope requirements of Chapter 11.

TABLE R702.7(4)

CONTINUOUS INSULATION WITH CLASS II VAPOR RETARDER

CLIMATE
ZONE
	CLASS II VAPOR RETARDERS PERMITTED FORa
3	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 2
4, 5 and 6	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 3 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 5 over 2 × 6 wall.

7	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 6 wall.

8	Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 7.5 over 2 × 4 wall.
Continuous insulation with R-value ≥ 10 over 2 × 6 wall.

a.	The requirements in this table apply only to insulation used to control moisture in order to permit the use of Class II vapor retarders. The insulation materials used to satisfy this option also contribute to but do not supersede the thermal envelope requirements of Chapter 11.

SECTION R703
EXTERIOR COVERING
R703.1 General.

Exterior walls shall provide the building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior wall envelope shall include flashing as described in Section R703.4.

Exception: Log walls designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of ICC 400.

R703.1.1 Water resistance.

The exterior wall envelope shall be designed and constructed in a manner that prevents the accumulation of water within the wall assembly by providing a water-resistant barrier behind the exterior cladding as required by Section R703.2 and a means of draining to the exterior water that penetrates the exterior cladding.

Exceptions:

1.	A weather-resistant exterior wall envelope shall not be required over concrete or masonry walls designed in accordance with Chapter 6 and flashed in accordance with Section R703.4.

2.	Compliance with the requirements for a means of drainage, and the requirements of Sections R703.2 and R703.4, shall not be required for an exterior wall envelope that has been demonstrated to resist wind-driven rain through testing of the exterior wall envelope, including joints, penetrations and intersections with dissimilar materials, in accordance with ASTM E331 under the following conditions:

2.1.	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall include at least one opening, one control joint, one wall/eave interface and one wall sill. All tested openings and penetrations shall be representative of the intended end-use configuration.

2.2.	Exterior wall envelope test assemblies shall be at least 4 feet by 8 feet (1219 mm by 2438 mm) in size.

2.3.	Exterior wall assemblies shall be tested at a minimum differential pressure of 6.24 pounds per square foot (299 Pa).

2.4.	Exterior wall envelope assemblies shall be subjected to the minimum test exposure for a minimum of 2 hours.

 The exterior wall envelope design shall be considered to resist wind-driven rain where the results of testing indicate that water did not penetrate control joints in the exterior wall envelope, joints at the perimeter of openings penetration or intersections of terminations with dissimilar materials.

R703.1.2 Wind resistance.

Wall coverings, backing materials and their attachments shall be capable of resisting wind loads in accordance with Tables R301.2(2) and R301.2(3) for walls using an effective wind area of 10 square feet. Wind-pressure resistance of the siding and backing materials shall be determined by ASTM E330 or other applicable standard test methods. Where wind-pressure resistance is determined by design analysis, data from approved design standards and analysis conforming to generally accepted engineering practice shall be used to evaluate the siding and backing material and its fastening. All applicable failure modes including bending rupture of siding, fastener withdrawal and fastener head pull-through shall be considered in the testing or design analysis. Where the wall covering and the backing material resist wind load as an assembly, use of the design capacity of the assembly shall be permitted.

R703.1.2.1 Wind resistance of exterior soffits.

Exterior soffits and their attachments shall comply with Section R704.

R703.2 Water-resistive barrier.

Not fewer than one layer of water-resistive barrier shall be applied over studs or sheathing of all exterior walls with flashing as indicated in Section R703.4, in such a manner as to provide a continuous water-resistive barrier behind the exterior wall veneer. The water-resistive barrier material shall be continuous to the top of walls and terminated at penetrations and building appendages in a manner to meet the requirements of the exterior wall envelope as described in Section R703.1. Water-resistive barrier materials shall comply with one of the following:

1.	No. 15 felt complying with ASTM D226, Type 1.

2.	ASTM E2568, Type 1 or 2.

3.	ASTM E331 in accordance with Section R703.1.1.

4.	Other approved materials in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

No.15 asphalt felt and water-resistive barriers complying with ASTM E2556 shall be applied horizontally, with the upper layer lapped over the lower layer not less than 2 inches (51 mm), and where joints occur, shall be lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm).

R703.3 Nominal thickness and attachments.

The nominal thickness and attachment of exterior wall coverings shall be in accordance with Table R703.3(1), the wall covering material requirements of this section, and the wall covering manufacturer’s installation instructions. Cladding attachment over foam sheathing shall comply with the additional requirements and limitations of Sections R703.15 through R703.17. Nominal material thicknesses in Table R703.3(1) are based on a maximum stud spacing of 16 inches (406 mm) on center. Where specified by the siding manufacturer’s instructions and supported by a test report or other documentation, attachment to studs with greater spacing is permitted. Fasteners for exterior wall coverings attached to wood framing shall be in accordance with Section R703.3.2 and Table R703.3(1). Exterior wall coverings shall be attached to cold-formed steel light frame construction in accordance with the cladding manufacturer’s installation instructions, the requirements of Table R703.3(1) using screw fasteners substituted for the nails specified in accordance with Table R703.3(2), or an approved design.

TABLE R703.3(1)

SIDING MINIMUM ATTACHMENT AND MINIMUM THICKNESS

SIDING MATERIAL	NOMINAL
THICKNESS
(inches)
	JOINT
TREATMENT
	TYPE OF SUPPORTS FOR THE SIDING MATERIAL AND FASTENERS
Wood or wood
structural
panel
sheathing
into stud
	Fiberboard
sheathing
into stud
	Gypsum
sheathing
into stud
	Foam plastic
sheathing
into studl
	Direct
to studs
	Number or
spacing of
fasteners

Anchored veneer: brick, concrete, masonry or stone (see Section R703.8)	2	Section R703.8	Section R703.8
Adhered veneer: concrete, stone or masonry (see Section R703.12)	—	Section R703.12	Section R703.12
Fiber cement siding	Panel siding (see Section R703.10.1)	5/16	Section R703.10.1	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	4d common
(11/2″ × 0.099″)
	6″ panel edges 12″ inter. sup.
Lap siding (see Section R703.10.2)	5/16	Section R703.10.2	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
	6d common
(2″ × 0.113″)
or 11 gage roofing nail	Note f
Hardboard panel siding (see Section R703.5)	7/16	—	0.120″ nail (shank) with 0.225″ head	0.120″ nail (shank) with 0.225″ head	0.120″ nail (shank) with 0.225″ head	0.120″ nail (shank) with 0.225″ head	0.120″ nail (shank) with 0.225″ head	6″ panel edges 12″ inter. sup.d
Hardboard lap siding (see Section R703.5)	7/16	Note e	0.099″ nail (shank) with 0.240″ head	0.099″ nail (shank) with 0.240″ head	0.099″ nail (shank) with 0.240″ head	0.099″ nail (shank) with 0.240″ head	0.099″ nail (shank) with 0.240″ head	Same as stud spacing 2 per bearing
Horizontal aluminuma	Without
insulation
	0.019b	Lap	Siding nail
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nailh
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Not allowed	Same as stud spacing
0.024	Lap	Siding nail
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nailh
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Not allowed
With
insulation
	0.019	Lap	Siding nail
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
21/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
21/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nailh
11/2″ × 0.120″
	Siding nail
11/2″ × 0.120″

Insulated vinyl sidingj	0.035
(vinyl
siding
layer only)
	Lap	0.120 nail (shank) with a 0.313 head or 16-gage crownh, i	0.120 nail (shank) with a 0.313 head or 16-gage crownh	0.120 nail (shank) with a 0.313 head or 16-gage crownh	0.120 nail (shank) with a 0.313 head Section R703.11.2	Not allowed	16 inches on center or specified by manufacturer instructions,test report or other sections of this code
Polypropylene sidingk	Not
applicable
	Lap	Section 703.14.1	Section 703.14.1	Section 703.14.1	Section 703.14.1	Not
allowed
	As specified by the manufacturer instructions,test report or other sections of this code
Steelc	29 ga.	Lap	Siding nail (13/4″ × 0.113″)	Siding nail (23/4″ × 0.113″)	Siding nail (21/2″ × 0.113″)	Siding nail (13/4″ × 0.113″)	Not allowed	Same as stud spacing
Vinyl siding (see Section R703.11)	0.035	Lap	See Section R703.11.
Wood siding (see Section R703.5)	Wood rustic, drop	3/8 min.	Lap	6d box or siding nail
(2″ × 0.099″)
	6d box or siding nail
(2″ × 0.099″)
	6d box or siding nail
(2″ × 0.099″)
	6d box or siding nail
(2″ × 0.099″)
	8d box or siding nail
(21/2″ × 0.113″)
	Face nailing up to 6″ widths, 1 nail per bearing; 8″ widths and over, 2 nails per bearing
Shiplap	19/32 average	Lap
Bevel	7/16
Butt tip	3/16	Lap
Wood structural panel ANSI/APA PRP 210 siding (exterior grade) (see Section R703.5)	3/8 – 1/2	Note e	2″ × 0.099″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	2″ × 0.099″
siding nail
	6″ panel edges 12″ inter. sup.
Wood structural panel lap siding (see Section R703.5)	3/8 – 1/2	Note e
Note g
	2″ × 0.099″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	21/2″ × 0.113″
siding nail
	2″ × 0.099″
siding nail
	8″ along bottom edge

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Aluminum nails shall be used to attach aluminum siding.

b.	Aluminum (0.019 inch) shall be unbacked only where the maximum panel width is 10 inches and the maximum flat area is 8 inches. The tolerance for aluminum siding shall be +0.002 inch of the nominal dimension.

c.	Shall be of approved type.

d.	Where used to resist shear forces, the spacing must be 4 inches at panel edges and 8 inches on interior supports.

e.	Vertical end joints shall occur at studs and shall be covered with a joint cover or shall be caulked.

f.	Face nailing: one 6d common nail through the overlapping planks at each stud. Concealed nailing: one 11-gage 11/2 -inch-long galv. roofing nail through the top edge of each plank at each stud in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

g.	Vertical joints, if staggered, shall be permitted to be away from studs if applied over wood structural panel sheathing.

h.	Minimum fastener length must be sufficient to penetrate sheathing other nailable substrate and framing a total of a minimum of 11/4 inches or in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

i.	Where specified by the manufacturer’s instructions and supported by a test report, fasteners are permitted to penetrate into or fully through nailable sheathing or other nailable substrate of minimum thickness specified by the instructions or test report, without penetrating into framing.

j.	Insulated vinyl siding shall comply with ASTM D7793.

k.	Polypropylene siding shall comply with ASTM D7254.

l.	Cladding attachment over foam sheathing shall comply with the additional requirements and limitations of Sections R703.15, R703.16 and R703.17.

TABLE R703.3(2)

SCREW FASTENER SUBSTITUTION FOR SIDING ATTACHMENT TO COLD-FORMED STEEL LIGHT FRAME CONSTRUCTIONa, b, c, d, e

NAIL DIAMETER
PER TABLE R703.3(1)
	MINIMUM SCREW
FASTENER SIZE

0.099″	No. 6
0.113″	No. 7
0.120″	No. 8

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm

a.	Screws shall comply with ASTM C1513 and shall penetrate a minimum of three threads through minimum 33 mil (20 gage) cold-formed steel frame construction.

b.	Screw head diameter shall be not less than the nail head diameter required by Table R703.3(1).

c.	Number and spacing of screw fasteners shall comply with Table R703.3(1).

d.	Pan head, hex washer head, modified truss head or other screw head types with a flat attachment surface under the head shall be used for vinyl siding attachment.

e.	Aluminum siding shall not be fastened directly to cold-formed steel light frame construction.

R703.3.1 Wind limitations.

Where the design wind pressure exceeds 30 psf or where the limits of Table R703.3.1 are exceeded, the attachment of wall coverings shall be designed to resist the component and cladding loads specified in Table R301.2(2), adjusted for height and exposure in accordance with Table R301.2(3). For the determination of wall covering attachment, component and cladding loads shall be determined using an effective wind area of 10 square feet (0.93 m2).

TABLE R703.3.1

LIMITS FOR ATTACHMENT PER TABLE R703.3(1)

MAXIMUM MEAN ROOF HEIGHT
Ultimate Wind Speed
(mph 3-second gust)
	Exposure
B	C	D
115	NL	50′	20′
120	NL	30′	DR
130	60′	15′	DR
140	35′	DR	DR

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

NL = Not limited by Table R703.3.1, DR = Design required.

R703.3.2 Fasteners.

Exterior wall coverings shall be securely fastened with aluminum, galvanized, stainless steel or rust-preventative coated nails in accordance with Table R703.3(1) or with other approved corrosion-resistant fasteners in accordance with the wall covering manufacturer’s installation instructions. Nails shall comply with ASTM F1667. Nails shall be T-head, modified round head, or round head with smooth or deformed shanks. Where fiberboard, gypsum, or foam plastic sheathing backing is used, nails shall be driven into the studs. Where wood or wood structural panel sheathing is used, fasteners shall be driven into studs unless otherwise permitted to be driven into sheathing in accordance with either the siding manufacturer’s installation instructions or Table R703.3.2.

TABLE R703.3.2

OPTIONAL SIDING ATTACHMENT SCHEDULE FOR FASTENERS WHERE NO STUD PENETRATION NECESSARY

APPLICATION	NUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENER	SPACING OF FASTENERSb
Exterior wall covering (weighing 3 psf or less) attachment
to wood structural panel sheathing, either direct or over
foam sheathing a maximum of 2 inches thick.a
Note: Does not apply to vertical siding.
	Ring shank roofing nail (0.120″ min. dia.)	12″ o.c.
Ring shank nail (0.148″ min. dia.)	15″ o.c.
No. 6 screw (0.138″ min. dia.)	12″ o.c.
No. 8 screw (0.164″ min. dia.)	16″ o.c.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Fastener length shall be sufficient to penetrate back side of the wood structural panel sheathing by at least 1/4 inch. The wood structural panel sheathing shall be not less than 7/16 inch in thickness.

b.	Spacing of fasteners is per 12 inches of siding width. For other siding widths, multiply “Spacing of Fasteners” above by a factor of 12/s, where “s” is the siding width in inches. Fastener spacing shall never be greater than the manufacturer’s minimum recommendations.

R703.3.3 Minimum fastener length and penetration.

Fasteners shall have the greater of the minimum length specified in Table R703.3(1) or as required to provide a minimum penetration into framing as follows:

1.	Fasteners for horizontal aluminum siding, steel siding, particleboard panel siding, wood structural panel siding in accordance with ANSI/APA-PRP 210, fiber-cement panel siding and fiber-cement lap siding installed over foam plastic sheathing shall penetrate not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) into framing or shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

2.	Fasteners for hardboard panel and lap siding shall penetrate not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) into framing.

3.	Fasteners for vinyl siding and insulated vinyl siding shall be installed in accordance with Section R703.11 or R703.13.

4.	Fasteners for vertical or horizontal wood siding shall penetrate not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) into studs, studs and wood sheathing combined, or blocking.

5.	Fasteners for siding material installed over foam plastic sheathing shall have sufficient length to accommodate foam plastic sheathing thickness and to penetrate framing or sheathing and framing combined, as specified in Items 1 through 4.

R703.3.4

Fasteners for polypropylene siding shall be installed in accordance with Section R703.14.

R703.3.5 Siding clearance at wall and adjacent surfaces.

Unless otherwise specified by the material manufacturer, or this code, siding shall have a clearance of at least 6 inches (152 mm) from grade and at least 1/2 inch (13 mm) from other adjacent surfaces (decks, roofs, slabs).

R703.4 Flashing.

Approved metal flashing, vinyl flashing, self-adhered membranes and mechanically attached flexible flashing shall be applied shingle-fashion or in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Metal flashing shall be corrosion resistant. Fluid-applied membranes used as flashing shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. All flashing shall be applied in a manner to prevent the entry of water into the wall cavity or penetration of water to the building structural framing components. Self-adhered membranes used as flashing shall comply with AAMA 711. All exterior fenestration products shall be sealed at the juncture with the building wall with a sealant complying with AAMA 800 or ASTM C920 Class 25 Grade NS or greater for proper joint expansion and contraction, ASTM C1281, AAMA 812, or other approved standard as appropriate for the type of sealant. Fluid-applied membranes used as flashing in exterior walls shall comply with AAMA 714. The flashing shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall finish. Approved flashings shall be installed at the following locations:

1.	Exterior window and door openings. Flashing at exterior window and door openings shall extend to the surface of the exterior wall finish or to the water-resistive barrier complying with Section 703.2 for subsequent drainage. Mechanically attached flexible flashings shall comply with AAMA 712. Flashing at exterior window and door openings shall be installed in accordance with one or more of the following:

1.1.	The fenestration manufacturer’s installation and flashing instructions, or for applications not addressed in the fenestration manufacturer’s instructions, in accordance with the flashing or water-resistive barrier manufacturer’s instructions. Where flashing instructions or details are not provided, pan flashing shall be installed at the sill of exterior window and door openings. Pan flashing shall be sealed or sloped in such a manner as to direct water to the surface of the exterior wall finish or to the water-resistive barrier for subsequent drainage. Openings using pan flashing shall incorporate flashing or protection at the head and sides.

1.2.	In accordance with the flashing design or method of a registered design professional.

1.3.	In accordance with other approved methods.

1.4	In accordance with FMA/AAMA 100, FMA/AAMA 200, FMA/WDMA 250, FMA/AAMA/WDMA 300 or FMA/AAMA/WDMA 400, or FMA/AAMA/WDMA 2710.

2.	At the intersection of chimneys or other masonry construction with frame or stucco walls, with projecting lips on both sides under stucco copings.

3.	Under and at the ends of masonry, wood or metal copings and sills.

4.	Continuously above all projecting wood trim.

5.	Where exterior porches, decks or stairs attach to a wall or floor assembly of wood-frame construction.

6.	At wall and roof intersections.

7.	At built-in gutters.

R703.5 Wood, hardboard and wood structural panel siding.

Wood, hardboard, and wood structural panel siding shall be installed in accordance with this section and Table R703.3(1). Hardboard siding shall comply with CPA/ANSI A135.6.

R703.5.1 Vertical wood siding.

Wood siding applied vertically shall be nailed to horizontal nailing strips or blocking set not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center.

R703.5.2 Panel siding.

3/8-inch (9.5 mm) wood structural panel siding shall not be applied directly to studs spaced more than 16 inches (406 mm) on center where long dimension is parallel to studs. Wood structural panel siding 7/16 inch (11.1 mm) or thinner shall not be applied directly to studs spaced more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center. The stud spacing shall not exceed the panel span rating provided by the manufacturer unless the panels are installed with the face grain perpendicular to the studs or over sheathing approved for that stud spacing.

Joints in wood, hardboard or wood structural panel siding shall be made as follows unless otherwise approved. Vertical joints in panel siding shall occur over framing members, unless wood or wood structural panel sheathing is used, and shall be shiplapped or covered with a batten. Horizontal joints in panel siding shall be lapped not less than 1 inch (25 mm) or shall be shiplapped or flashed with Z-flashing and occur over solid blocking, wood or wood structural panel sheathing.

R703.5.3 Horizontal wood siding.

Horizontal lap siding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Where there are no recommendations the siding shall be lapped not less than 1 inch (25 mm), or 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) if rabbeted, and shall have the ends caulked, covered with a batten or sealed and installed over a strip of flashing.

R703.6 Wood shakes and shingles.

Wood shakes and shingles shall conform to CSSB Grading Rules for Wood Shakes and Shingles.

R703.6.1 Application.

Wood shakes or shingles shall be applied either single course or double course over nominal 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) wood-based sheathing or to furring strips over 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) nominal nonwood sheathing. A water-resistive barrier shall be provided over all sheathing, with horizontal overlaps in the membrane of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and vertical overlaps of not less than 6 inches (152 mm). Where horizontal furring strips are used, they shall be 1 inch by 3 inches or 1 inch by 4 inches (25 mm by 76 mm or 25 mm by 102 mm) and shall be fastened to the studs with minimum 7d or 8d box nails and shall be spaced a distance on center equal to the actual weather exposure of the shakes or shingles, not to exceed the maximum exposure specified in Table R703.6.1. When installing shakes or shingles over a nonpermeable water-resistive barrier, furring strips shall be placed first vertically over the barrier and in addition, horizontal furring strips shall be fastened to the vertical furring strips prior to attaching the shakes or shingles to the horizontal furring strips. The spacing between adjacent shingles to allow for expansion shall be 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) to 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) apart, and between adjacent shakes shall be 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) to 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) apart. The offset spacing between joints in adjacent courses shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm).

TABLE R703.6.1

MAXIMUM WEATHER EXPOSURE FOR WOOD SHAKES AND SHINGLES ON EXTERIOR WALLSa, b, c

(Dimensions are in inches)

LENGTH	EXPOSURE
FOR SINGLE COURSE
	EXPOSURE
FOR DOUBLE COURSE

Shinglesa
16	7	12b
18	8	14c
24	101/2	16d
Shakesa
18	8	14
24	101/2	18

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Dimensions given are for No. 1 grade.

b.	A maximum 9-inch exposure is permitted for No. 2 grade.

c.	A maximum 10-inch exposure is permitted for No. 2 grade.

d.	A maximum 14-inch exposure is permitted for No. 2 grade.

R703.6.2 Weather exposure.

The maximum weather exposure for shakes and shingles shall not exceed that specified in Table 703.6.1.

R703.6.3 Attachment.

Wood shakes or shingles shall be installed according to this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. Where wind pressures determined in accordance with Table R301.2(2) do not exceed 30 psf, each shake or shingle shall be held in place by two stainless steel Type 304, Type 316 or hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized corrosion-resistant box nails in accordance with Table R703.6.3(1) or R703.6.3(2). The hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanizing shall conform to minimum standard ASTM A153D, 1.0 ounce per square foot. In single-course application, the fasteners shall be concealed by the course above and shall be driven approximately 1 inch (25 mm) above the butt line of the succeeding course and 3/4 inch (19 mm) from the edge. In double-course applications, the exposed shake or shingle shall be face-nailed with two fasteners, driven approximately 2 inches (51 mm) above the butt line and 3/4 inch (19 mm) from each edge. Fasteners installed within 15 miles (24 km) of salt water coastal areas shall be stainless steel Type 316. Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated shakes or shingles in accordance with Section R902 or pressure-impregnated-preservative-treated shakes or shingles in accordance with AWPA U1 shall be stainless steel Type 316. The fasteners shall penetrate the sheathing or furring strips by not less than 1/2 inch (13 mm) and shall not be overdriven. Fasteners for untreated (natural) and treated products shall comply with ASTM F1667.

TABLE R703.6.3(1)

SINGLE COURSE SIDEWALL FASTENERS

PRODUCT TYPE	NAIL TYPE AND MINIMUM LENGTH
(inches)
	MINIMUM HEAD DIAMETER
(inches)
	MINIMUM SHANK THICKNESS
(inches)

R & R and sanded shingles	Type		
16″ and 18″ shingles	3d box 11/4	0.19	0.08
24″ shingles	4d box 11/2	0.19	0.08
Grooved shingles	Type		
16″ and 18″ shingles	3d box 11/4	0.19	0.08
24″ shingles	4d box 11/2	0.19	0.08
Split and sawn shakes	Type		
18″ straight-split shakes	5d box 13/4	0.19	0.08
18″ and 24″ handsplit shakes	6d box 2	0.19	0.0915
24″ tapersplit shakes	5d box 13/4	0.19	0.08
18″ and 24″ tapersawn shakes	6d box 2	0.19	0.0915

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

TABLE R703.6.3(2)

DOUBLE COURSE SIDEWALL FASTENERS

PRODUCT TYPE	NAIL TYPE AND MINIMUM LENGTH	MINIMUM HEAD DIAMETER
(inches)
	MINIMUM SHANK THICKNESS
(inches)

R & R and sanded shingles
16,″ 8″ and 24″ shingles	5d box 13/4 or same size casing nails	0.19	0.08
Grooved shingles
16,″ 18″ and 24″shingles	5d box 13/4	0.19	0.08
Split and sawn shakes
18″ straight-split shakes	7d box 21/4 or 8d 21/2	0.19	0.099
18″ and 24″ handsplit shakes	7d box 21/4 or 8d 21/2	0.19	0.099
24″ tapersplit shakes	7d box 21/4 or 8d 21/2	0.19	0.099
18″ and 24″ tapersawn shakes	7d box 21/4 or 8d 21/2	0.19	0.099

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

R703.6.4 Bottom courses.

The bottom courses shall be doubled.

R703.7 Exterior plaster.

Installation of these materials shall be in compliance with ASTM C926, ASTM C1063 or ASTM C1787 and the provisions of this code.

R703.7.1 Lath.

Lath and lath attachments shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Expanded metal or woven wire lath shall be attached with 11/2-inch-long (38 mm), 11 gage nails having a 7/16-inch (11.1 mm) head, or 11/2-inch-long (22.2 mm), 16 gage staples, spaced in accordance with ASTM C1063 or C1787, or as otherwise approved.

R703.7.2 Plaster.

Plastering with cement plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over any type of code-approved lath and shall be not less than two coats where directly applied over masonry, concrete, clay brick, stone or tile. If the plaster surface is completely covered by veneer or other facing material or is completely concealed, plaster application need be only two coats, provided the total thickness is as set forth in Table R702.1(1).

On wood-frame construction with an on-grade floor slab system, exterior plaster shall be applied to cover, but not extend below, lath, paper and screed. Cement plaster shall be in accordance with ASTM C926. Cement materials shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1.	Masonry cement conforming to ASTM C91 Type M, S or N.

2.	Portland cement conforming to ASTM C150 Type I, II or III.

3.	Blended hydraulic cement conforming to ASTM C595 Type IP, IS(S<70), IL or IT(S<70).

4.	Hydraulic cement conforming to ASTM C1157 Type GU, HE, MS, HS or MH.

5.	Plaster (stucco) cement conforming to ASTM C1328.

The proportion of aggregate to cementitious materials shall be as set forth in Table R702.1(3).

R703.7.2.1 Weep screeds.

A minimum 0.019-inch (0.5 mm) (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage), corrosion-resistant weep screed or plastic weep screed, with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2 inches (89 mm) shall be provided at or below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with ASTM C926. The weep screed shall be placed not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth or 2 inches (51 mm) above paved areas and shall be of a type that will allow trapped water to drain to the exterior of the building. The weather-resistant barrier shall lap the attachment flange. The exterior lath shall cover and terminate on the attachment flange of the weep screed.

R703.7.3 Water-resistive barriers.

Water-resistive barriers shall be installed as required in Section R703.2 and, where applied over wood-based sheathing, shall include a water-resistive vapor-permeable barrier with a performance at least equivalent to two layers of Grade D paper. The individual layers shall be installed independently such that each layer provides a separate continuous plane and any flashing (installed in accordance with Section R703.4) intended to drain to the water-resistive barrier is directed between the layers.

Exception: Where the water-resistive barrier that is applied over wood-based sheathing has a water resistance equal to or greater than that of 60-minute Grade D paper and is separated from the stucco by an intervening, substantially nonwater-absorbing layer or designed drainage space.

R703.7.4 Application.

Each coat shall be kept in a moist condition for at least 48 hours prior to application of the next coat.

Exception: Applications installed in accordance with ASTM C926 including the reference in ASTM C926 Section 8 to Section X1.4.2 of the Appendix.

R703.7.5 Curing.

The finish coat for two-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than seven days after application of the first coat. For three-coat cement plaster, the second coat shall not be applied sooner than 48 hours after application of the first coat. The finish coat for three-coat cement plaster shall not be applied sooner than seven days after application of the second coat.

Exception: Applications installed in accordance with ASTM C926 including the reference in ASTM C926 Section 8 to Section X1.4.2 of the Appendix.

R703.8 Anchored stone and masonry veneer, general.

Anchored stone and masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with this chapter, Table R703.3(1) and Figure R703.8. These veneers installed over a backing of wood or cold-formed steel shall be limited to the first story above grade plane and shall not exceed 5 inches (127 mm) in thickness. See Section R602.3 for wall bracing requirements for masonry veneer for wood-framed construction and Section R603.1 for wall bracing requirements for masonry veneer for cold-formed steel construction. The provisions of this section are limited to areas where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, is less than 165 mph. Where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, equals or exceeds 165 mph, anchored stone and masonry veneer shall comply with TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5.

Exceptions:

1.	Exterior stone or masonry veneer, as specified in Table R703.8(1), with a backing of wood or steel framing shall be permitted to the height specified in Table R703.8(1) above a noncombustible foundation.

2.	Reserved.

TABLE R703.8(2) STONE OR MASONRY VENEER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS, ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS, SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORIES D0, D1 AND D2.

Reserved.

For SI: 1 inch = 24.5 mm.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	See Sections R703.8.5, R703.8.6 and R703.4.

b.	See Sections R703.2 and R703.8.4.

c.	See Section R703.8.4.2 and Table R703.8.4(1).

d.	See Section R703.8.3.

e.	Figure R703.8 illustrates typical construction details for a masonry veneer wall. For the actual mandatory requirements of this code, see the indicated sections of text. Other details of masonry veneer wall construction shall be permitted provided the requirements of the indicated sections of text are met.

FIGURE R703.8

TYPICAL MASONRY VENEER WALL DETAILSe

TABLE R703.8(1)

STONE OR MASONRY VENEER LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS, WOOD OR STEEL FRAMING

NUMBER OF
WOOD- OR STEEL-FRAMED
STORIES	MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF VENEER
ABOVE NONCOMBUSTIBLE
FOUNDATIONa (feet)	MAXIMUM NOMINAL
THICKNESS OF VENEER
(inches)	MAXIMUM WEIGHT
OF VENEER (psf)b
	WOOD- OR
STEEL-FRAMED
STORY
Steel: 1 or 2
Wood: 1, 2 or 3
	30	5	50	all

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.479 kPa.

a.	An additional 8 feet is permitted for gable end walls. See also story height limitations of Section R301.3.

b.	Maximum weight is installed weight and includes weight of mortar, grout, lath and other materials used for installation. Where veneer is placed on both faces of a wall, the combined weight shall not exceed that specified in this table.

R703.8.1 Interior veneer support.

Veneers used as interior wall finishes shall be permitted to be supported on wood or cold-formed steel floors that are designed to support the loads imposed.

R703.8.2 Exterior veneer support.

Exterior masonry veneers having an installed weight of 40 pounds per square foot (195 kg/m2) or less shall be permitted to be supported on wood or cold-formed steel construction. Where masonry veneer supported by wood or cold-formed steel construction adjoins masonry veneer supported by the foundation, there shall be a movement joint between the veneer supported by the wood or cold-formed steel construction and the veneer supported by the foundation. The wood or cold-formed steel construction supporting the masonry veneer shall be designed to limit the deflection to 1/600 of the span for the supporting members. The design of the wood or cold-formed steel construction shall consider the weight of the veneer and any other loads.

R703.8.2.1 Support by steel angle.

A minimum 6-inch by 4-inch by 5/16-inch (152 mm by 102 mm by 8 mm) steel angle, with the long leg placed vertically, shall be anchored to double 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) wood studs or double 350S162 cold-formed steel studs at a maximum on-center spacing of 16 inches (406 mm). Anchorage of the steel angle at every double stud spacing shall be not less than two 7/16-inch-diameter (11 mm) by 4-inch (102 mm) lag screws for wood construction or two 7/16-inch (11.1 mm) bolts with washers for cold-formed steel construction. The steel angle shall have a minimum clearance to underlying construction of 1/16 inch (1.6 mm). Not less than two-thirds the width of the masonry veneer thickness shall bear on the steel angle. Flashing and weep holes shall be located in the masonry veneer in accordance with Figure R703.8.2.1. The maximum height of masonry veneer above the steel angle support shall be 12 feet 8 inches (3861 mm). The airspace separating the masonry veneer from the wood backing shall be in accordance with Sections R703.8.4 and R703.8.4.2. The method of support for the masonry veneer on wood construction shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R703.8.2.1.

The maximum slope of the roof construction without stops shall be 7:12. Roof construction with slopes greater than 7:12 but not more than 12:12 shall have stops of a minimum 3-inch by 3-inch by 1/4-inch (76 mm by 76 mm by 6.4 mm) steel plate welded to the angle at 24 inches (610 mm) on center along the angle or as approved by the building official.

FIGURE R703.8.2.1

EXTERIOR MASONRY VENEER SUPPORT BY STEEL ANGLES

R703.8.2.2 Support by roof construction.

A steel angle shall be placed directly on top of the roof construction. The roof supporting construction for the steel angle shall consist of not fewer than three 2-inch by 6-inch (51 mm by 152 mm) wood members for wood construction or three 550S162 cold-formed steel members for cold-formed steel light frame construction. A wood member abutting the vertical wall stud construction shall be anchored with not fewer than three 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) diameter by 5-inch (127 mm) lag screws to every wood stud spacing. Each additional wood roof member shall be anchored by the use of two 10d nails at every wood stud spacing. A cold-formed steel member abutting the vertical wall stud shall be anchored with not fewer than nine No. 8 screws to every cold-formed steel stud. Each additional cold-formed steel roof member shall be anchored to the adjoining roof member using two No. 8 screws at every stud spacing. Not less than two-thirds the width of the masonry veneer thickness shall bear on the steel angle. Flashing and weep holes shall be located in the masonry veneer wythe in accordance with Figure R703.8.2.2. The maximum height of the masonry veneer above the steel angle support shall be 12 feet 8 inches (38.61 mm). The airspace separating the masonry veneer from the wood backing shall be in accordance with Sections R703.8.4 and R703.8.4.2. The support for the masonry veneer shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R703.8.2.2.

The maximum slope of the roof construction without stops shall be 7:12. Roof construction with slopes greater than 7:12 but not more than 12:12 shall have stops of a minimum 3-inch by 3-inch by 1/4-inch (76 mm by 76 mm by 6.4 mm) steel plate welded to the angle at 24 inches (610 mm) on center along the angle or as approved by the building official.

FIGURE R703.8.2.2

EXTERIOR MASONRY VENEER SUPPORT BY ROOF MEMBERS

R703.8.3 Lintels.

Masonry veneer shall not support any vertical load other than the dead load of the veneer above. Veneer above openings shall be supported on lintels of non-combustible materials. The lintels shall have a length of bearing not less than 4 inches (102 mm). Steel lintels shall be shop coated with a rust-inhibitive paint, except for lintels made of corrosion-resistant steel or steel treated with coatings to provide corrosion resistance. Construction of openings shall comply with either Section R703.8.3.1 or 703.8.3.2.

R703.8.3.1 Allowable span.

The allowable span shall not exceed the values set forth in Table R703.8.3.1.

TABLE R703.8.3.1

ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR LINTELS SUPPORTING MASONRY VENEERa, b, c, d

SIZE OF STEEL ANGLEa, c, d
(inches)
	NO STORY ABOVE	ONE STORY ABOVE	TWO STORIES ABOVE	NO. OF 1/2-INCH OR EQUIVALENT
REINFORCING BARS IN
REINFORCED LINTELb, d

3 × 3 × 1/4	6′-0″	4′-6″	3′-0″	1
4 × 3 × 1/4	8′-0″	6′-0″	4′-6″	1
5 × 31/2 × 5/16	10′-0″	8′-0″	6′-0″	2
6 × 31/2 × 5/16	14′-0″	9′-6″	7′-0″	2
2-6 × 31/2 × 5/16	20′-0″	12′-0″	9′-6″	4

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

a.	Long leg of the angle shall be placed in a vertical position.

b.	Depth of reinforced lintels shall be not less than 8 inches and all cells of hollow masonry lintels shall be grouted solid. Reinforcing bars shall extend not less than 8 inches into the support.

c.	Steel members indicated are adequate typical examples; other steel members meeting structural design requirements shall be permitted to be used.

d.	Either steel angle or reinforced lintel shall span opening.

R703.8.3.2 Maximum span.

The allowable span shall not exceed 18 feet 3 inches (5562 mm) and shall be constructed to comply with Figure R703.8.3.2 and the following:

1.	Provide a minimum length of 18 inches (457 mm) of masonry veneer on each side of opening as shown in Figure R703.8.3.2.

2.	Provide a minimum 5-inch by 31/2-inch by 5/16-inch (127 mm by 89 mm by 7.9 mm) steel angle above the opening and shore for a minimum of 7 days after installation.

3.	Provide double-wire joint reinforcement extending 12 inches (305 mm) beyond each side of the opening. Lap splices of joint reinforcement not less than 12 inches (305 mm). Comply with one of the following:

3.1.	Double-wire joint reinforcement shall be 3/16-inch (4.8 mm) diameter and shall be placed in the first two bed joints above the opening.

3.2.	Double-wire joint reinforcement shall be 9 gauge (0.144 inch or 3.66 mm diameter) and shall be placed in the first three bed joints above the opening.

4.	Provide the height of masonry veneer above opening, in accordance with Table R703.8.3.2.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

FIGURE R703.8.3.2

MASONRY VENEER OPENING

TABLE R703.8.3.2

HEIGHT OF MASONRY VENEER ABOVE OPENING

MINIMUM HEIGHT OF MASONRY
VENEER ABOVE OPENING (INCH)
	MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF MASONRY
VENEER ABOVE OPENING (FEET)

13	< 5
24	5 to < 12
60	12 to height above support
allowed by Section R703.8

For SI:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm.

R703.8.4 Anchorage.

Masonry veneer shall be anchored directly to the supporting wall studs with corrosion-resistant metal ties embedded in mortar or grout and extending into the veneer a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm), with not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) mortar or grout cover to outside face. Masonry veneer shall conform to Table R703.8.4(1).Where the masonry veneer tie attachment is fastened to wood structural panel not less than 7 /16 performance category through insulating sheathing not greater than 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness, see Table R703.8.4(2). Where Table R703.8.4(2) is used, attachment to the wood studs behind the sheathing is not required.

TABLE R703.8.4(1)

TIE ATTACHMENT AND AIRSPACE REQUIREMENTS

BACKING AND TIE	MINIMUM TIE	MINIMUM TIE
FASTENERa
	AIRSPACEb
Wood stud backing with
corrugated sheet metal
	22 US gage
(0.0299 in.) × 7/8 in. wide
	8d common nail
(21/2 in.
× 0.131 in.)	Nominal 1 in. between
sheathing and veneer

Wood stud backing with
adjustable metal strand wire
	W1.7 (No. 9 US gage; 0.148 in. dia.)
with hook embedded in mortar joint
d	8d common nail
(21/2 in. × 0.131 in.)
	Minimum nominal
1 in. between sheathing
and veneer	Maximum 45/8 in.
between backing
and veneer
Wood stud backing with
adjustable metal strand wire
	W2.8 (0.187 in. dia.)
with hook embedded
in mortar jointe, f	8d common nail
(21/2 in. × 0.131 in.)
	Greater than 45/8 in. between backing and veneer	Maximum 65/8 in. between backing and veneer
Cold-formed steel stud
backing with adjustable
metal strand wire	W1.7 (No. 9 US gage; 0.148 in. dia.)
with hook embedded in mortar jointd
	No. 10 screw extending through
the steel framing a minimum of
three exposed threads	Minimum nominal
1 in. between sheathing
and veneer	Maximum 45/8 in.
between backing
and veneer
Cold-formed steel stud
backing with adjustable
metal strand wire	W2.8 (0.148 in. dia.)
with hook embedded
in mortar jointe, f	No. 10 screw extending through
the steel framing a minimum of
three exposed threads	Greater than 45/8 in. between
backing and veneer
	Maximum 65/8 in. betweenbacking and veneer

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	All fasteners shall have rust-inhibitive coating suitable for the installation in which they are being used, or be manufactured from material not susceptible to corrosion.

b.	An airspace that provides drainage shall be permitted to contain some mortar from construction.

c.	Reserved.

d.	Adjustable tie pintle shall include a minimum of 1 pintle leg of wire size W2.8 (MW18) with a maximum offset of 11/4 in.

e.	Adjustable tie pintle shall include a minimum of 2 pintle legs with a maximum offset of 11/4 in. Distance between inside face of brick and end of pintle shallbe a maximum of 2 in.

f.	Adjustable tie backing attachment components shall consist of one of the following: eyes with minimum wire W2.8 (MW18), barrel with minimum 1/4 in.outside dia., or plate with minimum thickness of 0.074 in. and minimum width of 11/4 in.

TABLE R703.8.4(2)

REQUIRED BRICK TIE SPACING FOR DIRECT APPLICATION TO WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHINGa, b, c

FASTENER
TYPEd
	SIZE
(DIA. OR
SCREW #)
	REQUIRED BRICK-TIE SPACING (VERTICAL-TIE SPACING/HORIZONTAL-TIE SPACING) (inches/inches)
110 mph V Ultimate	115 mph V Ultimate	130 mph V Ultimate	140 mph V Ultimate
Zone 5,
Exposure B
	Zone 5,
Exposure C
	Zone 5,
Exposure D
	Zone 5,
Exposure B
	Zone 5,
Exposure C
	Zone 5,
Exposure D
	Zone 5,
Exposure B
	Zone 5,
Exposure C
	Zone 5,
Exposure D
	Zone 5,
Exposure B
	Zone 5,
Exposure C
	Zone 5,
Exposure D

Ring
Shank
Nails
	0.091	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	12/12	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	12/12	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	12/12	—	12/12	—	—
0.148	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	12/12
Screws	#6	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	12/12
#8	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12

#10	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/12,
12/16,
12/12

#14	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	24/16,
16/24,
16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12
	16/16,
16/12,
12/16,
12/12

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mph = 0.447 m/s.

a.	This table is based on attachment of brick ties directly to wood structural panel sheathing only. Additional attachment of the brick tie to lumber framing is not required. The brick ties shall be permitted to be placed over any insulating sheathing, not to exceed 2 inches in thickness. Wood structural panel sheathing shall be a minimum 7/16 performance category. The table is based on a building height of 30 feet or less.

b.	Wood structural panels shall have a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater in accordance with NDS.

c.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

d.	Fasteners shall be sized such that the tip of the fastener passes completely through the wood structural panel sheathing by not less than 1/4 inch.

R703.8.4.1 Size and spacing.

Veneer ties, if strand wire, shall be not less in thickness than No. 9 US gage [(0.148 inch) (4 mm)] wire and shall have a hook embedded in the mortar joint, or if sheet metal, shall be not less than No. 22 US gage by [(0.0299 inch) (0.76 mm)] 7/8 inch (22 mm) corrugated. Each tie shall support not more than 2.67 square feet (0.25 m2) of wall area and shall be spaced not more than 32 inches (813 mm) on center horizontally and 24 inches (635 mm) on center vertically.

Exceptions:

1.	Reserved.

2.	Where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, exceeds 140 mph, each tie shall support not more than 1.8 square feet (0.167 m2) of wall area and anchors shall be spaced at a maximum 18 inches (457 mm) horizontally and vertically.

R703.8.4.1.1 Veneer ties around wall openings.

Additional metal ties shall be provided around wall openings greater than 16 inches (406 mm) in either dimension. Metal ties around the perimeter of openings shall be spaced not more than 3 feet (9144 mm) on center and placed within 12 inches (305 mm) of the wall opening.

R703.8.4.2 Grout fill.

As an alternative to the airspace required by Table R703.8.4(1), grout shall be permitted to fill the airspace. Where the airspace is filled with grout, a water-resistive barrier is required over studs or sheathing. Where the airspace is filled, replacing the sheathing and water-resistive barrier with a wire mesh and approved water-resistive barrier or an approved water-resistive barrier-backed reinforcement attached directly to the studs is permitted.

R703.8.5 Flashing.

Flashing shall be located beneath the first course of masonry above finished ground level above the foundation wall or slab and at other points of support, including structural floors, shelf angles and lintels where masonry veneers are designed in accordance with Section R703.8. See Section R703.4 for additional requirements.

R703.8.6 Weepholes.

Weepholes shall be provided in the outside wythe of masonry walls at a maximum spacing of 33 inches (838 mm) on center. Weepholes shall be not less than 3/16 inch (5 mm) in diameter. Weepholes shall be located immediately above the flashing.

R703.9 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS)/EIFS with drainage.

Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) shall be designed or tested to meet the wind pressures specified in Table R301.2(2) and shall comply with this chapter and Section R703.9.1. EIFS with drainage shall comply with this chapter and Section R703.9.2.

R703.9.1 Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS).

EIFS shall comply with the following:

1.	ASTM E2568.

2.	EIFS shall be limited to applications over substrates of concrete or masonry wall assemblies.

3.	Flashing of EIFS shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section R703.4.

4.	EIFS shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

5.	EIFS shall terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the finished ground level.

6.	Decorative trim shall not be face-nailed through the EIFS.

R703.9.2 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS) with drainage.

EIFS with drainage shall comply with the following:

1.	ASTM E2568.

2.	EIFS with drainage shall be required over all wall assemblies with the exception of substrates of concrete or masonry wall assemblies.

3.	EIFS with drainage shall have an average minimum drainage efficiency of 90 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM E2273.

4.	The water-resistive barrier shall comply with Section R703.2 or ASTM E2570.

5.	The water-resistive barrier shall be applied between the EIFS and the wall sheathing.

6.	Flashing of EIFS with drainage shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section R703.4.

7.	EIFS with drainage shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

8.	EIFS with drainage shall terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the finished ground level.

9.	Decorative trim shall not be face-nailed through the EIFS with drainage.

R703.10 Fiber cement siding.
R703.10.1 Panel siding.

Fiber-cement panels shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2. Panels shall be installed with the long dimension either parallel or perpendicular to framing. Vertical and horizontal joints shall occur over framing members and shall be protected with caulking, or with battens or flashing, or be vertical or horizontal shiplap, or otherwise designed to comply with Section R703.1. Panel siding shall be installed with fasteners in accordance with Table R703.3(1) or the approved manufacturer’s instructions.

R703.10.2 Lap siding.

Fiber-cement lap siding having a maximum width of 12 inches (305 mm) shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2. Lap siding shall be lapped a minimum of 11/4 inches (32 mm) and lap siding not having tongue-and-groove end joints shall have the ends protected with caulking, covered with an H-section joint cover, located over a strip of flashing, or shall be designed to comply with Section R703.1. Lap siding courses shall be installed with the fastener heads exposed or concealed, in accordance with Table R703.3(1) or approved manufacturer’s instructions.

R703.11 Vinyl siding.

Vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D3679 by an approved agency.

R703.11.1 Installation.

Vinyl siding, insulated vinyl siding and compatible accessories shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R703.11.1.1 Fasteners.

Unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer’s instructions, fasteners for vinyl siding shall be 0.120-inch (3 mm) shank diameter nail with a 0.313-inch (8 mm) head.

R703.11.1.2 Penetration depth.

Unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer’s installation instructions or in accordance with Table R703.3(1), fasteners shall penetrate into building framing. The total penetration into the sheathing, furring framing or other nailable substrate shall be a minimum 11/4 inches (32 mm).

R703.11.1.3 Spacing.

Unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the maximum spacing between fasteners for horizontal siding shall be 16 inches (406 mm), and for vertical siding 12 inches (305 mm) both horizontally and vertically. Where specified by the manufacturer’s instructions and supported by a test report, alternative fastener spacing is permitted.

R703.11.1.4 Starter strip.

The first course of horizontal siding shall be secured using a starter strip as specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions. See Figure R703.11.1.4(1).Where the first course of siding has to be cut or trimmed, the bottom edge shall be secured with utility trim and snap locks as specified by the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

a.	Figure R703.11.1.4.1(1) illustrates typical installation details. See manufacturer’s installation instructions for actual installation details.

FIGURE R703.11.1.4(1)

TYPICAL STARTER STRIPa

R703.11.1.5 Utility trim.

Where horizontal siding has to be cut or trimmed below windows and at the top of walls, the top edge of the siding shall be secured with utility trim and snap locks or as specified by the manufacturer’s installation instructions. See Figures R703.11.1.5(1) and R703.11.1.5(2).

a.	Figure R703.11.1.5(1) illustrates typical installation details. See manufacturer’s installation instructions for actual installation details.

FIGURE R703.11.1.5(1)

TYPICAL SNAP LOCK & UTILITY TRIMa

a.	Figure R703.11.1.5(2) illustrates typical installation details. See manufacturer’s installation instructions for actual installation details.

FIGURE R703.11.1.5(2)

SNAP LOCK & UTILITY TRIM UNDER WINDOWSa

R703.11.2 Installation over foam plastic sheathing.

Where vinyl siding or insulated vinyl siding is installed over foam plastic sheathing, the vinyl siding shall comply with Section R703.11 and shall have a wind load design pressure rating in accordance with Table R703.11.2.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the foam plastic sheathing is applied directly over wood structural panels, fiberboard, gypsum sheathing or other approved backing capable of independently resisting the design wind pressure, the vinyl siding shall be installed in accordance with Sections R703.11.1 and R703.3.3.

2.	Where the vinyl siding manufacturer’s product specifications provide an approved wind load design pressure rating for installation over foam plastic sheathing, use of this wind load design pressure rating shall be permitted and the siding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

3.	Where the foam plastic sheathing and its attachment has a design wind pressure resistance complying with Sections R316.8 and R301.2.1, the vinyl siding shall be installed in accordance with Sections R703.11.1 and R703.3.3.

TABLE R703.11.2

REQUIRED MINIMUM WIND LOAD DESIGN PRESSURE RATING FORVINYL SIDING INSTALLED OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING ALONE

Ultimate Design Wind Speed
(mph)
	Adjusted Minimum Design Wind Pressure (ASD) (psf)a, b
Case 1: With interior gypsum wallboardc	Case 2: Without interior gypsum wallboardc
Exposure	Exposure
B	C	D	B	C	D
≤ 95	-30.0	-33.2	-39.4	-33.9	-47.4	-56.2
100	-30.0	-36.8	-43.6	-37.2	-52.5	-62.2
105	-30.0	-40.5	-48.1	-41.1	-57.9	-68.6
110	-31.8	-44.5	-52.8	-45.4	-63.5	-75.3
115	-35.5	-49.7	-59.0	-50.7	-71.0	-84.2
120	-37.4	-52.4	-62.1	-53.4	-74.8	-88.6
130	-44.9	-62.8	-74.5	-64.1	-89.7	-106
> 130	See note d

For SI: 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa.

a.	Linear interpolation is permitted.

b.	The table values are based on a maximum 30-ft. mean roof height, an effective wind area of 10 ft2, Wall Zone 5 (corner), and the ASD designcomponent and cladding wind pressure from Table R301.2(2), adjusted for exposure in accordance with Table R301.2(3), multiplied by the followingadjustment factors: 1.87 (Case 1) and 2.67 (Case 2).

c.	Gypsum wallboard, gypsum panel product or equivalent.

d.	For the indicated wind speed condition and where foam sheathing is the only sheathing on the exterior of a frame wall with vinyl siding, the wall assembly shall be capable of resisting an impact without puncture at least equivalent to that of a wood frame wall with minimum 7/16″ OSB sheathing as tested in accordance with ASTM E1886. The vinyl siding shall comply with an adjusted design wind pressure requirement in accordance with note b, using an adjustment factor of 2.67.

R703.11.2.1 Basic wind speed not exceeding 115 miles per hour and Exposure Category B.

Reserved.

R703.11.2.2 Design wind pressure rating.

Reserved.

R703.12 Adhered masonry veneer installation.

Adhered masonry veneer shall comply with the requirements of Section R703.7.3 and the requirements in Sections 12.1 and 12.3 of TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5. Adhered masonry veneer shall be installed in accordance with Section R703.7.1, Article 3.3C of TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6 or the manufacturer’s instructions.

R703.12.1 Clearances.

On exterior stud walls, adhered masonry veneer shall be installed:

1.	Minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) above the earth;

2.	Minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) above paved areas; or

3.	Minimum of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) above exterior walking surfaces that are supported by the same foundation that supports the exterior wall.

R703.12.2 Flashing at foundation.

A corrosion-resistant screed or flashing of a minimum 0.019-inch (0.48 mm) or 26-gage galvanized or plastic with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 31/2 inches (89 mm) shall be installed to extend a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with Section R703.4.

R703.12.3 Water-resistive barrier.

A water-resistive barrier shall be installed as required by Section R703.2 and shall comply with the requirements of Section R703.7.3. The water-resistive barrier shall lap over the exterior of the attachment flange of the screed or flashing provided in accordance with Section R703.7.3.

R703.13 Insulated vinyl siding.

Insulated vinyl siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D7793 by an approved agency.

R703.13.1 Insulated vinyl siding and accessories.

Insulated vinyl siding and compatible accessories shall be installed in accordance with Sections R703.11.1, R703.11.2 and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R703.14 Polypropylene siding.

Polypropylene siding shall be certified and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D7254 by an approved agency. In addition, polypropylene siding shall conform to the fire separation distance requirements of Section R703.14.2 or R703.14.3.

R703.14.1 Polypropylene siding and accessories.

Polypropylene siding and accessories shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R703.14.1.1 Installation.

Unless otherwise specified in the manufacturer’s installation instructions, polypropylene siding shall be installed over and attached to wood structural panel sheathing with minimum thickness of 7/16 inch (11.1 mm), or other nailable substrate, composed of wood or wood-based material and fasteners having equivalent withdrawal resistance. Accessories shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R703.14.1.1.1 Starter strip.

Horizontal siding shall be installed with a starter strip at the initial course at any location.

R703.14.1.1.2 Under windows and top of walls.

Where nail hem is removed, such as under windows and at the top of walls, nail slot punch or pre-drilled holes shall be constructed as shown in Figure R703.14.1.1.2(1).

FIGURE R703.14.1.1.2(1)

TRIM UNDER WINDOW AND TOPOF WALLS POLYPROPYLENE SIDING

R703.14.1.2 Fastener requirements.

Unless otherwise specified in the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions, nails shall be corrosion resistant, with a minimum 0.120-inch (3 mm) shank and minimum 0.313-inch (8 mm) head diameter. Nails shall be a minimum of 11/4 inches (32 mm) long or as necessary to penetrate sheathing or nailable substrate not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). Where the nail fully penetrates the sheathing or nailable substrate, the end of the fastener shall extend not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) beyond the opposite face of the sheathing or nailable substrate. Staples are not permitted. The spacing of fasteners shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R703.14.2 Fire separation.

Polypropylene siding shall not be installed on walls with a fire separation distance of less than 5 feet (1524 mm) and walls closer than 10 feet (3048 mm) to a building on another lot.

Exception: Walls perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire separation distance.

R703.14.3 Flame spread index.

The certification of the flame spread index shall be accompanied by a test report stating that all portions of the test specimen ahead of the flame front remained in position during the test in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

R703.15 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to wood framing.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section R703, the cladding manufacturer’s approved instructions, including any limitations for use over foam plastic sheathing, or an approved design. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Section R703.15.1, Section R703.15.2, or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section R703.9.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section R703.8.

R703.15.1 Direct attachment.

Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, cladding minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table R703.15.1.

TABLE R703.15.1

CLADDING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT ATTACHMENT OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa

CLADDING
FASTENER
THROUGH FOAM
SHEATHINGb
	CLADDING
FASTENER
TYPE AND
MINIMUM
SIZEb, c	CLADDING
FASTENER
VERTICAL
SPACING
(inches)	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGd
(inches)

16″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing	24″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing
Cladding Weight:	Cladding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Wood Framing
(minimum
11/4-inch
penetration)
	0.113″
diameter
nail	6	2.00	1.45	1.00	0.75	DR	2.00	0.85	0.55	DR	DR
8	2.00	1.00	0.65	DR	DR	2.00	0.55	DR	DR	DR
12	2.00	0.55	DR	DR	DR	1.8	DR	DR	DR	DR
0.120″
diameter
nail	6	3.00	1.70	1.15	0.90	0.55	3.00	1.05	0.65	0.50	DR
8	3.00	1.20	0.80	0.60	DR	3.00	0.70	DR	DR	DR
12	3.00	0.70	DR	DR	DR	2.15	DR	DR	DR	DR
0.131″
diameter
nail	6	4.00	2.15	1.50	1.20	0.75	4.00	1.35	0.90	0.70	DR
8	4.00	1.55	1.05	0.80	DR	4.00	0.90	0.55	DR	DR
12	4.00	0.90	0.55	DR	DR	2.70	0.50	DR	DR	DR
0.162″
diameter
nail	6	4.00	3.55	2.50	2.05	1.40	4.00	2.25	1.55	1.25	0.80
8	4.00	2.55	1.80	1.45	0.95	4.00	1.60	1.10	0.85	0.50
12	4.00	1.60	1.10	0.85	0.50	4.00	0.95	0.60	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

DR = Design required.

o.c. = On center.

a.	Wood framing shall be Spruce-pine-fir or any wood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater in accordance with AWC NDS.

b.	The thickness of wood structural panels complying with the specific gravity requirement of note a shall be permitted to be included in satisfying the minimum penetration into framing. For cladding connections to wood structural panels, refer to Table R703.3.2. For brick veneer tie connections to wood structural panels, refer to Table R703.8.4(2).

c.	Nail fasteners shall comply with ASTM F1667, except nail length shall be permitted to exceed ASTM F1667 standard lengths.

d.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

R703.15.2 Furred cladding attachment.

Where wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table R703.15.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative-treated wood in accordance with Section R317.1 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance Section R317.3.

TABLE R703.15.2

FURRING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa, b

FURRING
MATERIAL
	FRAMING
MEMBER
	FASTENER
TYPE AND
MINIMUM
SIZE	MINIMUM
PENETRATION
INTO WALL
FRAMING
(inches)c
	FASTENER
SPACING IN
FURRING
(inches)
	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGe
(inches)

16″ o.c. Furringf	24″ o.c. Furringf
Siding Weight:	Siding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Minimum
1×
Wood Furringd	Minimum
2× Wood
Stud	0.131″
diameter
nail	11/4	8	4.00	2.45	1.75	1.45	0.95	4.00	1.60	1.10	0.85	DR
12	4.00	1.60	1.10	0.85	DR	4.00	0.95	0.55	DR	DR
16	4.00	1.10	0.70	DR	DR	3.05	0.60	DR	DR	DR
0.162″
diameter
nail	11/4	8	4.00	4.00	3.05	2.45	1.60	4.00	2.75	1.85	1.45	0.85
12	4.00	2.75	1.85	1.45	0.85	4.00	1.65	1.05	0.75	DR
16	4.00	1.90	1.25	0.95	DR	4.00	1.05	0.60	DR	DR
No.10
wood
screw	1	12	4.00	2.30	1.60	1.20	0.70	4.00	1.40	0.85	0.60	DR
16	4.00	1.65	1.05	0.75	DR	4.00	0.90	DR	DR	DR
24	4.00	0.90	DR	DR	DR	2.85	DR	DF	DR	DR
1/4″ lag
screw
	11/2	12	4.00	2.65	1.90	1.50	0.90	4.00	1.65	1.05	0.80	DR
16	4.00	1.95	1.25	0.95	0.50	4.00	1.10	0.65	DR	DR
24	4.00	1.10	0.65	DR	DR	3.25	0.50	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

DR = Design required.

o.c. = On center

a.	Wood framing and furring shall be Spruce-pine-fir or any wood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater in accordance with AWC NDS.

b.	Nail fasteners shall comply with ASTM F1667, except nail length shall be permitted to exceed ASTM F1667 standard lengths.

c.	The thickness of wood structural panels complying with the specific gravity requirement of note a shall be permitted to be included in satisfying theminimum required penetration into framing.

d.	Where the required cladding fastener penetration into wood material exceeds 3/4 inch and is not more than 11/2 inches, a minimum 2 × wood furring or an approved design shall be used.

e.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

f.	Furring shall be spaced not more than 24 inches on center, in a vertical or horizontal orientation. In a vertical orientation, furring shall be located over wall studs and attached with the required fastener spacing. In a horizontal orientation, the indicated 8-inch and 12-inch fastener spacing in furring shall be achieved by use of two fasteners into studs at 16 inches and 24 inches on center, respectively.

R703.16 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to cold-formed steel framing.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section R703, the cladding manufacturer’s approved instructions, including any limitations for use over foam plastic sheathing, or an approved design. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Section R703.16.1, Section R703.16.2 or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section R703.9.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section R703.7.

R703.16.1 Direct attachment.

Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, cladding minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table R703.16.1.

TABLE R703.16.1

CLADDING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR DIRECT ATTACHMENT OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa, b

CLADDING
FASTENER
THROUGH FOAM
SHEATHING INTO:
	CLADDING
FASTENER TYPE
AND MINIMUM
SIZEc
	CLADDING
FASTENER
VERTICAL
SPACING
(inches)	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGd
(inches)

16″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing	24″ o.c. Fastener Horizontal Spacing
Cladding Weight:	Cladding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Steel Framing
(minimum penetration
of steel thickness + 3
threads)
	No. 8 screw
into 33 mil steel
or thicker	6	3.00	2.95	2.50	2.20	1.45	3.00	2.35	1.75	1.25	DR
8	3.00	2.55	2.00	1.60	0.60	3.00	1.80	0.90	DR	DR
12	3.00	1.80	0.95	DR	DR	3.00	0.65	DR	DR	DR
No. 10 screw
into 33 mil steel
	6	4.00	3.50	3.05	2.70	1.95	4.00	2.90	2.20	1.70	0.55
8	4.00	3.10	2.50	2.05	1.00	4.00	2.25	1.35	0.70	DR
12	4.00	2.25	1.35	0.70	DR	3.70	1.05	DR	DR	DR
No. 10 screw
into 43 mil steel
or thicker	6	4.00	4.00	4.00	4.00	3.60	4.00	4.00	3.80	3.45	2.70
8	4.00	4.00	4.00	3.70	3.00	4.00	3.85	3.25	2.80	1.80
12	4.00	3.85	3.25	2.80	1.80	4.00	3.05	2.15	1.50	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

DR = Design required.

o.c. = On center.

a.	Steel framing shall be minimum 33 ksi steel for 33 mil and 43 mil steel, and 50 ksi steel for 54 mil steel or thicker.

b.	Where cladding is attached to wood structural panel sheathing only, fastening requirements shall be in accordance with Table R703.3.2. Where brick veneer ties are attached to wood structural panel sheathing only, fastening requirements shall be in accordance with Table R703.8.4(2).

c.	Screws shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1513.

d.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

R703.16.2 Furred cladding attachment.

Where steel or wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table R703.16.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative-treated wood in accordance with Section R317.1 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance with Section R317.3. Steel furring shall have a minimum G60 galvanized coating.

TABLE R703.16.2

FURRING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OVER FOAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT CLADDING WEIGHTa

FURRING
MATERIAL
	FRAMING
MEMBER
	FASTENER
TYPE AND
MINIMUM
SIZEb
	MINIMUM
PENETRATION
INTO WALL
FRAMING
(inches)	FASTENER
SPACING IN
FURRING
(inches)
	MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF FOAM SHEATHINGd
(inches)

16″ o.c. Furringe	24″ o.c. Furringe
Cladding Weight:	Cladding Weight:
3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf	3 psf	11 psf	15 psf	18 psf	25 psf
Minimum
33 mil Steel
Furring or
Minimum 1×
Wood Furringc	33 mil
Steel Stud
	No. 8
screw
	Steel
thickness + 3
threads	12	3.00	1.80	0.95	DR	DR	3.00	0.65	DR	DR	DR
16	3.00	1.00	DR	DR	DR	2.85	DR	DR	DR	DR
24	2.85	DR	DR	DR	DR	2.20	DR	DR	DR	DR
No. 10
screw
	Steel
thickness + 3
threads	12	4.00	2.25	1.35	0.70	DR	3.70	1.05	DR	DR	DR
16	3.85	1.45	DR	DR	DR	3.40	DR	DR	DR	DR
24	3.40	DR	DR	DR	DR	2.70	DR	DR	DR	DR
43 mil
or thicker
Steel Stud	No. 8
Screw
	Steel
thickness + 3
threads	12	3.00	1.80	0.95	DR	DR	3.00	0.65	DR	DR	DR
16	3.00	1.00	DR	DR	DR	2.85	DR	DR	DR	DR
24	2.85	DR	DR	DR	DR	2.20	DR	DR	DR	DR
No. 10
screw
	Steel
thickness + 3
threads	12	4.00	3.85	3.25	2.80	1.80	4.00	3.05	2.15	1.50	DR
16	4.00	3.30	2.55	1.95	0.60	4.00	2.25	1.05	DR	DR
24	4.00	2.25	1.05	DR	DR	4.00	0.65	DR	DR	DR

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 mil = 0.0254 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa.

DR = Design required.

o.c. = On center.

a.	Wood furring shall be Spruce-pine-fir or any softwood species with a specific gravity of 0.42 or greater. Steel furring shall be minimum 33 ksi steel. Steel studs shall be minimum 33 ksi steel for 33 mil and 43 mil thickness, and 50 ksi steel for 54 mil steel or thicker.

b.	Screws shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1513.

c.	Where the required cladding fastener penetration into wood material exceeds 3/4 inch and is not more than 11/2 inches, a minimum 2-inch nominal wood furring or an approved design shall be used.

d.	Foam sheathing shall have a minimum compressive strength of 15 psi in accordance with ASTM C578 or ASTM C1289.

e.	Furring shall be spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center, in a vertical or horizontal orientation. In a vertical orientation, furring shall be located over wall studs and attached with the required fastener spacing. In a horizontal orientation, the indicated 8-inch and 12-inch fastener spacing in furring shall be achieved by use of two fasteners into studs at 16 inches and 24 inches on center, respectively.

R703.17 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to masonry or concrete wall construction.

Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Section 703.3 and the cladding manufacturer’s instructions or an approved design. Foam sheathing shall be attached to masonry or concrete construction in accordance with the insulation manufacturer’s installation instructions or an approved design. Furring and furring attachments through foam sheathing into concrete or masonry substrate shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Section R301, including support of cladding weight as applicable. Fasteners used to attach cladding or furring through foam sheathing to masonry or concrete substrates shall be approved for application into masonry or concrete material and shall be installed in accordance with the fastener manufacturer’s instructions.

Exceptions:

1.	Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing and connection to a masonry or concrete substrate, those requirements shall apply.

2.	For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section R703.9.

3.	For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section R703.8.

SECTION R704
SOFFITS
R704.1 Wind resistance of soffits.

Soffits and their attachments shall be capable of resisting wind loads specified in Tables R301.2(2) and R301.2(3) for walls using an effective wind area of 10 square feet.

R704.2 Soffit installation.

Soffit installation shall comply with Sections R704.2.1, R704.2.2, R704.2.3 and R704.2.4.

R704.2.1 Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels.

Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels shall be installed using aluminum, galvanized, stainless steel or rust-preventative coated nails or other approved corrosion-resistant fasteners specified by the manufacturer and shall be fastened at both ends to a supporting component such as a nailing strip, fascia or subfascia component in accordance with Figure R704.2.1. Where the unsupported span of soffit panels is greater than 12 inches, intermediate nailing strips shall be provided in accordance with Figure R704.2.2 unless a larger span is permitted in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification. Vinyl and aluminum soffit panels shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use. Fascia covers shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use and Section R704.3.

FIGURE R704.2.1

TYPICAL SINGLE-SPAN VINYL SOFFIT PANEL SUPPORT

R704.2.2 Fiber-cement soffit panels.

Fiber-cement soffit panels shall be a minimum of 1/4 inch thick and shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1186, Type A, minimum Grade II or ISO 8336, Category A, minimum Class 2. Panel joints shall occur over framing or over wood structural panel sheathing. Soffit panels shall be installed with spans and fasteners in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use.

FIGURE R704.2.2

TYPICAL MULTI-SPAN VINYL SOFFIT PANEL SUPPORT

R704.2.3 Hardboard soffit panels.

Where the design wind pressure is 30 psf or less, soffit panels shall be a minimum of 7/16 inch in thickness and shall be fastened to framing or nailing strips with 2 1/2″ × 0.113″ siding nails spaced not more than 6 inches on center at panel edges and 12 inches on center at intermediate supports. Where the design wind pressure is greater than 30 psf, hardboard soffit panels shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s product approval specification and limitations of use.

R704.2.4 Wood structural panel soffit prescriptive alternative.

Wood structural panel soffit panels are permitted to be installed in accordance with Table R704.2.4.

TABLE R704.2.4

INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL, CLOSED SOFFITb, c, d, e, f

MAXIMUM
DESIGN
PRESSURE
(- or + psf)
	MINIMUM
PANEL SPAN
RATING	MINIMUM
PANEL
PERFORMANCE
CATEGORY
	NAIL TYPE AND SIZE (inches)	FASTENERa SPACING ALONG EDGES AND
INTERMEDIATE SUPPORTS (inches)

GALVANIZED STEEL	STAINLESS STEEL
30	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	6f	4
40	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	6	4
50	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	4	4
8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	6	6
60	24/0	3/8	6d box (2 × 0.099 × 0.266 head diameter)	4	3
8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	6	4
70	24/16	7/16	8d common (21/2 × 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	4
10d box (3 × 0.128 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4
80	24/16	7/16	8d common (21/2× 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	4
10d box (3 × 0.128 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4
90	32/16	15/32	8d common (21/2× 0.131 × 0.281 head diameter)	4	3
10d box (3 × 0.148 × 0.312 head diameter)	6	4

a.	Fasteners shall comply with Sections R703.3.2 and R703.3.3.

b.	Maximum spacing of soffit framing members shall not exceed 24 inches.

c.	Wood structural panels shall be of an exterior exposure grade.

d.	Wood structural panels shall be installed with strength axis perpendicular to supports with a minimum of two continuous spans.

e.	Wood structural panels shall be attached to soffit framing members with specific gravity of at least 0.42. Framing members shall be minimum 2 inch by 3 inch nominal with the larger dimension in the cross section aligning with the length of fasteners to provide sufficient embedment depths.

f.	Spacing at intermediate supports is permitted to be 12 inches on center.

R704.3 Aluminum fascia.

Aluminum fascia shall have a minimum thickness of 0.019 inches and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and this code. Fasteners shall be aluminum or stainless steel. Aluminum fascia shall be attached in accordance with Section R704.3.1, R704.3.2 or R704.3.3. The drip edge shall comply with R905.2.8.5, and the thickness of the drip edge shall be in accordance with Table R903.2.1.

R704.3.1 Fascia installation where the design wind pressure is 30 psf or less.

Where the design wind pressure is 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kPA) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4″ × 0.057″ × 0.177″ head diameter) spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center, and

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1.0 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch below the drip edge.

R704.3.2 Fascia installation where the design wind pressure exceeds 30 psf but is 60 psf or less.

Where the design wind pressure is 60 pounds per square foot (2.88 kPA) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached in accordance with Section R704.3.2.1 or Section R704.3.2.2.

R704.3.2.1.

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the subfascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the subfascia is less than or equal to 6.5 inches (165 mm) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4″ × 0.057″ × 0.177″ head diameter) spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center, and

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch (25 mm) below the drip edge.

R704.3.2.2

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the sub-fascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the subfascia is greater than 6.5 inches (165 mm), the top edge of the fascia shall be secured using utility trim installed beneath the drip edge with snap locks punched into the fascia spaced no more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center.

R704.3.3 Fascia installation where the design windpressure exceeds 60 psf.

Where the design wind pressureis greater than 60 pounds per square foot (2.88 kPA), aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows in accordancewith Section R704.3.3.1 or Section R704.3.3.2.

R704.3.3.1

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the subfascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the subfascia is less than or equal to 4.5 inches (114 mm) or less, aluminum fascia shall be attached as follows:

1.	Finish nails shall be provided in the return leg (11/4″ × 0.057″ × 0.177″ head diameter) spaced a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center, and

2.	The fascia shall be inserted under the drip edge with not less than half the height of the drip edge or 1.0 inch (25 mm), whichever is greater, of the fascia material covered by the drip edge. One finish nail shall be centered in the face of the fascia from each end of the fascia material section located no more than 1 inch (25 mm) below the drip edge.

R704.3.3.2

Where the height of the fascia from the top of the roof sheathing to the bottom of the subfascia plus any thickness of soffit material below the subfascia is greater than 4.5 inches (114 mm), the top edge of the fascia shall be secured using utility trim installed beneath the drip edge with snap locks punched into the fascia spaced no more than 6 inches (152 mm) on center.

R704.4 Corners on hip roofs.

Fascia shall be bent around corners and extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) beyond the corner. The next fascia material section shall overlap the extension a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) and be fastened through the return leg at the overlap.

R704.5 Corners on gable roofs.

Fascia shall be wrapped (tabbed) around and extend at least 1 inch (25 mm) beyond the corner. The gable fascia material section shall overlap the tab and be fastened through the fascia cover and the tab at the end with two face nails (11/4″ × 0.057″ × 0.177″ head diameter) for a 2 × 4-inch subfascia and three face nails for 2 × 6- inch and greater sub fascia.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-8]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 8
ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION R801
GENERAL
R801.1 Application.

The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the roof-ceiling system for buildings.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44.

R801.2 Requirements.

Roof and ceiling construction shall be capable of accommodating all loads imposed in accordance with Section R301 and of transmitting the resulting loads to the supporting structural elements.

R801.3 Roof drainage.

In areas where expansive or collapsible soils are known to exist, all dwellings shall have a controlled method of water disposal from roofs that will collect and discharge roof drainage to the ground surface not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from foundation walls or to an approved drainage system.

SECTION R802
WOOD ROOF FRAMING
R802.1 General.

Wood and wood-based products used for load-supporting purposes shall conform to the applicable provisions of this section.

R802.1.1 Sawn lumber.

Sawn lumber shall be identified by a grade mark of an accredited lumber grading or inspection agency and have design values certified by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20. In lieu of a grade mark, a certificate of inspection issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be accepted.

R802.1.1.1 End-jointed lumber.

Approved end-jointed lumber identified by a grade mark conforming to Section R802.1.1 shall be permitted to be used interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber used in an assembly required elsewhere in this code to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation “Heat-Resistant Adhesive” or “HRA” included in its grade mark.

R802.1.2 Structural glued laminated timbers.

Glued laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI A190.1, ANSI 117 and ASTM D3737.

R802.1.3 Structural log members.

Structural log members shall comply with the provisions of ICC 400.

R802.1.4 Structural composite lumber.

Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5456.

R802.1.5 Fire-retardant-treated wood.

Fire-retardanttreated wood (FRTW) is any wood product that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, shall have, when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, a listed flame spread index of 25 or less. In addition, the ASTM E84 or UL 723 test shall be continued for an additional 20-minute period and the flame front shall not progress more than 10.5 feet (3200 mm) beyond the center line of the burners at any time during the test.

R802.1.5.1 Pressure process.

For wood products impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process, the process shall be performed in closed vessels under pressures not less than 50 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (344.7 kPa).

R802.1.5.2 Other means during manufacture.

For wood products impregnated with chemicals by other means during manufacture, the treatment shall be an integral part of the manufacturing process of the wood product. The treatment shall provide permanent protection to all surfaces of the wood product. The use of paints, coating, stains or other surface treatments is not an approved method of protection as required by this section.

R802.1.5.3 Testing.

For fire-retardant-treated wood products, the front and back faces of the wood product shall be tested in accordance with and produce the results required in Section R802.1.5.

R802.1.5.3.1 Fire testing of wood structural panels.

Wood structural panels shall be tested with a ripped or cut longitudinal gap of 1/8 inch (3.2 mm).

R802.1.5.4 Labeling.

Fire-retardant-treated lumber and wood structural panels shall be labeled. The label shall contain:

1.	The identification mark of an approved agency in accordance with Section 1703.5 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

2.	Identification of the treating manufacturer.

3.	The name of the fire-retardant treatment.

4.	The species of wood treated.

5.	Flame spread index and smoke-developed index.

6.	Method of drying after treatment.

7.	Conformance to applicable standards in accordance with Sections R802.1.5.5 through R802.1.5.10.

8.	For FRTW exposed to weather, or a damp or wet location, the words “No increase in the listed classification when subjected to the Standard Rain Test” (ASTM D2898).

R802.1.5.5 Strength adjustments.

Design values for untreated lumber and wood structural panels as specified in Section R802.1 shall be adjusted for fire-retardant-treated wood. Adjustments to design values shall be based upon an approved method of investigation that takes into consideration the effects of the anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment and redrying procedures.

R802.1.5.6 Wood structural panels.

The effect of treatment and the method of redrying after treatment, and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities on the flexure properties of fire-retardant-treated softwood plywood shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5516. The test data developed by ASTM D5516 shall be used to develop adjustment factors, maximum loads and spans, or both for untreated plywood design values in accordance with ASTM D6305. Each manufacturer shall publish the allowable maximum loads and spans for service as floor and roof sheathing for their treatment.

R802.1.5.7 Lumber.

For each species of wood treated, the effect of the treatment and the method of redrying after treatment and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities on the allowable design properties of fire-retardant-treated lumber shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5664. The test data developed by ASTM D5664 shall be used to develop modification factors for use at or near room temperature and at elevated temperatures and humidity in accordance with ASTM D6841. Each manufacturer shall publish the modification factors for service at temperatures of not less than 80°F (27°C) and for roof framing. The roof framing modification factors shall take into consideration the climatological location.

R802.1.5.8 Exposure to weather.

Where fire-retardant-treated wood is exposed to weather or damp or wet locations, it shall be identified as “Exterior” to indicate there is not an increase in the listed flame spread index as defined in Section R802.1.5 when subjected to ASTM D2898.

R802.1.5.9 Interior applications.

Interior fire-retardant-treated wood shall have a moisture content of not over 28 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM D3201 procedures at 92-percent relative humidity. Interior fire-retardant-treated wood shall be tested in accordance with Section R802.1.5.6 or R802.1.5.7. Interior fire-retardant-treated wood designated as Type A shall be tested in accordance with the provisions of this section.

R802.1.5.10 Moisture content.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be dried to a moisture content of 19 percent or less for lumber and 15 percent or less for wood structural panels before use. For wood kiln dried after treatment (KDAT) the kiln temperatures shall not exceed those used in kiln drying the lumber and plywood submitted for the tests described in Section R802.1.5.6 for plywood and R802.1.5.7 for lumber.

R802.1.6 Cross-laminated timber.

Cross-laminated timber shall be manufactured and identified as required by ANSI/APA PRG 320.

R802.1.7 Engineered wood rim board.

Engineered wood rim boards shall conform to ANSI/APA PRR 410 or shall be evaluated in accordance with ASTM D7672. Structural capacities shall be in accordance with ANSI/APA PRR 410 or established in accordance with ASTM D7672. Rim boards conforming to ANSI/APA PRR 410 shall be marked in accordance with that standard.

R802.1.8 Prefabricated wood I-joists.

Structural capacities and design provisions for prefabricated wood I-joists shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5055.

R802.2 Design and construction.

Wood roof framing shall be in accordance with Section R301.2.1.1 or ANSI AWC NDS.

R802.3 Framing details.

Reserved.

R802.3.1 Ceiling joist and rafter connections.

Reserved.

R802.3.2 Ceiling joists lapped.

Reserved.

R802.3.3 Blocking.

Reserved.

R802.4 Allowable ceiling joist spans.

Reserved.

Table R802.4(1) Ceiling Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.4(2) Ceiling Joist Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

R802.5 Allowable rafter spans.

Reserved.

R802.5.1 Purlins.

Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(1) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(2) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(3) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(4) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(5) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(6) Rafter Spans for Common Lumber Species. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(7) Rafter Spans for 70 PSF Ground Snow Load. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(8) Rafter Spans for 70 PSF Ground Snow Load. Reserved.

Table R802.5.1(9) Rafter/Ceiling Joist Heel Joint Connections. Reserved.

Figure 802.5.1 Braced Rafter Construction. Reserved.

R802.6 Bearing.

Reserved.

R802.6.1 Finished ceiling material.

Reserved.

R802.7 Cutting, drilling and notching.

Structural roof members shall not be cut, bored or notched in excess of the limitations specified in this section.

R802.7.1 Sawn lumber.

Cuts, notches and holes in solid lumber joists, rafters, blocking and beams shall comply with the provisions of Section R502.2 except that cantilevered portions of rafters shall be permitted in accordance with Section R802.7.1.1.

R802.7.1.1 Cantilevered portions of rafters.

Notches on cantilevered portions of rafters are permitted provided the dimension of the remaining portion of the rafter is not less than 31/2 inches (89 mm) and the length of the cantilever does not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) in accordance with Figure R802.7.1.1.

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

FIGURE R802.7.1.1

RAFTER NOTCH

R802.7.1.2 Ceiling joist taper cut.

Taper cuts at the ends of the ceiling joist shall not exceed one-fourth the depth of the member in accordance with Figure R802.7.1.2.

FIGURE R802.7.1.2

CEILING JOIST TAPER CUT

R802.7.2 Engineered wood products.

Cuts, notches and holes bored in trusses, structural composite lumber, structural glue-laminated members, cross-laminated timber members or I-joists are prohibited except where permitted by the manufacturer’s recommendations or where the effects of such alterations are specifically considered in the design of the member by a registered design professional.

R802.8 Lateral support.

Reserved.

R802.8.1 Bridging.

Reserved.

R802.9 Framing of openings.

Reserved.

R802.10 Wood trusses.
R802.10.1 Truss design drawings.

Truss design drawings, prepared in conformance to Section R802.10.1, shall be provided to the building official and approved prior to installation. Truss design drawings shall be provided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

1.	Slope or depth, span and spacing.

2.	Location of all joints.

3.	Required bearing widths.

4.	Design loads as applicable.

4.1.	Top chord live load (as determined from Section R301.6).

4.2.	Top chord dead load.

4.3.	Bottom chord live load.

4.4.	Bottom chord dead load.

4.5.	Concentrated loads and their points of application.

4.6.	Controlling wind loads.

5.	Adjustments to lumber and joint connector design values for conditions of use.

6.	Each reaction force and direction.

7.	Joint connector type and description such as size, thickness or gage and the dimensioned location of each joint connector except where symmetrically located relative to the joint interface.

8.	Lumber size, species and grade for each member.

9.	Connection requirements for:

9.1.	Truss to girder-truss.

9.2.	Truss ply to ply.

9.3.	Field splices.

10.	Calculated deflection ratio and/or maximum description for live and total load.

11.	Maximum axial compression forces in the truss members to enable the building designer to design the size, connections and anchorage of the permanent continuous lateral bracing. Forces shall be shown on the truss design drawing or on supplemental documents.

12.	Required permanent truss member bracing location.

R802.10.2 Design.

Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The design and manufacture of metal-plate-connected wood trusses shall comply with ANSI/TPI 1. The truss design drawings shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the Florida Statutes.

R802.10.3 Bracing.

Trusses shall be braced to prevent rotation and provide lateral stability in accordance with the requirements specified in the construction documents for the building and on the individual truss design drawings. In the absence of specific bracing requirements, trusses shall be braced in accordance with accepted industry practice such as the SBCA Building Component Safety Information (BCSI) Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses.

R802.10.4 Alterations to trusses.

Truss members shall not be cut, notched, drilled, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without the approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of load such as HVAC equipment water heater that exceeds the design load for the truss shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting such additional loading.

R802.11 Roof tie-down.

Reserved.

Table R802.11 Rafter or Truss Uplift Connection Forces from Wind (ASD) (Pounds Per Connection). Reserved.

R802.11.1 Uplift resistance.

Reserved.

R802.11.1.1 Truss uplift resistance.

Reserved.

R802.11.1.2 Rafter uplift resistance.

Reserved.

SECTION R803
ROOF SHEATHING
R803.1 Lumber sheathing.

Allowable spans for lumber used as roof sheathing shall conform to Table R803.1. Spaced lumber sheathing for wood shingle and shake roofing shall conform to the requirements of Sections R905.7 and R905.8.

TABLE R803.1

MINIMUM THICKNESS OF LUMBER ROOF SHEATHING

RAFTER OR BEAM SPACING
(inches)
	MINIMUM NET THICKNESS
(inches)

24	5/8
48a	11/2 T & G
60b
72c

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Minimum 270 Fb, 340,000 E.

b.	Minimum 420 Fb, 660,000 E.

c.	Minimum 600Fb, 1,150,000 E.

R803.2 Wood structural panel sheathing.
R803.2.1 Identification and grade.

Wood structural panels shall conform to DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2, CSA O437 or CSA O325, and shall be identified for grade, bond classification and performance category by a grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency. Wood structural panels shall comply with the grades specified in Section R503.1.

R803.2.1.1 Exposure durability.

Wood structural panels, when designed to be permanently exposed in outdoor applications, shall be of an exterior exposure durability. Wood structural panel roof sheathing exposed to the underside shall be permitted to be of interior type bonded with exterior glue, identified as Exposure 1.

R803.2.1.2 Fire-retardant-treated plywood.

The allowable unit stresses for fire-retardant-treated plywood, including fastener values, shall be developed from an approved method of investigation that considers the effects of anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated plywood will be subjected, the type of treatment and redrying process. The fire-retardant-treated plywood shall be graded by an approved agency.

R803.2.2 Allowable spans.

The minimum thickness and span rating for wood structural panel roof sheathing shall not exceed the values set forth in Table R803.2.2.

TABLE R803.2.2

MINIMUM ROOF SHEATHING THICKNESS

Rafter/Truss Spacing
24 in. o.c.
	WIND SPEED
115 mph	120 mph	130 mph	140 mph	150 mph	160 mph	170 mph	180 mph
Minimum Sheathing Thickness, inches
(Panel Span Rating) Exposure B
	7/16
(24/16)
	7/16
(24/16)
	7/16
(24/16)
	7/16
(24/16)
	15/32
(32/16)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)

Minimum Sheathing Thickness, inches
(Panel Span Rating) Exposure C
	7/16
(24/16)
	7/16
(24/16)
	15/32
(32/16)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	23/32
(48/24)

Minimum Sheathing Thickness, inches
(Panel Span Rating) Exposure D
	15/32
(32/16)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	19/32
(40/20)
	23/32
(48/24)
	23/32
(48/24)
R803.2.3 Installation.

Wood structural panel used as roof sheathing shall be installed with joints staggered in accordance with Section R803.2.3.1 for wood roof framing or with Section R804.1 for cold-formed steel roof framing. Wood structural panel roof sheathing shall not cantilever more than 9 inches beyond the gable end wall unless supported by gable overhang framing.

R803.2.3.1 Sheathing fastenings.

Wood structural panel sheathing shall be fastened to roof framing in accordance with Table R803.2.3.1.Sheathing shall be fastened with ASTM F1667 RSRS-03 (21/2" × 0.131" × 0.281 head diameter) nails except that ASTM F1667 RSRS-01 (23/8" × 0.113") nails or ASTM F1667 RSRS-04 (3" × 0.120" × 0.281 head diameter) nails shall be permitted where sheathing thickness is 15/32 inches and less. RSRS-01, RSRS-03 and RSRS-04 are ring shank nails meeting the specifications in ASTM F1667.

TABLE R803.2.3.1

ROOF SHEATHING ATTACHMENTa, b

Rafter/Truss Spacing
24 in. o.c.
	WIND SPEED
115 mph	120 mph	130 mph	140 mph	150 mph	160 mph	170 mph	180 mph
E	F	E	F	E	F	E	F	E	F	E	F	E	F	E	F
Exposure B
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.42	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	4	4	4	4	4	4
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.49	6	12	6	12	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6
Exposure C
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.42	6	6	6	6	6	6	4	4	4	4	4	4	3	3	3	3
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.49	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	4	4	4	4
Exposure D
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.42	6	6	6	6	4	4	4	4	4	4	3	3	3	3	3	3
Rafter/Truss SG = 0.49	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	6	4	4	4	4	4	4	4	4

E = Nail spacing along panel edges (inches)

F = Nail spacing along intermediate supports in the panel field (inches)

a.	For sheathing located a minimum of 4 feet from the perimeter edge of the roof, including 4 feet on each side of ridges and hips, nail spacing is permitted to be 6 inches on center along panel edges and 6 inches on center along intermediate supports in the panel field.

b.	Where rafter/truss spacing is less than 24 inches on center or for specific gravities (SG) other than those shown, roof sheathing fastening is permitted to be in accordance with the AWC WFCM or the AWC NDS provided nail spacing does not exceed 6 inches on center along panel edges and 12 inches on center along intermediate supports in the panel field.

SECTION R804
COLD-FORMED STEEL ROOF FRAMING
R804.1 General.

In accordance with Section R301.2.1.1, the design of cold-formed steel roof framing shall be in accordance with AISI S230, Standard for Cold-Formed Steel Framing—Prescriptive Method For One- and Two-Family Dwellings.

SECTION R805
CEILING FINISHES
R805.1 Ceiling installation.

Ceilings shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for interior wall finishes as provided in Section R702.

SECTION R806
ROOF VENTILATION
R806.1 Ventilation required.

Enclosed attics and enclosed rafter spaces formed where ceilings are applied directly to the underside of roof rafters shall have cross ventilation for each separate space by ventilating openings protected against the entrance of rain or snow. Ventilation openings shall have a least dimension of 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) minimum and 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) maximum. Ventilation openings having a least dimension larger than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) shall be provided with corrosion-resistant wire cloth screening, hardware cloth, perforated vinyl or similar material with openings having a least dimension of 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) minimum and 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) maximum. Openings in roof framing members shall conform to the requirements of Section R802.7. Required ventilation openings shall open directly to the outside air and shall be protected to prevent the entry of birds, rodents, snakes and other similar creatures.

R806.2 Minimum vent area.

The minimum net free ventilating area shall be 1/150 of the area of the vented space.

Exception: The minimum net free ventilation area shall be 1/300 of the vented space, provided that not less than 40 percent and not more than 50 percent of the required ventilating area is provided by ventilators located in the upper portion of the attic or rafter space. Upper ventilators shall be located not more than 3 feet (914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space, measured vertically. The balance of the required ventilation provided shall be located in the bottom one-third of the attic space. Where the location of wall or roof framing members conflicts with the installation of upper ventilators, installation more than 3 feet (914 mm) below the ridge or highest point of the space shall be permitted.

R806.3 Vent and insulation clearance.

Where eave or cornice vents are installed, blocking, bridging and insulation shall not block the free flow of air. Not less than a 1-inch (25 mm) space shall be provided between the insulation and the roof sheathing and at the location of the vent.

R806.4 Installation and weather protection.

Ventilators shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Installation of ventilators in roof systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section R903. Installation of ventilators in wall systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section R703.1.

R806.5 Unvented attic and unvented enclosed rafter assemblies.

Unvented attics and unvented enclosed roof framing assemblies created by ceilings that are applied directly to the underside of the roof framing members and structural roof sheathing applied directly to the top of the roof framing members/rafters, shall be permitted where all the following conditions are met:

1.	The unvented attic space is completely within the building thermal envelope.

2.	No interior Class I vapor retarders are installed on the ceiling side (attic floor) of the unvented attic assembly or on the ceiling side of the unvented enclosed roof framing assembly.

3.	Where wood shingles or shakes are used, a minimum 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) vented airspace separates the shingles or shakes and the roofing underlayment above the structural sheathing.

4.	In Climate Zones 5, 6, 7 and 8, any air-impermeable insulation shall be a Class II vapor retarder, or shall have a Class II vapor retarder coating or covering in direct contact with the underside of the insulation.

5.	Insulation shall comply with Item 5.3 and Item 5.1. As an alternative, where air-permeable insulation is located on top of the attic floor or on top of the attic ceiling, insulation shall comply with Item 5.3 and Item 5.2.

5.1.	Item 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3 or 5.1.4 shall be met, depending on the air permeability of the insulation directly under the structural roof sheathing.

5.1.1.	Where only air-impermeable insulation is provided, it shall be applied in direct contact with the underside of the structural roof sheathing.

5.1.2.	Where air-permeable insulation is provided inside the building thermal envelope, it shall be installed in accordance with Section 5.1.1. In addition to the air-permeable insulation installed directly below the structural sheathing, rigid board or sheet insulation shall be installed directly above the structural roof sheathing in accordance with the R-values in Table R806.5 for condensation control.

5.1.3.	Where both air-impermeable and air-permeable insulation are provided, the air-impermeable insulation shall be applied in direct contact with the underside of the structural roof sheathing in accordance with Item 5.1.1 and shall be in accordance with the R-values in Table R806.5 for condensation control. The air-permeable insulation shall be installed directly under the air-impermeable insulation.

5.1.4.	Alternatively, sufficient rigid board or sheet insulation shall be installed directly above the structural roof sheathing to maintain the monthly average temperature of the underside of the structural roof sheathing above 45°F (7°C). For calculation purposes, an interior air temperature of 68°F (20°C) is assumed and the exterior air temperature is assumed to be the monthly average outside air temperature of the three coldest months.

5.2.	In Climate Zones 1, 2 and 3, air-permeable insulation installed in unvented attics on the top of the attic floor or on top of the ceiling shall meet the following requirements:

5.2.1.	An approved vapor diffusion port shall be installed not more than 12 inches (305 mm) from the highest point of the roof, measured vertically from the highest point of the roof to the lower edge of the port.

5.2.2.	The port area shall be greater than or equal to 1:600 of the ceiling area. Where there are multiple ports in the attic, the sum of the port areas shall be greater than or equal to the area requirement.

5.2.3.	The vapor-permeable membrane in the vapor diffusion port shall have a vapor permeance rating of greater than or equal to 20 perms when tested in accordance with Procedure A of ASTM E96.

5.2.4.	The vapor diffusion port shall serve as an air barrier between the attic and the exterior of the building.

5.2.5.	The vapor diffusion port shall protect the attic against the entrance of rain and snow.

5.3.	Where preformed insulation board is used as the air-impermeable insulation layer, it shall be sealed at the perimeter of each individual sheet interior surface to form a continuous layer.

TABLE R806.5

INSULATION FOR CONDENSATION CONTROL

CLIMATE ZONE	MINIMUM RIGID BOARD
ON AIR-IMPERMEABLE
INSULATION R-VALUEa, b
2B and 3B tile roof only	0 (none required)
1, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, 3C	R-5
4C	R-10
4A, 4B	R-15
5	R-20
6	R-25
7	R-30
8	R-35

a.	Contributes to but does not supersede the requirements in Section R402 of the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation.

b.	Alternatively, sufficient continuous insulation shall be installed directly above the structural roof sheathing to maintain the monthly average temperature of the underside of the structural roof sheathing above 45°F (7°C). For calculation purposes, an interior air temperature of 68°F (20°C) is assumed and the exterior air temperature is assumed to be the monthly average outside air temperature of the three coldest months.

SECTION R807
ATTIC ACCESS
R807.1 Attic access.

Buildings with combustible ceiling or roof construction shall have an attic access opening to attic areas that have a vertical height of 30 inches (762 mm) or greater over an area of not less than 30 square feet (2.8 m2).

The vertical height shall be measured from the top of the ceiling framing members to the underside of the roof framing members.

The rough-framed opening shall be not less than 22 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm) and shall be located in a hallway or other location with ready access. Where located in a wall, the opening shall be not less than 22 inches wide by 30 inches high (559 mm wide by 762 mm high). Where the access is located in a ceiling, minimum unobstructed headroom in the attic space shall be 30 inches (762 mm) at some point above the access measured vertically from the bottom of ceiling framing members. See Section M1305.1.3 for access requirements where mechanical equipment is located in attics.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-chapter-9]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHAPTER 9
ROOF ASSEMBLIES
SECTION R901
GENERAL
R901.1 Scope.

The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design, materials, construction and quality of roof assemblies.

Exception: Buildings and structures located within the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 44.

SECTION R902
FIRE CLASSIFICATION
R902.1 Roofing covering materials.

Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B or C roof assemblies shall be installed in jurisdictions designated by law as requiring their use or where the edge of the roof is less than 3 feet (914 mm) from a lot line. Where Class A, B, or C roof assemblies are required, they shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. Where required, the roof assembly shall be listed and identified as to Class by an approved testing agency.

Exceptions:

1.	Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

2.	Class A roof assemblies include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

3.	Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounces per square foot copper sheets installed over combustible decks.

R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes.

Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles shall be treated by impregnation with chemicals by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process, in accordance with AWPA C1. Each bundle shall be marked to identify the manufactured unit and the manufacturer, and shall be labeled to identify the classification of the material in accordance with the testing required in Section R902.1, the treating company and the quality control agency.

R902.3 Building-integrated photovoltaic product.

Reserved.

R902.4 Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems installed on or above the roof covering shall be tested, listed and identified with a fire classification in accordance with UL 1703 and UL 2703. Class A, B or C photovoltaic panel systems and modules shall be installed in jurisdictions designated by law as requiring their use or where the edge of the roof is less than 3 feet (914 mm) from a lot line.

SECTION R903
WEATHER PROTECTION
R903.1 General.

Roof decks shall be covered with approved roof coverings secured to the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Roof assemblies shall be designed and installed in accordance with this code and the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions such that the roof assembly shall serve to protect the building or structure.

R903.2 Flashing.

Flashings shall be used to seal roofing systems, where the system is interrupted or terminated and shall be installed in a manner that prevents moisture from entering the wall and roof through joints in copings, through moisture permeable materials and at intersections with parapet walls and other penetrations through the roof plane.

R903.2.1 Locations.

Flashings shall be installed at wall and roof intersections, wherever there is a change in roof slope or direction and around roof openings. Where flashing is of metal, the metal shall be corrosion resistant with a thickness of not less than provided in Table R903.2.1 or in compliance with RAS 111.

Exception: Flashing is not required at hip and ridge junctions.

TABLE R903.2.1

METAL FLASHING MATERIAL

MATERIAL	GAGE MINIMUM
THICKNESS
(inches)	GAGE	WEIGHT
(lbf)

Copper	0.024	—	1 (16 oz)
Aluminum	0.024	—	—
Stainless steel	—	28	—
Galvanized
steel
	0.0179	26
(zinc coated
G90)	26
(zinc coated
G90)
Aluminum
zinc coated
steel	0.0179	26
(AZ50
alum zinc)	26
(AZ50
alum zinc)
Zinc alloy	0.027	—	—
Lead	—	2.5 (40 oz.)	—
Painted terne	—	—	1.25 (20 oz.)
R903.2.2 Crickets and saddles.

A cricket or saddle shall be installed on the ridge side of any chimney or penetration more than 30 inches (762 mm) wide as measured perpendicular to the slope. Cricket or saddle coverings shall be sheet metal or of the same material as the roof covering.

Exception: Unit skylights installed in accordance with Section R308.6 and flashed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions shall be permitted to be installed without a cricket or saddle.

R903.2.3 Membrane flashings.

All membrane flashing shall be installed according to the roof assembly manufacturer’s published literature.

R903.3 Coping.

Parapet walls shall be properly coped with noncombustible, weatherproof materials of a width not less than the thickness of the parapet wall.

R903.4 Roof drainage.

Unless roofs are sloped to drain over roof edges, roof drains shall be installed at each low point of the roof. Where required for roof drainage, scuppers shall be placed level with the roof surface in a wall or parapet. The scupper shall be located as determined by the roof slope and contributing roof area.

R903.4.1 Overflow drains and scuppers.

When other means of drainage of overflow water is not provided, overflow scuppers shall be placed in walls or parapets not less than 2 inches (51 mm) nor more than 4 inches (102 mm) above the finished roof covering and shall be located as close as practical to required vertical leaders or down-spouts or wall and parapet scuppers. An overflow scupper shall be sized in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Plumbing. Overflow drains shall discharge to an approved location and shall not be connected to roof drain lines.

R903.4.2 One and two family dwellings, and private garages.

When gutters and leaders are placed on the outside of buildings, the gutters and leaders shall be constructed of metal or approved plastic for outdoor exposure with lapped, soldered or caulked joints and shall be securely fastened to the building with a corrosion resistant fastening device of similar or compatible material to the gutters and downspouts.

SECTION R904
MATERIALS
R904.1 Scope.

The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to the application of roof covering materials specified herein. Roof assemblies shall be applied in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Installation of roof assemblies shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section R905.

R904.2 Compatibility of materials.

Roof assemblies shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and with the building or structure to which the materials are applied.

R904.3 Material specifications and physical characteristics.

Roof covering materials shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. In the absence of applicable standards or where materials are of questionable suitability, testing by an approved testing agency shall be required by the building official to determine the character, quality and limitations of application of the materials.

R904.4 Product identification.

Roof covering materials shall be delivered in packages bearing the manufacturer’s identifying marks and approved testing agency labels required. Bulk shipments and/or site manufactured materials shall be accompanied by the same information or issued in the form of a certificate or on a bill of lading by the manufacturer.

R904.5 Fasteners.
R904.5.1 Nails.

Nails shall be corrosion-resistant nails conforming to ASTM F1667 or an equal corrosion resistance by coating, electro galvanization, mechanical galvanization, hot dipped galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metal and alloys or other suitable corrosion-resistant material, or corrosion resistance shall be demonstrated in accordance with TAS 114, Appendix E.

R904.5.2 Screws.

Wood screws shall conform to ANSI/ASME B 18.6.1. Screws shall be corrosion resistant by coating, galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metal or other suitable corrosion-resistant material. The corrosion resistance shall be demonstrated through one of the following methods:

1.	Corrosion resistance equivalent to ASTM A641, Class 1;

2.	Corrosion resistance in accordance with TAS 114, Appendix E;

3.	Corrosion-resistant coating exhibiting not more than 5-percent red rust after 1000 hours exposure in accordance with ASTM B117.

R904.5.3 Clips.

Clips shall be corrosion-resistant clips. The corrosion resistance shall meet 0.90 ounce per square foot (0.458 kg/m2) measured according ASTM A90/A90M, TAS 114 Appendix E or an equal corrosion resistance coating, electro galvanization, mechanical galvanization, hot dipped galvanization, stainless steel, nonferrous metals and alloys or other suitable corrosion-resistant material. Stainless steel clips shall conform to ASTM A240/A240M, Type 304.

SECTION R905
REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS
R905.1 Roof covering application.

Roof coverings shall be applied in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Unless otherwise specified in this section, roof coverings shall be installed to resist the component and cladding loads specified in Table R301.2(2), adjusted for height and exposure in accordance with Table R301.2(3).

R905.1.1 Underlayment.

Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall conform to the applicable standards listed in this chapter. Underlayment materials required to comply with ASTM D226, D1970, D4869, D6757, or ASTM D8257, shall bear a label indicating compliance to the standard designation and, if applicable, type classification indicated. Underlayment for roof slopes 2:12 and greater shall be applied and attached in accordance withSection R905.1.1.1 or R905.1.1.2 as applicable.

Exception: Compliance with Section R905.1.1.1 is not required for structural metal panels that do not require a substrate or underlayment.

Table R905.1.1(1) Underlayment Types. Reserved.

Table R905.1.1(2) Underlayment Application. Reserved.

Table R905.1.1(3) Underlayment Attachment. Reserved.

R905.1.1.1 Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles, wood shakes and wood shingles.

Underlayment for asphalt shingles, metal roof panels or shingles, mineral surfaced roll roofing, slate and slate-type shingles, wood shakes and wood shingles shall comply with one of the following methods:

1.	The entire roof deck shall be covered with an approved self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen underlayment complying with ASTM D1970 installed in accordance with both the underlayment manufacturer’s and roof covering manufacturer’s installation instructions for the deck material, roof ventilation configuration and climate exposure for the roof covering to be installed.

Exceptions:

1.	This method is not permitted for wood shingles or shakes.

2.	An existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and, where it is required, renailing off the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table R905.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

2.	A minimum 33/4-inch-wide (95 mm) strip of self-adhering polymer-modified bitumen membrane complying with ASTM D1970 or self-adhering flexible flashing tape complying with AAMA 711, Level 3 [for exposure up to 176°F (80°C)], installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions for the deck material, shall be applied over all joints in the roof decking. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table R905.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the membrane strips.

3.	Two layers of ASTM D226 Type II, ASTM D4869 Type III or Type IV or ASTM D8257 underlayment shall be installed as follows: Apply a strip of underlayment for the first course that is half the width of a full sheet parallel to and starting at the eaves, fastened sufficiently to hold in place. Starting at the eave, apply a full sheet of underlayment, for the second course. Apply the third course of underlayment overlapping the second course half the width of a full sheet plus 2 inches (51 mm). Overlap all successive courses half the width of a full sheet plus 1 inch (25 mm). End laps shall be 6 inches (152 mm) and shall be offset by 6 feet (1829 mm). Underlayment shall be attached to a nailable deck with corrosion- resistant fasteners with a maximum fastener spacing, measured horizontally and vertically, of 12 inches (305 mm) o.c. between side laps, and one row at the end and side laps fastened 6 inches (152 mm) o.c. Underlayment shall be attached using annular ring or deformed shank nails with metal or plastic caps with a nominal cap diameter of not less than 1 inch (25 mm). Metal caps are required where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, equals or exceeds 170 mph. Metal caps shall have a thickness of not less than 32-gage sheet metal. The minimum thickness of the outside edge of plastic caps shall be 0.035 inch (0.889 mm). The cap nail shank shall be not less than 0.083 inch (2.1082 mm) for ring shank nails. The cap nail shank shall have a length sufficient to penetrate through the roof sheathing or not less than 3/4 inch into the roof sheathing.

Exception: Use of ASTM D8257 underlayment is not permitted for wood shingles or shakes.

TABLE R905.1.1.1

UNDERLAYMENT WITH SELF-ADHERING STRIPS OVER ROOF DECKING JOINTS

ROOF COVERING	UNDERLAYMENT TYPE	UNDERLAYMENT ATTACHMENT
ROOF SLOPE 2:12 AND
LESS THAN 4:12
	ROOF SLOPE 4:12
AND GREATER

Asphalt Shingles,
Metal Roof Panels,
Photovoltaic Shingles	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869 Type
III or IV
ASTM D6757,
ASTM D8257
	Apply in accordance with
Section R905.1.1.1, Item 3.
	Underlayment shall be applied shingle fashion, parallel to and starting
from the eave and lapped 4 inches (51 mm); end laps shall be 6
inches and shall be offset by 6 feet. Underlayment shall be attached to
a nailable deck with corrosion-resistant fasteners with a maximum
fastener spacing measured horizontally and vertically of 12 inches
(305 mm) o.c. between side laps and one row at the end and side laps
fastened 6 inches (152 mm) o.c. Underlayment shall be attached
using annular ring or deformed shank nails with metal or plastic caps
with a nominal cap diameter of not less than 1 inch. Metal caps are
required where the ultimate design wind speed, Vult, equals or
exceeds 170 mph. Metal caps shall have a thickness of not less than
32-gage sheet metal. Power-driven metal caps shall have a minimum
thickness of 0.010 inch. Minimum thickness of the outside edge of
plastic caps shall be 0.035 inch. The cap nail shank shall be not less
than 0.083 inch for ring shank cap nails. Cap nail shank shall have a
length sufficient to penetrate through the roof sheathing or not less
than 3/4 inch into the roof sheathing.
Metal Roof Shingles,
Mineral-Surface Roll
Roofing, Slate and
Slate-type Shingles
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869 Type
III or IV
ASTM D8257

Wood Shingles,
Wood Shakes
	ASTM D226 Type II
ASTM D4869
Type III or IV
R905.1.1.2 Underlayment for concrete and clay tile.

Underlayment for concrete and clay tile shall comply with Section 905.3.3.

R905.1.2 Ice barriers.

Reserved.

R905.2 Asphalt shingles.

The installation of asphalt shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section or RAS 115.

R905.2.1 Sheathing requirements.

Asphalt shingles shall be fastened to solidly sheathed decks.

R905.2.2 Slope.

Asphalt shingles shall be used only on roof slopes of two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) or greater.

R905.2.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.2.4 Asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall comply with ASTM D3462.

R905.2.4.1 Installation of asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall be installed in accordance with Sections R905.2.6 and R905.2.6.1.

Table R905.2.4.1 Classification of Asphalt Roof Shingles. Reserved.

R905.2.5 Fasteners.

Fasteners for asphalt shingles shall be galvanized steel, stainless steel, aluminum or copper roofing nails, minimum 12-gage [0.105 inch (3 mm)] shank with a minimum 3/8-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) head, complying with ASTM F1667, of a length to penetrate through the roofing materials and not less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) into the roof sheathing. Where the roof sheathing is less than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) thick, the fasteners shall penetrate through the sheathing.

Exception: If the architectural appearance is to be preserved from below, an alternate method of attachment complying with the wind load requirements of Chapter 16 of the Florida Building Code, Building may be proposed unless otherwise addressed in Chapter 9. The alternative attachment shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Florida-registered architect or a Florida-registered engineer, which architect or engineer shall be proficient in structural design.

R905.2.6 Attachment.

Asphalt shingles shall have the minimum number of fasteners required by the manufacturer, but not less than four fasteners per strip shingle or two fasteners per individual shingle. Where the roof slope exceeds 21 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (21:12, 175-percent slope), shingles shall be installed as required by the manufacturer.

R905.2.6.1 Wind resistance of asphalt shingles.

Asphalt shingles shall be tested and classified in accordance with ASTM D3161, TAS 107 or ASTM D7158 and shall meet the required classification in accordancewith Table R905.2.6.1 to resist the basic wind speed in accordance with Figure R301.2(4). Asphalt shingle wrappers shall be labeled to indicate compliance with one of the required classifications, as shown in Table R905.2.6.1.

TABLE R905.2.6.1

CLASSIFICATION OF ASPHALT SHINGLES

Maximum Basic Wind Speed, Vult,
From Figure R301.2(4)
	Vasd as determined in accordance
with Section R301.2.1.3
	ASTM D7158	ASTM D3161
110	85	D, G or H	D or F
116	90	D, G or H	D or F
129	100	G or H	D or F
142	110	G or H	F
155	120	G or H	F
168	130	H	F
181	140	H	F
194	150	H	F
R905.2.7 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.2.8 Flashing.

Flashing for asphalt shingles shall comply with this section or RAS 111.

R905.2.8.1 Base and counter flashing.

Base and counter flashing shall be installed as follows:

1.	in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions, or

2.	in compliance with RAS 111, or

3.	a continuous metal minimum 4 inch by 4 inch “L” flashing shall be set in approved flashing cement and set flush to base of wall and over the underlayment. Both horizontal and vertical metal flanges shall be fastened 6 inches (152 mm) on center with approved fasteners. All laps shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) fully sealed in approved flashing cement. Flashing shall start at the lower portion of roof to ensure water-shedding capabilities of all metal laps. The entire edge of the horizontal flange shall be sealed covering all nail penetrations with approved flashing cement and membrane. Shingles shall overlap the horizontal flange and shall be set in approved flashing cement.

Base flashing shall be of either corrosion-resistant metal provided in Section R905.2.8.1 or mineral surface roll roofing weighing a minimum of 77 pounds per 100 square feet (3.76 kg/m2). Counter flashing shall be corrosion-resistant metal with a minimum thickness provided in Table R903.2.1.

R905.2.8.2 Valleys.

Valley linings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions before applying shingles. Valley linings of the following types shall be permitted:

1.	For open valleys (valley lining exposed) lined with metal, the valley lining shall be not less than 16 inches (406 mm) wide and of any of the corrosion-resistant metals in Table R903.2.1.

2.	For open valleys, valley lining of two plies of mineral-surfaced roll roofing, complying with ASTM D3909 or ASTM D6380 Class M, shall be permitted. The bottom layer shall be 18 inches (457 mm) and the top layer not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide.

3.	For closed valleys (valley covered with shingles), valley lining of one ply of smooth roll roofing complying with ASTM D6380 Class S and not less than 36 inches wide (914 mm) or valley lining as described in Item 1 or 2 shall be permitted. Self-adhering polymer modified bitumen underlayment complying with ASTM D1970 and not less than 36 inches (914 mm) wide shall be permitted in lieu of the lining material.

Table R905.2.8.2 Valley Lining Material. Reserved.

R905.2.8.3 Sidewall flashing.

Flashing against a vertical sidewall shall be by the step-flashing method or continous “L” flashing method.

R905.2.8.4 Other flashing.

Flashing against a vertical front wall, as well as soil stack, vent pipe and chimney flashing, shall be applied in accordance with the asphalt shingle manufacturer’s instructions.

R905.2.8.5 Drip edge.

Provide drip edge at eaves and gables of shingle roofs. Overlap to be a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm). Eave drip edges shall extend 1/2 inch (13 mm) below sheathing and extend back on the roof a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm). Drip edge shall be installed over the underlayment. Self-adhering ASTM D1970 underlayment may be installed over a primed drip edge flange. There shall be a minimum 4 inch (51 mm) width of roof cement installed over the drip edge flange or the self-adhering underlayment. Drip edge shall be mechanically fastened a maximum of 12 inches (305 mm) on center. Where the Vasd as determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3 is 110 mph (177 km/h) or greater or the mean roof height exceeds 33 feet (10 058 mm), drip edges shall be mechanically fastened a maximum of 4 inches (102 mm) on center.

R905.3 Clay and concrete tile.

The installation of clay and concrete tile shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions, or recommendations of FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3.

R905.3.1 Deck requirements.

Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid sheathing, except where the roof covering is specifically designed and tested in accordance with Chapter 16, Florida Building Code, Building to be applied over spaced structural sheathing boards.

R905.3.2 Deck slope.

Clay and concrete roof tile shall be installed on roof slopes in accordance with the recommendations of FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3.

R905.3.3 Underlayment.

Unless otherwise noted, required underlayment shall comply with the underlayment manufacturer’s installation instructions in accordance with the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3.

Exception: Where an existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and, where it is required, renailing of the roof sheathing in accordance with Section 706.7.1 of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with a two-ply system as described in the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

R905.3.3.1 Slope and underlayment requirements.

Refer to manufacturer’s installation instructions, FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3 for underlayment and slope requirements for specific roof tile systems.

R905.3.4 Clay tile.

Clay roof tile shall comply with ASTM C1167.

R905.3.5 Concrete tile.

Concrete roof tile shall comply with ASTM C1492.

R905.3.6 Fasteners.

Nails shall be corrosion resistant and not less than 11 gage, 5/16-inch (11 mm) head, and of sufficient length to penetrate the deck not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) or through the thickness of the deck, whichever is less or in accordance with the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3. Attaching wire for clay or concrete tile shall not be smaller than 0.083 inch (2.1 mm).

R905.3.7 Application.

Tile shall be applied in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, recommendations of the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition.

Table R905.3.7 Clay and Concrete Tile Attachment. Reserved.

R905.3.7.1 Hip and ridge tiles.

Hip and ridge tiles shall be installed in accordance with FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3.

R905.3.8 Flashing.

At the juncture of roof vertical surfaces, flashing and counterflashing shall be provided in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, recommendations of the FRSA/TRI Florida High Wind Concrete and Clay Roof Tile Installation Manual, Seventh Edition where the Vasd is determined in accordance with Section R301.2.1.3.

R905.4 Metal roof shingles.

The installation of metal roof shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section. Metal roofing shingles shall be factory or field manufactured in accordance with the manufacturers’ product approval specifications and limitations of use. Metal roofing shingles shall be factory or field manufactured under a quality assurance program that is audited by a third-party quality assurance entity approved by the Florida Building Commission for that purpose.

R905.4.1 Deck requirements.

Metal roof shingles shall be applied to a solid or closely fitted deck, except where the roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to spaced sheathing.

R905.4.2 Deck slope.

Metal roof shingles shall not be installed on roof slopes below three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).

R905.4.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.4.3.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.4.4 Material standards.

Metal roof shingle roof coverings shall comply with Table R905.4.4. The materials used for metal roof shingle roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or be made corrosion resistant in accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses listed in Table R905.4.4.

TABLE R905.4.4

METAL ROOF COVERINGS

ROOF COVERING TYPE	STANDARD	STANDARD APPLICATION RATE/THICKNESS
Aluminum	ASTM B209	0.024-inch minimum thickness for roll-formed panels and 0.019-inch minimum thickness for
press-formed shingles

Aluminum-zinc coated
steel
	ASTM A792	0.013-inch minimum thickness, AZ 50 (coated minimum application rate)
Cold-rolled copper	ASTM B370	Minimum 16 oz./sq. ft. and 12 oz./sq. ft. high yield copper for metal-sheet roof covering systems:
12 oz./sq. ft. for preformed metal shingle systems

Copper	ASTM B370	16 oz./sq. ft. for metal-sheet roof-covering systems; 12 oz./sq. ft. for preformed metal shingle
systems.

Galvanized steel	ASTM A653	0.013-inch minimum thickness, G-90 zinc-coateda
Hard lead	—	2 lbs./sq. ft.
Lead-coated copper	ASTM B101	—
Prepainted steel	ASTM A755	0.0142 inch minimum thickness
Soft lead	—	3 lbs./sq. ft.
Stainless steel	ASTM A240	300 Series alloys
Steel	ASTM A924/
ASTM A924M
	—
Terne and terne-coated
stainless
	—	Terne coating of 40 lbs. per double base box, field painted where applicable in accordance with
manufacturer’s installation instructions

Zinc	—	0.027 inch minimum thickness; 99.995% electrolytic high grade zinc with alloy additives of copper
(0.08% – 0.20%), titanium (0.07% – 0.12%) and aluminum (0.015%)

For SI: 1 ounce per square foot = 0.0026 kg/m2, 1 pound per square foot = 4.882 kg/m2, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

a.	For Group U buildings, the minimum coating thickness for ASTM A653 galvanized steel roofing shall be G-60.

R905.4.4.1 Wind resistance of metal roof shingles.

Metal roof shingles applied to a solid or closely fitted deck shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D3161, FM 4474, UL 580, UL 1897 or TAS 107. Metal roof shingles tested in accordance with ASTM D3161 shall meet the classification requirements of Table R905.4.4.1 for the appropriate maximum basic wind speed and the metal shingle packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with ASTM D3161 and the required classification in Table R905.4.4.1.

TABLE R905.4.4.1

CLASSIFICATION OF METAL ROOF SHINGLES TESTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ASTM D3161

MAXIMUM BASIC WIND SPEED
FROM FIGURE R301.2(4) or ASCE 7
	Vasd	ASTM D3161
110	85	D or F
116	90	D or F
129	100	D or F
142	110	F
155	120	F
168	130	F
181	140	F
194	150	F
R905.4.5 Application.

Metal roof shingles shall be installed in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of metal roof shingles shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof listed in Table R301.2(2).

R905.4.6 Flashing.

Roof valley flashing shall be of corrosion-resistant metal of the same material as the roof covering or shall comply with the standards in Table R905.4.4. Valley flashing shall extend not less than 8 inches (203 mm) from the centerline each way and shall have a splash diverter rib not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) in height at the flow line formed as part of the flashing. Sections of flashing shall have an end lap of not less than 4 inches (102 mm). The metal valley flashing shall have a 36-inch-wide (914 mm) underlayment directly under it consisting of one layer of underlayment running the full length of the valley, in addition to underlayment required for metal roof shingles.

R905.5 Mineral-surfaced roll roofing.

The installation of mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall comply with this section.

R905.5.1 Deck requirements.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.

R905.5.2 Deck slope.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall not be applied on roof slopes below one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope).

R905.5.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.5.3.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.5.4 Material standards.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall conform to ASTM D3909 or ASTM D6380, Class M or Class WS.

R905.5.5 Application.

Mineral-surfaced roll roofing shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions.

R905.6 Slate and slate-type shingles.

The installation of slate and slate-type shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.6.1 Deck requirements.

Slate shingles shall be fastened to solidly sheathed roofs.

R905.6.2 Deck slope.

Slate shingles shall be used only on slopes of four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater.

R905.6.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply with Section R905.1.1. Underlayment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R905.6.3.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.6.4 Material standards.

Slate shingles shall comply with ASTM C406.

R905.6.5 Application.

Minimum headlap for slate shingles shall be in accordance with Table R905.6.5. Slate shingles shall be secured to the roof with two fasteners per slate. Slate shingles shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of slate and slate-type shingles shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof listed in Table R301.2(2).

TABLE R905.6.5

SLATE SHINGLE HEADLAP

SLOPE	HEADLAP (inches)
4:12 = slope < 8:12	4
8:12 = slope < 20:12	3
Slope = 20:12	2

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

R905.6.6 Flashing.

Flashing and counterflashing shall be made with sheet metal. Valley flashing shall be a minimum of 16 inches (406 mm) wide. Valley and flashing metal shall be a minimum thickness as provided in Table R903.2.1 for nonferrous metal or stainless steel. Chimneys, stucco or brick walls shall have not less than two plies of felt for a cap flashing consisting of a 4-inch-wide (102 mm) strip of felt set in plastic cement and extending 1 inch (25 mm) above the first felt and a top coating of plastic cement. The felt shall extend over the base flashing 2 inches (51 mm).

R905.6.7

Slate and slate-type shingles shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of slate and slate-type shingles shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof listed in Table R301.2(2).

R905.7 Wood shingles.

All wood shingles shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau New Roof Construction Manual or RAS 130. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of wood shingles shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof listed in Table R301.2(2).

R905.7.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

R905.7.1.1 Solid sheathing required.

Reserved.

R905.7.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

R905.7.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.7.3.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.7.4 Material standards.

Wood shingles shall be of naturally durable wood and comply with the requirements of Table R905.7.4.

TABLE R905.7.4

WOOD SHINGLE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL	MINIMUM GRADES	APPLICABLE
GRADING RULES

Wood shingles of naturally
durable wood
	1, 2 or 3	Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
R905.7.5 Application.

Reserved.

Table R905.7.5(1) Wood Shingle Weather Exposure and Roof Slope. Reserved.

Table R905.7.5(2) Nail Requirements for Wood Shakes and Wood Shingles. Reserved.

R905.7.6 Valley flashing.

Reserved.

R905.7.6.1 Fasteners.
R905.7.6.1.1 Nails.

Fasteners to attach wood shingles shall be Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal areas) stainless steel ring-shank nails with a minimum penetration of 0.75 inch into the sheathing. Each shingle shall be attached with a minimum of two fasteners.

R905.7.7 Label required.

Each bundle of shingles shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency.

R905.8 Wood shakes.

All wood shakes shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions, the Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau New Roof Construction Manual or RAS 130. The product approval shall state the allowable uplift resistance for the attachment system. The installation of wood shakes shall be limited to roofs where the allowable uplift resistance is equal to or greater than the design uplift pressure for the roof listed in Table R301.2(2).

R905.8.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

R905.8.1.1 Solid sheathing required.

Reserved.

R905.8.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

R905.8.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.8.3.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.8.4 Interlayment.

Reserved.

R905.8.5 Material standards.

Wood shakes shall comply with the requirements of Table R905.8.5.

TABLE R905.8.5

WOOD SHAKE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

MATERIAL	MINIMUM
GRADES
	APPLICABLE
GRADING RULES

Wood shakes of naturally durable
wood
	1	Cedar Shake and
Shingle Bureau

Tapersawn shakes of naturally
durable wood
	1 or 2	Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
Preservative-treated shakes and
shingles of naturally durable wood
	1	Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
Fire-retardant-treated shakes and
shingles of naturally durable wood
	1	Cedar Shake and Shingle Bureau
Preservative-treated tapersawn
shakes of Southern pine treated in
accordance with AWPA Standard U1
(Commodity Specification A,
Special Requirement 4.6)	1 or 2	Forest Products
Laboratory of the
Texas Forest
Services
R905.8.6 Application.

Reserved.

Table R905.8.6 Wood Shake Weather Exposure and Roof Slope. Reserved.

R905.8.7 Shake placement.

Reserved.

R905.8.7.1 Fasteners.
R905.8.7.1.1 Nails.

Fasteners to attach wood shakes shall be Type 304 (Type 316 for coastal areas) stainless steel ring-shank nails with a minimum penetration of 0.75 inch into the sheathing. Each shake shall be attached with a minimum of two fasteners.

R905.8.8 Valley flashing.

Reserved.

R905.8.9 Label required.

Each bundle of shakes shall be identified by a label of an approved grading or inspection bureau or agency.

R905.9 Built-up roofs.

The installation of built-up roofs shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.9.1 Slope.

Built-up roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage, except for coal-tar built-up roofs, which shall have a design slope of a minimum one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope).

R905.9.2 Material standards.

Built-up roof covering materials shall comply with the standards in Table R905.9.2 or UL 55A.

TABLE R905.9.2

BUILT-UP ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL STANDARD	STANDARD
Acrylic coatings used in roofing	ASTM D6083
Aggregate surfacing	ASTM D1863
Asphalt adhesive used in roofing	ASTM D3747
Asphalt cements used in roofing	ASTM D2822; D3019; D4586
Asphalt-coated glass fiber base sheet	ASTM D4601
Asphalt coatings used in roofing	ASTM D 1227; D2823; D2824; D4479
Asphalt glass felt	ASTM D2178
Asphalt primer used in roofing	ASTM D41
Asphalt-saturated and asphalt-coated organic felt base sheet	ASTM D2626
Asphalt-saturated organic felt (perforated)	ASTM D226
Asphalt used in roofing	ASTM D312
Coal-tar cements used in roofing	ASTM D4022; D5643
Coal-tar primer used in roofing, dampproofing and waterproofing	ASTM D43
Coal-tar saturated organic felt	ASTM D227
Coal-tar used in roofing	ASTM D450, Type I or II
Glass mat, coal tar	ASTM D4990
Glass mat, venting type	ASTM D4897
Mineral-surfaced inorganic cap sheet	ASTM D3909
Thermoplastic fabrics used in roofing	ASTM D5665; D5726
R905.9.2.1

Rosin paper shall be used when the membrane is applied directly to a wood deck or cementitious fiber decks.

R905.9.3 Application.

Reserved.

R905.10 Metal roof panels.

The installation of metal roof panels shall comply with the provisions of this section. Metal roofing panels shall be factory or field manufactured in accordance with the manufacturers’ product approval specifications and limitations of use. Metal roofing panels shall be factory or field manufactured under a quality assurance program that is audited by a third-party quality assurance entity approved by the Florida Building Commission for that purpose.

R905.10.1 Deck requirements.

Metal roof panel roof coverings shall be applied to solid or spaced sheathing, except where the roof covering is specifically designed to be applied to spaced supports.

R905.10.2 Slope.

Minimum slopes for metal roof panels shall comply with the following:

1.	The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered-seam metal roofs without applied lap sealant shall be three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope).

2.	The minimum slope for lapped, nonsoldered-seam metal roofs with applied lap sealant shall be one-half unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (4-percent slope). Lap sealants shall be applied in accordance with the approved manufacturer’s installation instructions.

3.	The minimum slope for standing-seam roof systems shall be one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

R905.10.3 Material standards.

Metal-sheet roof covering systems that incorporate supporting structural members shall be designed in accordance with the Florida Building Code, Building. Metal-sheet roof coverings installed over structural decking shall comply with Table R905.4.4. The materials used for metal-sheet roof coverings shall be naturally corrosion resistant or provided with corrosion resistance in accordance with the standards and minimum thicknesses shown in Table R905.4.4.

Table R905.10.3(1) Metal Roof Covering Standards. Reserved.

Table R905.10.3(2) Minimum Corrosion Resistance. Reserved.

R905.10.4 Attachment.

Metal roof panels shall be secured to the supports in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. In the absence of manufacturer’s installation instructions, the following fasteners shall be used:

1.	Galvanized fasteners shall be used for steel roofs.

2.	Copper, brass, bronze, copper alloy and 300-series stainless steel fasteners shall be used for copper roofs.

3.	Stainless steel fasteners are acceptable for metal roofs.

4.	Aluminum-zinc coated fasteners are acceptable for aluminum-zinc coated roofs.

R905.10.5 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.11 Modified bitumen roofing.

The installation of modified bitumen roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.11.1 Slope.

Modified bitumen membrane roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

R905.11.2 Material standards.

Modified bitumen roof coverings shall comply with the standards in Table R905.11.2.

TABLE R905.11.2

MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOFING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylic coating	ASTM D6083
Asphalt adhesive	ASTM D3747
Asphalt cement	ASTM D3019
Asphalt coating	ASTM D1227; D2824
Asphalt primer	ASTM D41
Modified bitumen roof membrane	ASTM D6162; D6163;
D6164; D6222; D6223;
D6298; D6509
R905.11.3 Application.

Modified bitumen roofs shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. The approved allowable uplift resistance for the modified bitumen roof shall be equal to or greater than the uplift resistance for the roof based on Table R301.2(2).

R905.12 Thermoset single-ply roofing.

The installation of thermoset single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.12.1 Slope.

Thermoset single-ply membrane roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

R905.12.2 Material standards.

Thermoset single-ply roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D4637 or ASTM D5019.

R905.12.3 Application.

Thermoset single-ply roofs shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. The approved allowable uplift resistance for the thermoset single-ply membrane roof shall be equal to or greater than the uplift resistance for the roof based on Table R301.2(2).

R905.13 Thermoplastic single-ply roofing.

The installation of thermoplastic single-ply roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.13.1 Slope.

Thermoplastic single-ply membrane roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

R905.13.2 Material standards.

Thermoplastic single-ply roof coverings shall comply with ASTM D4434, ASTM D6754 or ASTM D6878.

R905.13.3 Application.

Thermoplastic single-ply roofs shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. The approved allowable uplift resistance for the thermoplastic single-ply roof shall be equal to or greater than the uplift resistance for the roof based on Table R301.2(2).

R905.14 Sprayed polyurethane foam roofing.

The installation of sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section or incompliance with RAS 109 and 109A.

R905.14.1 Slope.

Sprayed polyurethane foam roofs shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) for drainage.

R905.14.2 Material standards.

Spray-applied polyurethane foam insulation shall comply with ASTM C1029, Type III or IV or ASTM D7425.

R905.14.3 Application.

Foamed-in-place roof insulation shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s instructions. A liquid-applied protective coating that complies with Table R905.14.3 shall be applied not less than 2 hours nor more than 72 hours following the application of the foam. The approved allowable uplift resistance for the sprayed polyurethane foam roofing shall be equal to or greater than the uplift resistance for the roof based on Table R301.2(2).

TABLE R905.14.3

PROTECTIVE COATING MATERIAL STANDARDS

MATERIAL	STANDARD
Acrylic coating	ASTM D6083
Silicone coating	ASTM D6694
Moisture-cured polyurethane coating	ASTM D6947
R905.14.4 Foam plastics.

Foam plastic materials and installation shall comply with Section R316.

R905.15 Liquid-applied roofing.

The installation of liquid-applied roofing shall comply with the provisions of this section.

R905.15.1 Slope.

Liquid-applied roofing shall have a design slope of not less than one-fourth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope).

R905.15.2 Material standards.

Liquid-applied roofing shall comply with ASTM C836, C957, D1227, D3468, D6083, D6694 or D6947.

R905.15.3 Application.

Liquid-applied roofing shall be installed in accordance with this chapter and the manufacturer’s approved installation instructions. The approved allowable uplift resistance for the liquid-applied coatings shall be equal to or greater than the uplift resistance for the roof based on Table R301.2(2).

R905.16 Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles.

The installation of building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall comply with the provisions of this section, Section R324 and NFPA 70.

R905.16.1 Deck requirements.

Reserved.

R905.16.2 Deck slope.

Reserved.

R905.16.3 Underlayment.

Underlayment shall comply and be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1.

R905.16.4 Underlayment application.

Reserved.

R905.16.4.1 Ice barrier.

Reserved.

R905.16.4.2 Underlayment and high winds.

Reserved.

R905.16.5 Material standards.

Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703.

R905.16.6 Attachment.

Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R905.16.7 Wind resistance.

Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall be tested in accordance with procedures and acceptance criteria in ASTM D3161 or TAS 107. Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingles shall comply with the classification requirements of Table R905.2.6.1 for the appropriate maximum basic wind speed. Building-integrated photovoltaic roofing modules/shingle packaging shall bear a label to indicate compliance with the procedures in ASTM D3161 or TAS 107 and the required classification from Table R905.2.6.1.

R905.17 Photovoltaic systems.

Rooftop mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed in accordance with this section.

R905.17.1 Wind resistance.

Rooftop mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed for wind loads in accordance with ASCE 7.

R905.17.2 Fire classification.

Rooftop mounted photovoltaic systems shall have the same fire classification as required for the roof assembly by Section R902.

R905.17.3 Installation.

Rooftop mounted photovoltaic systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

R905.17.4 Photovoltaic panels and modules.

Photovoltaic panels and modules mounted on top of a roof shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.

SECTION R906
ROOF INSULATION
R906.1 General.

Where above-deck thermal insulation is installed, such insulation shall be covered with an approved roof covering and shall comply with NFPA 276 or UL 1256.

R906.2 Material standards.

Above-deck thermal insulation board shall comply with the standards in Table R906.2.

TABLE R906.2

MATERIAL STANDARDS FOR ROOF INSULATION

Cellular glass board	ASTM C552 or ASTM C1902
Mineral wool board	ASTM C726
Composite boards	ASTM C1289, Type III, IV, V or VI
Expanded polystyrene	ASTM C578
Extruded polystyrene board	ASTM C578
Perlite board	ASTM C728
Polyisocyanurate board	ASTM C1289, Type I or II
Wood fiberboard	ASTM C208
Fiber-reinforced gypsum
board
	ASTM C1278
Glass-faced gypsum board	ASTM C1177
SECTION R907
ROOFTOP-MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
R907.1 Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic systems.

Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section R324, NFPA 70 and the Florida Fire Prevention Code.

SECTION R908
EXISTING ROOFING
R908.1 General.

Materials and methods of application used for re-covering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.

Exceptions:

1.	Reroofing shall not be required to meet the minimum design slope requirement of one-quarter unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (2-percent slope) in Section R905 for roofs that provide positive roof drainage.

2.	An existing self-adhering modified bitumen underlayment that has been previously installed over the roof decking and where it is required, renailing of the roof sheathing in accordance with Section R908.7.1 can be confirmed or verified. An approved underlayment in accordance with Table R905.1.1.1 for the applicable roof covering shall be applied over the entire roof over the existing self-adhered modified bitumen underlayment.

R908.1.1

Not more than 25 percent of the total roof area or roof section of any existing building or structure shall be repaired, replaced or recovered in any 12-month period unless the roof covering on the entire existing roof system or roof section is replaced or recovered to conform to the requirements of this code.

Exception: If an existing roofing system or roof section was built, repaired, or replaced in compliance with the requirements of the 2007 Florida Building Code, or any subsequent editions of the Florida Building Code, and 25 percent or more of such roofing system or roof section is being repaired, replaced, or recovered, only the repaired, replaced, or recovered portion is required to be constructed in accordance with the Florida Building Code in effect, as applicable. Pursuant to s. 553.844(5), Florida Statutes, a local government may not adopt by ordinance an administrative or technical amendment to this exception.

R908.2 Structural and construction loads.

The structural roof components shall be capable of supporting the roof covering system and the material and equipment loads that will be encountered during installation of the roof covering system.

R908.3 Recovering versus replacement.

New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers of roof coverings where any of the following conditions occur:

1.	Where the existing roof or roof covering is water soaked or has deteriorated to the point that the existing roof or roof covering is not adequate as a base for additional roofing.

2.	Where the existing roof covering is wood shingle or shake, slate, clay, cement or asbestos-cement tile.

3.	Where the existing roof has two or more applications of any type of roof covering.

4.	When blisters exist in any roofing, unless blisters are cut or scraped open and remaining materials secured down before applying additional roofing.

5.	Where the existing roof covering is to be used for attachment for a new roof system and compliance with the securement provisions of Section R905 cannot be met.

Exceptions:

1.	Complete and separate roofing systems, such as standing-seam metal roof systems, that are designed to transmit the roof loads directly to the building’s structural system and that do not rely on existing roofs and roof coverings for support, shall not require the removal of existing roof coverings.

2.	Reserved.

3.	The application of new protective coating over existing spray polyurethane foam roofing systems shall be permitted without tear-off of existing roof coverings.

4.	Reserved.

5.	Roof coating. Application of elastomeric and/or maintenance coating systems over existing asphalt shingles shall be in accordance with the shingle manufacturer’s approved installation instructions.

R908.3.1 Roof re-cover.

Reserved.

R908.3.1.1 Roof re-cover not allowed.

Reserved.

R908.4 Roof re-covering.

Reserved.

R908.5 Reinstallation/reuse of materials.

Existing or salvaged slate, clay or concrete tile shall be permitted for reinstallation or reuse, to repair an existing slate or tile roof, except that salvaged slate or tile shall be of like kind in both material and profile. Damaged, cracked or broken slate or tile shall not be reinstalled. The building official may permit salvaged slate, clay and concrete tile to be installed on additions and new construction, when the tile is tested in compliance with the provisions of Section R905 or Section 1523 of the Florida Building Code, Building (HVHZ shall comply with Section 1523 of the Florida Building Code, Building) and installed in accordance with Section R905 or Section 1518 of the Florida Building Code, Building (HVHZ shall comply with Section 1518 of the Florida Building Code, Building). Existing vent flashing, metal edgings, drain outlets, collars and metal counterflashings shall not be reinstalled where rusted, damaged or deteriorated. Aggregate surfacing materials shall not be reinstalled (High-Velocity Hurricane Zones shall comply with Sections 1512 through 1525 of the Florida Building Code, Building).

R908.6 Flashings.

Flashings shall be reconstructed in accordance with approved manufacturer’s installation instructions or in compliance with RAS 111. Metal flashing to which bituminous materials are to be adhered shall be primed prior to installation.

R908.7 Wind mitigation.

When a roof covering on an existing structure with a sawn lumber, wood plank or wood structural panel roof deck is removed and replaced, the following procedures shall be permitted to be performed by the roofing contractor:

(a)	Roof-decking attachment shall be as required by Section R908.7.1.

(b)	A secondary water barrier shall be provided as required by Section R908.7.2.

Exception: Structures permitted subject to the Florida Building Code are not required to comply with this section.

R908.7.1 Roof decking attachment for existing structures with wood roof decks.

Fastening for sawn lumber, wood plank or wood structural panel roof decks shall be in accordance with Section R908.7.1.1 or R908.7.1.2 as appropriate for the existing construction. 8d nails shall be a minimum of 0.113 inch (2.9 mm) in diameter and shall be a minimum of 21/4 inch (57 mm) long to qualify for the provisions of this section for existing nails regardless of head shape or head diameter.

R908.7.1.1

Roof decking consisting of sawn lumber or wood planks up to 12 inches wide and secured with at least two nails (minimum size 8d) to each roof framing member it crosses shall be deemed to be sufficiently connected. Sawn lumber or wood plank decking secured with smaller fasteners than 8d nails or with fewer than two nails (minimum size 8d) to each framing member it crosses shall be deemed sufficiently connected if fasteners are added such that two clipped head, round head, or ring shank nails (minimum size 8d) are in place on each framing member it crosses.

R908.7.1.2

For roof decking consisting of wood structural panels, fasteners and spacing required in columns 3 and 4 of Table R908.7.1.2 are deemed to comply with the indicated design wind speed range. Wood structural panel connections retrofitted with a two part urethane based closed cell adhesive sprayed onto the joint between the sheathing and framing members are deemed to comply provided testing using the manufacturer’s recommended application on panels connected with 6d smooth shank nails at no more than a 6-inch edge and 12-inch field spacing demonstrate an uplift resistance of a minimum of 200 psf.

Supplemental fasteners as required by Table R908.7.1.2 shall be ASTM F1667 classification RSRS-01 ring shank nails with the following minimum dimensions:

1.	0.113-inch nominal shank diameter.

2.	Ring diameter a minimum of 0.012-inch greater than shank diameter.

3.	16 to 20 rings per inch.

4.	A minimum 0.280-inch full round head diameter.

5.	Ring shank to extend a minimum of 11/2 inches from the tip of the nail.

6.	Minimum 21/4 inch nail length.

TABLE R908.7.1.2

SUPPLEMENT FASTENERS AT PANEL EDGES AND INTERMEDIATE FRAMING

EXISTING
FASTENERS
	EXISTING
SPACING
	Vasd 110 MPH OR
LESS
SUPPLEMENTAL
FASTENER
SPACING SHALL
BE NO GREATER
THAN	Vasd GREATER
THAN 110 MPH
SUPPLEMENTAL
FASTENER
SPACING
SHALL BE NO
GREATER THAN
Staples or 6d	Any	6 inches o.c.b	6 inches o.c.b
8d clipped
head, round
head, smooth or
ring shank
	6 inches
o.c. or
less	None necessary	None necessary
8d clipped
head, round
head, smooth or
ring shank
	Greater
than
6 inches
o.c.
	6 inches o.c.a	6 inches o.c.a

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm.

a.	Maximum spacing determined based on existing fasteners and supplemental fasteners.

b.	Maximum spacing determined based on supplemental fasteners only.

c.	Vasd shall be determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1 of the Florida Building Code, Building or Section R301.2.1.3 of the Florida Building Code, Residential.

R908.7.2 Roof secondary water barrier for existing structures with wood roof decks.

When a roof covering is removed and replaced, a secondary water barrier shall be installed in accordance with Section R905.1.1 or Section 1518.2 of the Florida Building Code, Building.

Exceptions:

1.	Roof slopes < 2:12 having a continuous roof system shall be deemed to comply with Section R908.7.2 requirements for a secondary water barrier.

2.	Clay and concrete tile roof systems installed as required by the Florida Building Code, Residential are deemed to comply with the requirements of Section R908.7.2 for Secondary Water Barriers.

R908.8

When a roof covering on an existing structure with a sawn lumber, wood plank or wood structural panel roof deck is removed and replaced on a building that is located in the wind-borne debris region as defined in the Florida Building Code, Building and that has an insured value of $300,000 or more or, if the building is uninsured or for which documentation of insured value is not presented, has a just valuation for the structure for purposes of ad valorem taxation of $300,000 or more:

(a)	Roof to wall connections shall be improved as required by Section R908.8.1.

(b)	Mandated retrofits of the roof-to-wall connection shall not be required beyond a 15 percent increase in the cost of re-roofing.

Exception: Structures permitted subject to the Florida Building Code are not required to comply with this section.

R908.8.1 Roof-to-wall connections for structures with wood roof decks.

Where required by Section R908.8, the intersection of roof framing with the wall below shall provide sufficient resistance to meet the uplift loads specified in Table R908.8.1 either because of existing conditions or through retrofit measures. As an alternative to an engineered design, the prescriptive retrofit solutions provided in Sections R908.8.1.1 through R908.8.1.7 shall be accepted as meeting the mandated roof-to-wall retrofit requirements.

Exceptions:

1.	Where it can be demonstrated (by code adoption date documentation and permit issuance date) that roof-to-wall connections and/or roof-to-foundation continuous load path requirements were required at the time of original construction.

2.	Roof-to-wall connections shall not be required unless evaluation and installation of connections at gable ends or all corners can be completed for 15 percent of the cost of roof replacement.

TABLE R908.8.1

REQUIRED UPLIFT CAPACITIES FOR ROOF-TO-WALL CONNECTIONSa, b, c (POUNDS PER LINEAR FOOT)

	Ultimate
Design Wind
Speed, Vultd	Roof Span (feet)	Overhangs
12	20	24	28	32	36	40
Within 6 feet
of building
corner	85	-69.85	-116.42	-139.70	-162.99	-186.27	-209.55	-232.84	-27
90	-82.67	-137.78	-165.34	-192.90	-220.45	-248.01	-275.57	-30.3
100	-110.51	-184.18	-221.01	-257.85	-294.68	-331.52	-368.36	-37.4
110	-141.27	-235.45	-282.55	-329.64	-376.73	-423.82	-470.91	-45.3
120	-174.97	-291.62	-349.94	-408.26	-466.59	-524.91	-583.23	-53.9
130	-211.60	-352.66	-423.19	-493.72	-564.26	-634.79	-705.32	-63.2
140	-251.15	-418.59	-502.31	-586.02	-669.74	-753.46	-837.18	-73.3
150	-293.64	-489.40	-587.28	-685.16	-783.04	-880.92	-978.80	-84.2
170	-387.40	-645.67	-774.81	-903.94	-1033.08	-1162.21	-1291.35	-108
Greater than
6 feet from
building
corner
	85	-39.10	-65.17	-78.20	-91.24	-104.27	-117.30	-130.34	-27
90	-48.20	-80.33	-96.39	-112.46	-128.52	-144.59	-160.66	-30.3
100	-67.95	-113.24	-135.89	-158.54	-181.19	-203.84	-226.49	-37.4
110	-89.78	-149.63	-179.55	-209.48	-239.40	-269.33	-299.25	-45.3
120	-113.68	-189.47	-227.37	-265.26	-303.16	-341.05	-378.94	-53.9
130	-139.67	-232.78	-279.34	-325.90	-372.45	-419.01	-465.57	-63.2
140	-167.74	-279.56	-335.47	-391.38	-447.29	-503.21	-559.12	-73.3
150	-197.88	-329.80	-395.76	-461.72	-527.68	-593.64	-659.60	-84.2
170	-264.41	-440.68	-528.81	-616.95	-705.08	-793.22	-881.35	-108

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm; 1 pound per linear foot = 1.488 kg/m; 1 mile per hour = 0.305 m/s.

a.	The uplift loads are pounds per lineal foot of building length. For roof uplift connections multiply by 1.33 for framing spaced 16 inches on center and multiply by 2 for framing spaced 24 inches on center.

b.	The uplift loads do not account for the effects of overhangs. The magnitude of the above loads shall be increased by adding the overhang loads found in the table. The overhang loads are also based on framing spaced 12 inches on center. The overhang loads given shall be multiplied by the overhang projection and added to the roof uplift value in the table.

c.	For Ultimate Design Wind Speeds, Vult, greater than 170 mph, wind uplift forces shall be determined in accordance with Florida Building Code, Residential Section R301.2.1.1 or ASCE 7.

d.	Ultimate Design Wind Speeds determined from Figure 1609.3(1) in the Florida Building Code, Building or Figure R301.2(4) in the Florida Building Code, Residential.

R908.8.1.1 Access for retrofitting roof to wall connections.

These provisions are not intended to limit the means for gaining access to the structural elements of the roof and wall for the purposes of retrofitting the connection. The retrofit of roof to wall connections can be made by access through the area under the eave, from above through the roof, or from the interior of the house. Methods for above access include removal of roof panels or sections thereof or removal of portions of roof paneling at selected locations large enough for access, viewing, and installing the retrofit connectors and fasteners.

Where panels or sections are removed, the removed portions shall not be reused. New paneling shall be used and fastened as in new construction.

Holes shall be deemed adequately repaired if a patch of paneling is installed with no gap greater than 1/2 inch (13 mm) between the patch and the existing sheathing and if the patch is supported using one of the following methods.

a)	Solid 11/2-inch lumber shall fully support the patch and shall be secured to the existing sheathing with #8 by 11/4-inch screws spaced a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) around the perimeter with screws a minimum of 3/4 inch from the near edge of the hole. The patch shall be secured to the lumber with #8 × 11/4-inch-screws spaced on a grid no greater than 6 inches by 6 inches (152 mm × 152 mm) with no fewer than 2 screws.

b)	Holes that extend horizontally from roof framing member to adjacent roofing framing member that are less than or equal to 7 inches (178 mm) wide along the slope of the roof shall be supported by a minimum of 2 × 4 lumber whose face is attached to each roofing framing members using a minimum of 2 each 3-inch (76 mm) long fasteners (#8 screws or 10d common nails) connecting the two. The patch shall have attached to its bottom, running horizontally, a minimum 2 × 4 either flat wise or on edge secured with #8 × 11/4 inch screws a maximum of 4 inches (102 mm) on center and no more distant from the end of the added lumber than 3 inches (76 mm). The patch shall be secured with two #8 × 1-11/4-inch screws to each support member.

R908.8.1.2 Partially inaccessible straps.

Where part of a strap is inaccessible, if the portion of the strap that is observed is fastened in compliance with these requirements, the inaccessible portion of the strap shall be presumed to comply with these requirements.

R908.8.1.3 Prescriptive method for gable roofs on a wood frame wall.

The anchorage of each of the exposed rafters or truss within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the corner along the exterior wall on each side of each gable end shall be inspected. Wherever a strap is missing or an existing strap has fewer than four fasteners on each end, approved straps, ties or right angle brackets with a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg) shall be installed that connect each rafter or truss to the top plate below. Adding fasteners to existing straps shall be allowed in lieu of adding a new strap provided the strap is manufactured to accommodate at least 4 fasteners at each end. Wherever access makes it possible (without damage of the wall or soffit finishes), both top plate members shall be connected to the stud below using a stud to plate connector with a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg). Use of straps that connect directly from the rafter or truss to the wall stud below shall be allowed as an alternate provided the two members align with no more than 11/2 inches (38 mm) offset.

R908.8.1.4 Prescriptive method for gable roofs on a masonry wall.

The anchorage of each of the exposed rafters or trusses within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the corner along the exterior wall on each side of each gable end shall be inspected. Wherever a strap is missing or an existing strap has fewer than four fasteners on each end, approved straps, ties or right angle gusset brackets with a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg) shall be installed that connect each rafter or truss to the top plate below or directly to the masonry wall using approved masonry screws of a length and diameter recommended by the manufacturer. In the absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, screws shall provide at least a 21/2-inch (64 mm) embedment into the concrete or masonry. When the straps or right angle gusset brackets are attached to a wood sill plate, the sill plate shall be anchored to the concrete masonry wall below. This anchorage shall be accomplished by installing 1/4-inch diameter masonry screws, each with supplementary 1/4-inch washer, having sufficient length to develop a 21/2-inch (64 mm) embedment into the concrete and masonry. These screws shall be installed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the truss or rafter on both sides of each interior rafter or truss and on the accessible wall side of the gable end truss or rafter.

R908.8.1.5 Prescriptive method for hip roofs on a wood frame wall.

Unless it is possible to verify through nondestructive inspection or from plans prepared by a design professional that the roof structure is anchored at least as well as outlined below, access shall be provided at a minimum to the hip rafter (commonly known as a “king jack”), to the hip girder and at each corner of the hip roof. The hip rafter (commonly known as a “king jack”), the hip girder and the rafters/trusses adjacent to the hip girder that are not anchored with a strap having at least four fasteners on each end, shall be connected to the top plate below using a strap or a right angle gusset bracket having a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg). Adding fasteners to existing straps shall be allowed in lieu of adding a new strap provided the strap is manufactured to accommodate at least four fasteners at each end. Wherever access makes it possible (without damage of the wall or soffit finishes), both top plate members shall be connected to the stud below using a stud to plate connector with a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg). Use of straps that connect directly from the hip rafter, hip girder or adjacent rafters/trusses to the wall stud below shall be allowed as an alternate provided the two members align with no more than 11/2 inch (38 mm) offset.

R908.8.1.6 Prescriptive method for hip roofs on a masonry wall.

Unless it is possible to verify through nondestructive inspection or from plans prepared by a design professional that the roof structure is anchored at least as well as outlined below, access shall be provided at a minimum to the hip rafter (commonly known as a “king jack”), to the hip girder and at each corner of the hip roof. The hip rafter (commonly known as a “king jack”), the hip girder and the rafters/trusses adjacent to the hip girder that are not anchored with a strap having at least four fasteners on each end, shall be connected to the concrete masonry wall below using approved straps or right angle gusset brackets with a minimum uplift capacity of 500 pounds (740 kg). Adding fasteners to existing straps shall be allowed in lieu of adding a new strap provided the strap is manufactured to accommodate at least four fasteners at each end. The straps or right angle gusset brackets shall be installed such that they connect each rafter or truss to the top plate below or directly to the masonry wall using approved masonry screws of a length and diameter recommended by the manufacturer. In the absence of manufacturer’s recommendations, screws shall provide at least 21/2-inches (64 mm) embedment into the concrete or masonry. When the straps or right angle gusset brackets are attached to a wood sill plate, the sill plate shall be anchored to the concrete masonry wall below. This anchorage shall be accomplished by installing 1/4-inch (6 mm) diameter masonry screws, each with supplementary 1/4-inch (6 mm) washer, with sufficient length to develop a 21/2-inch (64 mm) embedment into the concrete and masonry. These screws shall be installed within 4 inches (102 mm) of the truss or rafter on both sides of each interior rafter or truss and on the accessible wall side of the gable end truss or rafter.

R908.8.1.7 Priorities for mandated roof-to-wall retrofit expenditures.

Priority shall be given to connecting the exterior corners of roofs to walls where the spans of the roofing members are greatest. For houses with both hip and gable roof ends, the priority shall be to retrofit the gable end roof-to-wall connections unless the width of the hip end is more than 1.5 times greater than the width of the gable end. When considering priorities for houses with both hip and gable roof ends, and the 15 percent of the cost of roof replacement is sufficient to complete all of the prioritized elements pursuant to this section, but is not sufficient to complete all of the non-prioritized elements, then no portion of complete retrofit of the non-prioritized element is required.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-copyright]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida Building Code, Residential, 8th Edition (2023)





First Printing: July 2023





ISBN: 978-1-960701-20-6 (loose-leaf edition)

ISBN: 978-1-960701-21-3 (PDF download)





COPYRIGHT © 2023
by
INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL, INC.





ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. This Florida Building Code, Residential, 8th Edition (2023) contains substantial copyrighted material from the Florida Building Code, Residential, 7th Edition (2020) and the 2021 International Residential Code®, second printing, which are copyrighted works owned by the International Code Council, Inc. (“ICC”). Without separate written permission from the copyright owner, no part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any means, including, without limitation, electronic, optical or mechanical means (by way of example, and not limitation, photocopying or recording by or in an information storage and/or retrieval system). For information on use rights and permissions, please contact: ICC Publications, 4051 Flossmoor Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois 60478; 1-888-ICC-SAFE (422-7233); https://www.iccsafe.org/about/periodicals-and-newsroom/icc-logo-license/.

Trademarks: “International Code Council,” the “International Code Council” logo, “ICC,” the “ICC” logo, “International Residential Code,” “IRC” and other names and trademarks appearing in this publication are registered trademarks of the International Code Council, Inc., and/or its licensors (as applicable), and may not be used without permission.




PRINTED IN THE USA

T029078

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-index]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDEX
A
ABSORPTION COOLING EQUIPMENT
M1412
ACCESS
To appliances
M1305
To attic
R807
To crawl space
R408.4
To equipment
M1401.2
To floor furnace
M1408.4
To plumbing connections
P2704
To plumbing fixtures
P2705
To whirlpool pumps
P2720.1
ACCESS (TO)
Definition
R202
Readily accessible, definition
R202
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
Definition
R202
ADDRESS (SITE)
R319
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
AIR
Barrier
202
Combustion
Chapter 17, G2407
Combustion air, definition
R202
Makeup
M1503.4
Return
M1602
ALLOWABLE SPANS
Of floor joists
R505.3.2
Of headers
R610.8
ALLOWABLE STRESS
R606.9
ANCHOR BOLTS
R403.1.6.1, R608.5.2
APPLIANCE
Access to
M1305
Attic
M1305.1.3
Clearance for
M1306
Connectors, fuel-gas
Chapter 24
Definition
R202
Equipment (general)
Chapter 14
Floor furnace
M1408
Flue area
R1003.14
Fuel-burning
Chapter 24
Heating and cooling
Chapter 14
Installation
M1307
Labeling
M1303
Open-top broiler units
M1505.1
Outdoor
G2454
Ranges
M1901
Room heaters
M1410
Special fuel-burning equipment
Chapter 19
Vented (decorative)
Chapter 24
Wall furnace
M1409
Warm-air furnace
M1402
Water heaters
Chapter 20, Chapter 24
APPLICATION
Plywood
R703.3
APPROVAL
Mechanical
M1302
APPROVED
Definition
R202
AREA
Disposal, private sewage disposal
P2602
Flue (appliances)
R1003.14
Flue masonry
R1003.15
ASPHALT SHINGLES
R905.2
ATTIC
Access
R807
B
BACKFILL
For piping
P2604
Placement
R404.1.7
BACKFLOW, DRAINAGE
Definition
R202
BACKWATER VALVE
R202
BASEMENT WALL
Definition
R202
BATH AND SHOWER SPACES
R307
BATHROOM
Exhaust
M1507.4
Group
R202, Table P3004.1
BATHTUB
Enclosure
P2713.2
Outlets for
P2713.1
Whirlpool
P2720
BEAM SUPPORTS
R606.14
BIDETS
P2721, TABLE P2903.1
BOILER
Definition
R202
Requirements
Chapter 20
BONDING
E4204
BUILDING
Definition
R202
Drain, definition
R202
Existing, definition
R202
Planning
Chapter 3
Sewer, definition (See also SEWER/BUILDING)
R202
BUILDING OFFICIAL
Definition
R202
Inspection and tests of
fuel-gas piping
Chapter 24
BUILDING PLANNING
Carbon monoxide alarms
R315
Ceiling height
R305
Decay protection
R317
Design criteria
R301
Emergency escape
R310
Exterior wall
R302.1
Fire-resistant construction
R302
Foam plastic
R316
Garages and carports
R309
Glazing
R308
Guardrails
R312
Handrails
R311.7.8, R311.8.3
Insulation
R302.10
Landing
R311.3, R311.3.1, R311.3.2, R311.5.1
Light, ventilation and heating
R303
Means of egress
R311
Minimum room area
R304
Planning
Chapter 3
Plumbing fixture clearances
R307
Radon protection
Appendix F
Ramps
R311.8
Sanitation
R306
Site address
R319
Smoke alarms
R314
Stairways
R311.7
Storm shelters
R323
Termite protection
R318
BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE
Definition
R202
BUILT-UP GIRDERS (see GIRDERS)
BUILT-UP ROOFING (see ROOFING)
C
CAPACITY
Expansion tank
M2003.2
CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS
R315
Definition
202
CARPORT
R309.4
CEILING
Finishes
R805
Height
202, R305
CEILING FANS
E4203.4
CENTRAL FURNACES (see FURNACES)
CHASES
R606.8
Freon
E406.1.2
Masonry
606.8
Structural
E404.1
CHIMNEYS
And fireplaces
Chapter 10
Caps
R1003.9.1
Clearance
R1003.18
Corbeling
R1003.5
Crickets
R1003.20
Design (masonry)
R1003.1
Factory-built
R1005
Fireblocking
R1003.19
Flue area
R1003.14, R1003.15
Flue lining
R100311
Load
R1003.8
Masonry and factory built, size
M1805
Multiple flue
R1003.14
Rain caps
1003.9.3
Spark arrestors
R1003.9.2
Termination
R1003.9
Wall thickness
R1003.10
CLASS 2 CIRCUITS
Class 2 remote-control, signaling
and power-limited circuits
Chapter 43
CLAY
Tiles
R905.3
CLEANOUT
Definition
R202
Drainage
P3005.2
Masonry chimney
R1003.17
CLEARANCE
Above cooking top
M1901.1
For appliances
M1306.1
For chimneys
R1003.18
Reduction methods
M1306.2
Vent connector
Table M1306.2, M1803.3.4
CLOTHES DRYERS
M1502, Chapter 24
CLOTHES WASHING MACHINES
P2718
COLUMNS
R407
COMBUSTIBLE
Materials
R202, R1001.11, R1001.12, R1003.18, R1003.19
COMBUSTION AIR
Air
Chapter 17
Definition
R202
COMMON VENT
Definition
R202
Requirements
M1801.11
CONCRETE
Compressive Strength
R402.2
Floors (on ground)
R506
Tile (roof)
R905.3
Weathering
Figure R301.2(3), R402.2
CONNECTION
Access to connections
P2704
For fuel-burning appliances
Chapter 24
For fuel-oil piping
M2202
Joints
P2904
Plumbing fixture
P2601.2
To water supply
P2902.1
CONNECTOR
Chimney and vent
M1803
Vent, definition
R202
CONSTRUCTION
Cavity wall masonry
R608
Flood-resistant
R322
Floors
Chapter 5
Footings
R403
Foundation material
R402
Foundation walls
R404
Foundations
Chapter 4
Masonry
R606, R607, R608, R610
Roofs
Chapter 8
Steel framing
R505, R603, R804
Wood framing
R502, R602, R802
Walls
Chapter 6
CONTINUOUS WASTE
Definition
R202
CONTROL
Devices
Chapter 24
CONTROLS
For forced-air furnaces
Chapter 24
COOLING
Absorption cooling equipment
M1412
Access to equipment
M1401.2
Evaporative cooling equipment
M1413
Installation
M1401.1
Refrigeration cooling equipment
M1404
Return air-supply source
M1602
CORROSION
Protection of metallic piping
P2603.3
COURT
Definition
R202
COVERING
Exterior
R703
Interior
R702
Roof
Chapter 9
Wall
Chapter 7
CRAWL SPACE
R408
CRITERIA
Design
R301
CROSS CONNECTION
Definition
R202
D
DAMPER, VOLUME
Definition
R202
DECAY
Protection against
R317
DECK
Supported by exterior wall
R507
Wood/plastic composite boards
R507.2
DECORATIVE APPLIANCES
Outdoor
G2454
Vented
Chapter 24
DEFINITIONS
Building
R202
Mechanical system
R202
Plumbing
R202
DESIGN
Criteria
R301
DIRECTIONAL
Fittings, plumbing
P2707
DISHWASHING MACHINES
P2717
DOORS
Egress
R311.2
Exterior
R311.3.2, R609
DRAFT HOOD
Definition
R202
DRAFTSTOPPING
R302.12, R502.12
DRAIN
Floor
P2719
Shower receptors
P2709
Subsoil
P3302.1
DRAINAGE
Backflow
202
Cleanouts
P3005.2
Foundation
R405
Inspection and tests
P2503
Storm drainage
Chapter 33
DRILLING AND NOTCHING (see NOTCHING)
DRINKING WATER TREATMENT
P2909
DRYERS
Domestic clothes
M1502
DUCTS
Chapter 16
Installation
M1601.4
Insulation
M1601.3
Material
M1601
System, definition
R202
DWELLING
Definition
R202
DWELLING UNIT
Definition
R202
Separation
R302.2, R302.3
E
EJECTORS (see SUMPS AND EJECTORS)
ELECTRICAL
Appliance (labeling)
M1303
GFCI Protection
E3408
ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE HEATERS
Baseboard convectors
M1405
Duct heaters
M1407
Radiant heating
M1406
EMERGENCY ESCAPE
R202, R310
ENERGY CONSERVATION
Chapter 11
EQUIPMENT
General, mechanical
Chapter 14
Heating and cooling
Chapter 14
EXCAVATIONS
For appliance installation
M1305.1.4.2
EXISTING PLUMBING SYSTEMS
P2502
EXTERIOR
Covering
R703
Insulation finish systems
R703.9
Lath
R703.7.1
Plaster
R703.7
EXTERIOR WALL
Construction
R302.1
Definition
R202
Fire-resistance rating
R302.1
F
FACTORY BUILT
Chimneys
R1005, M1805
Fireplace stoves
R1005.3
Fireplaces
R1004
FAUCETS
P2701
Handle orientation
P2722.2
Requirements
P2701
FENESTRATION
Definition
R202
FINISHES
Flame spread and smoke density
R302.9
For ceilings
R805
Interior
R302.9, R315, R702
FIRE-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
R302
FIREBLOCKING
Barrier between stories
R302.11
Chimney
R1003.19
Fireplace
R1001.12
FIREPLACES
Chapter 10
Clearance
R1001.11
Corbeling
R1003.5
Factory-built
R1004
Fireblocking
R1001.12
Walls
R1001.5
FITTINGS
DWV piping
P3002.3
Prohibited joints
P3003.2
Water supply
P2906.6
FIXTURE UNIT
Drainage, definition
R202
Unit valves
P2903.9.3
Water supply, definition
R202
FIXTURES
Plumbing fixture, definition
R202
Plumbing fixture, general
Chapter 27
Trap seals
P3201.2
FLAME SPREAD INDEX
R302.9, R302.10
FLASHING
R703.8.5, R703.4, R903.2, R905
FLOOD HAZARD AREA
Construction
R322
Plumbing systems
P2601.3
FLOOR DRAIN
P2719
FLOOR FURNACE
M1408
FLOORS
Concrete (on ground)
R506
Steel framing
R505
Treated-wood (on ground)
R504
Wood framing
R502
FLUE
Area
R1003.14, R1003.15
Lining
R1003.11, R1003.12
Multiple
R1003.13
FOAM PLASTICS
R316
FOOD-WASTE DISPOSERS
General
P2716
Discharge connection to sink tailpiece
P2707.1
FOOTINGS
Excavation for piping near
P2604.4
Requirements
R403
FORCED MAIN SEWER
Materials
P3002.2
Testing
P2503.4
FOOTINGS
R403
FOUNDATIONS
Chapter 4
Frost protection
R403.1.4.1
Walls
R404
FREEZE PROTECTION OF PLUMBING
P2603.5
FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCES
(see APPLIANCE, definition)
Identification
Chapter 24
FUEL GAS
Chapter 24
FUEL OIL
Oil tanks
M2201
Piping, fittings and connections
M2202
Pumps and valves
M2204
FURNACES
Clearance of warm-air furnaces
M1402.2
Exterior
M1401.4
Floor (see Floor Furnace)
Wall (see Wall Furnace)
Warm-air
M1402, Chapter 24
G
GARAGES
R309
GAS
Appliance labeling
Chapter 24
GAS PIPING SYSTEM NOT
TO BE USED AS GROUNDING
ELECTRODE
Chapter 24
GLAZING
R308
Aggregate
R303.1
Protection of openings
R301.2.1.2
GRADE
Definition
R202
Of lumber
R502.1.1, R602.1.1, R802.1.1
Plane, definition
R202
Slope of piping, definition
R202
GRAYWATER
Identification for
P2901.2
Supply to fixtures
P2901.1
GROUND
Floors (on ground)
R504, R506
Joint connection
P2906.8
GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP
M2105
GUARDS
R312
Definition
R202
GYPSUM
Wallboard
R702.3
H
HABITABLE SPACE
Definition
R202
HALLWAYS
R311.6
HANDRAILS
R311.7.8, R311.8.3
Definition
R202
HAND SHOWER (see SHOWER)
HEADERS
SIP
R610.10
Steel
R603
HEARTH
R1001.9
Extension
R1001.9, R1001.10
HEATERS
Baseboard
M1405
Central furnaces
M1402
Duct
M1407
Heat pumps
M1403
Masonry
R1002
Pool
M2006, Chapter 24
Radiant
M1406
Sauna
Chapter 24
Unvented
G2445
Vented room
M1410, Chapter 24
Water
Chapter 20, Chapter 28
HEATING
R303.9
HEATING EQUIPMENT
Chapter 14
HEIGHT
Ceiling
R305
HOLLOW-UNIT MASONRY
(see MASONRY)
R606.3.2.2, 606.13.1.2
HORIZONTAL
Pipe, definition
R202
Vent length
M1803.3.2
HOT TUBS
E4201, Appendix G
HOT WATER
Definition
R202
Distribution pipe rating
P2906.5
Distribution systems
P2905
Heaters
M2005, Chapter 24
Supplied to bathtubs
P2713
Temperature actuated valves for
P2724
HUB DRAIN (see WASTE RECEPTOR)
HYDROGEN GENERATING
AND REFUELING
M1307.4
HYDRONIC HEATING SYSTEMS
Baseboard convectors
M2102
Boilers
M2001
Expansion tanks
M2003
Floor heating systems
M2103
Operating and safety controls
M2002
Piping systems installation
M2101
I
INDIVIDUAL
Sewage disposal systems
R202, P2602
Water supply and sewage
disposal systems
P2602
INLET
To masonry chimneys
R1003.16
INSPECTION
Excavation for piping
P2604.1
Fuel-supply system
Chapter 24
Of plumbing system
P2503
INSTALLATION
Existing
Appendix J
Of appliances
M1307
Of cooling and heating equipment
M1401.1
Of ducts
M1601.4
Of flue liners
R1003.12
Of plumbing fixtures
P2705
Of wall furnaces
M1409.3
INSULATION
R302.10
INTERIOR
Lath
R702.2.3
Other finishes
R702.5
Plaster
R702.2
Wall covering
Chapter 7
IRRIGATION (see SUBSURFACE IRRIGATION)
J
JOINTS, PIPE
And connections
P2906, P3003
Slip
P2704.1, P3005.2.9
JOIST
Bearing
R606.6.3.1
K
KITCHEN
Definition
R202
L
L VENT TERMINATION
M1804.2.4
LABELING
Appliances
M1303
Definition
R202
LABELED
Definition
R202
LANDINGS
R311.3, R311.3.1, R311.7.6, R311.8.2
LATERAL SUPPORT
R606.6.4, R607.5.2
LATH
Exterior
R703.7.1
Interior
R702.2.3
LAUNDRY TUBS
Drain connection to standpipe
P2706.1.2.1
Requirements
P2715
LAVATORIES
P2711
Clearances
R307
Waste outlets
P2711.3
LEAD
Allowable amount, potable water
components
P2906.2
Bends and traps
P3002.4.2
Caulked joints
P3003.6.1
Flashing
P3002.4.1
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
R303
LINING
Flue
R1003.11, R1003.12
LINTEL
R606.10, R608.8, R703.8.3, R1001.7
LISTED AND LISTING
Definition applied to building and
mechanical provisions
R202
Mechanical appliances
M1302.1
Potable water components
P2609
LOAD
Additional
R1003.8
Dead load
202
Roof
R301.6
Seismic risk map
Figure R301.2(2)
Snow load map
Figure R301.2(5)
Wind speed map
Figure R301.2(4)
LOCATION
Of furnaces
M1408.3, M1409.2
LOT
202
LUMBER
Grade
R502.1.1, R602.1.1, R802.1.1
M
MACERATING TOILET
P2723
Definition
202
MAKEUP AIR
M1503.4
MANUFACTURED HOME
Definition
R202
MASONRY
Chases
R606.8
General
R606
Hollow unit
R202, R606.3.2.2, R606.13.1.2
Solid, definition
R202
Veneer
R703.8
Veneer attachment
R703.3
MATERIALS
Combustible
R202, R1001.11, R1001.12, R1003.18, R1003.19
For ducts
M1601
For fixture accessories
P2702
For flue liners
R1003.11
For fuel-supply systems
Chapter 24
For hearth extension
R1001.9
For siding
R703.5
Foundations
402
Hydronic pipe
M2101, M2103, M2104
Plumbing pipe
P2702.2, P2906, P3002
MECHANICAL
System requirements
Chapter 13
MEDIUM PRESSURE FUEL-GAS
PIPING SYSTEM
Chapter 24
MEMBRANE
Penetration
R302.4.2
Polyethylene
R504.2.2, R506.2.3
Water-resistive
R703.2
Waterproofing
R406.2
METAL
Ducts
Chapter 16
Roof panels
R905.10
Roof shingles
R905.4
METHODS
Water distribution pipe sizing
Appendix P
MOISTURE CONTROL
R408.1, R702.7
MORTAR
Joints
R606.3.1
MULTIPLE
Appliance venting systems
M1801.11
Flues
R1003.13
N
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL
Definition
R202
NONPOTABLE WATER SYSTEMS
P2910, P2911, P2912, P2913
NOTCHING
For mechanical systems
M1308
For plumbing piping
P2603.2
Steel joists
R804
Steel studs
R603
Wood joists
R802.7.1
O
OCCUPIED SPACE
Definition
R202
OIL
Piping and connections
M2202
Supply pumps and valves
M2204
Tanks
M2201
OPEN-TOP GAS BROILER UNITS
M1505.1
OPENING
Requirements,
combustion air
Chapter 17, Chapter 24
Waterproofing of piping penetrations
P2606.1
OUTLET
Definition
Chapter 24
P
PARAPETS
R302.2.2, R606.4.4
PARTICLEBOARD
Walls
R605
PENETRATIONS
Plumbing
P2606
PIERS
R606.7
Masonry
R404.1.9
PIPE
Fittings
P2702.2
Materials listing
Table M2101.1, P2609
Protection
P2603
Standards, drain,
waste and vent
Table P3002.1(1), Table P3002.1(2)
Standards, sewer
Table P3002.2
Standards, water supply
P2906
PIPING
Connections and materials
Table M2101.1, P2905
Drain, waste and vent
P3002.1
Excavations next to footings
P2604.4
Fuel-gas size determination
Chapter 24
Penetrations
P2606
Protection
P2603
Sizing methods, water distribution
P2903.7
Support
M2101.9, Chapter 24, P2605
PLANNING
Building
Chapter 3
PLASTER
Exterior
R703.7
Interior
R702.2
PLENUM
Definition
R202
PLUMBING
Fixture clearances
R307
Fixtures
Chapter 27
Freeze Protection
P2603.5
Materials
P2702.2, P2906, P3002
Requirements and definitions
R202
Support
P2605
System, definition
R202
Third-party certification
P2609.4
Traps
Chapter 32
Vents
Chapter 31
PLYWOOD
Application
R703.5
Materials, walls
R604
POTABLE WATER
Definition
R202
Piping listing
P2609.4
PRECAST CONCRETE
Footings
R403.4
Foundation material
R402.3.1
Foundation walls
R404.5
PRESSURE, WATER SUPPLY
Maximum
P2903.3.1
Minimum
P2903.3
PRIVATE
Sewage disposal system
Appendix I
PROHIBITED
Receptors
P2706
Return air sources
M1602.2
Traps
P3201.5
Valves below grade
P2903.9.5
Water closets
P2712.1
PROTECTION
Against decay and termites
R317, R318, R320
Against radon
Appendix F
Guards
R312
Of backflow preventers
P2902.6
Of ferrous gas piping
Chapter 24
Of potable water supply
P2902
Openings
R301.2.1.2, R302.5.1
Required
M1502.5
Seal
P3201.2.1
Structural and Piping
P2603
Under-stair
R302.7
Weather
R903
Window Fall
R312
R
R-VALUE
Definition
R202
RADON
Map
Appendix F
RAFTERS
Grade of lumber
R802.1
Spans
R802.1.1
RAINWATER
Identification for
P2901.2
Supply to fixtures
P2901.1
RAMPS
R311.8
Glazing adjacent
R308.4.6
Guards
R312.1.1
RANGES AND OVENS
Vertical clearance above cooking top
M1901.1
READY ACCESS (TO)
Definition
R202
RECEPTORS
Plumbing fixtures and traps
Chapter 27
Site-built materials
P2709.2
Waste
P2706
RECLAIMED WATER
Identification for
P2901.2
Supply to fixtures
P2901.1
REQUIREMENTS
Connections for fuel-burning
appliances
Chapter 24
Plumbing
Chapter 28
Return air
M1602
RESISTANT SIDING MATERIAL (see MATERIALS)
RETURN-AIR
M1602
ROOF
Coverings
R905
Drainage
R903.4
Flashing
R703.4, R903.2, R905
Insulation
R906
Steel framing
R804
Wood framing
R802
ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION
(see CONSTRUCTION)
Chapter 8
Wind uplift
R804
ROOFING
Built-up
R905.9
Existing
R908
Liquid-applied coating
R905.15
Modified bitumen
R905.11
Sprayed polyurethane foam
R905.14
Thermoplastic single-ply
R905.13
Thermoset single-ply
R905.12
ROOM
Heaters, vented
M1410, Chapter 24
Minimum Sizes
R304
S
SANITATION
R306
SEISMIC RISK MAP
Figure R301.2(2)
SEPTIC TANK
Definition
R202
SEWAGE
Disposal, private
P2602
SEWER, BUILDING
Definition
R202
Separation from water service
P2604.2, P2906.4.1
Size
P3005.4.2
Testing
P2503.4
SHAKES
Wood
R702.6, R703.6, R905.8
SHINGLE
Asphalt shingles
R905.2
Metal
R905.4
Shingle fashion
202
Slate
R905.6
Tile
905.3
Wood
R905.7
SHOWER
Control valve
P2708.4
Control valve riser to shower head
P2708.3
Compartment
R307.2
Drain size
P2708.2
Hand
P2708.5
Receptor
P2709
Stall dimensions
P2708
Walls
P2710
SHUTOFF VALVE (see VALVES)
SIDING
Exterior coverings
R703
Materials
R703.5
SINKS
P2714
Water Supply
R306.4
SITE
Address
R319
Preparation
R408.5, R504.2, R506.2
SIZE
Of combustion air openings
Chapter 17
Of rooms
R304
Of trap
P3201.7
SIZING METHODS
Water piping
P2903.7
SKYLIGHTS
R308.6
SLATE SHINGLES
R905.6
SMOKE ALARMS
R314
SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX
R302.9, R302.10
SNOW LOAD MAP
Figure R301.2(5)
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
M2301
Planning
R324
SPANS
Steel (allowable)
R505, R804
SPRINKLER (see FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS)
STAIRWAYS
R311.7
STANDARDS
Chapter 44, Appendix G
STANDPIPE (see WASTE RECEPTOR)
STEEL
Fireplace units
R1001.5.1
Floor construction
R505
Roof-ceiling construction
R804
Walls
R603
STORM SHELTERS
R323
STORY
Definition
R202
STOVES
Factory-built fireplace
M1414
STRUCTURAL AND PIPING PROTECTION
P2603
STRUCTURAL INSULATED PANEL (SIP)
R610
STUDS
Wood
R602.2, R602.3
Steel
R603
SUBSURFACE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
P3009
SUMPS AND EJECTORS
P3007
SUMP PUMPS
P3007.3.2, P3303
SUPPLY
Combustion air
Chapter 17, Chapter 24
Fuel systems
Chapter 24
Oil supply pumps and valves
M2204
Required gas
Chapter 24
Return air
M1602
Water
Chapter 29
SUPPORT
Of decks
R317.1, R507
Of ducts
M1601.4.4
Of floor joists
R505
Of masonry chimneys
R1003.2, R1003.3, R1003.4
Of pipe
M2101.9, Chapter 24, P2605
SWIMMING POOLS
R326
SYSTEMS
Mechanical venting
Chapter 18, Chapter 24
Plumbing, drainage, waste
and venting
Chapter 25, Chapter 30, Chapter 31, Chapter 33
T
TAIL PIECES, PLUMBING FIXTURE
P2703
TANK
For fuel oil-burning appliances
M2201
Septic, definition
R202
TEMPERATURE ISOLINES
Figure R301.2(1)
TERMINATION
Of chimneys
R1003.9
Of vents (general)
M1804.2
TERMITES
Infestation probability map
Figure R301.2(6)
Protection
R318
TEST
For leaks in supply piping
Chapter 24
Of backflow preventers
P2503.8
Of building sewers
P2503.4
Of plumbing systems
P2503
Of shower liner
P2503.6
THICKNESS
Footings
R403.1
Of chimney walls
R1003.10
Wood Structural Panel
R301.2.1.2
TIES
Veneer
R703.8.4
TILE
Shingles (clay and concrete)
R905.3
TOWNHOUSE
Definition
R202
Scope
R101.2
Separation
R302.2
TRACK LIGHTING
E4005
TRAP
Chapter 32
Arm, definition
R202
Building
P3201.1
Seal protection
P3201.2.1
TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING
P2604
TRUSSES
Steel
R505, R804
Wood
R502.11, R802.10
TYPE OF VENTING
SYSTEMS REQUIRED
Chapter 18, Chapter 24
U
U-FACTOR
Definition
R202
UNDER FLOOR
Access to furnaces
M1305.1.4
Plenums
M1601.5
Space
R408
UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
Duct systems
M1601.1.2
UNVENTED ATTIC ASSEMBLIES
R806.5
UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT
Definition
E3401
V
VALVES
Backwater
P3008
Meter
Chapter 24
Oil-supply
M2204
Relief, water heater
P2804
Shutoff, fuel-gas
Chapter 24
Shutoff, fuel-oil
M2204.2
Water heaters
P2903.9.2
Water supply
P2903.9
VAPOR RETARDERS
R702.7
Definition
R202
VENT
B or BW vent
Chapter 24
Definition
Chapter 24
L vent
M1804.2.4, Chapter 24
Plumbing system, definition
R202
Termination
M1804.2, M2203.5, P3103.5
VENTED
Decorative appliances
Chapter 24
Floor furnaces
M1408
Room heaters
M1410
Wall furnaces
M1409
VENTILATION
Bathroom and kitchen
M1507
For hydrogen systems
M1307.4
Roof
R806
Under floor
R408.1
Whole house
M1507.3
VENTING (MECHANICAL)
Chimney and vent connectors
M1803, Chapter 24
Components
M1802, Chapter 24
General
M1801, Chapter 24
Required
M1801, M2203.4, Chapter 24
Systems
Chapter 18, Chapter 24
VENTING (PLUMBING)
Air admittance valves
P3114
Circuit
P3110
Combination waste and vent system
P3111
Common
P3107
Connections and grades
P3104
Fixture
P3105
Individual
P3106
Island fixture
P3112
Pipe sizing
P3113
Stacks and stack vents
P3102
Systems
P3101
Terminals
P3103
Waste stack
P3109
Wet
P3108
VERTICAL
Clearances above cooking top
M1901.1
Pipe, definition
R202
W
WALL FURNACE (see APPLIANCE)
General
M1409.1
Installation
M1409.3
Location
M1409.2
WALLBOARD
Gypsum
R702.3
WALLS
Bathtub compartments
P2710
Bracing, steel
R603
Construction
Chapter 6
Covering
Chapter 7
Deflection
R301.7
Exterior covering
R703
Finishes
R302.9, R702
Fireplace
R1001.5
Foundation
R404
Insulating concrete form
R608.3, R608.4, R608.5.3
Shower compartments
P2710
Steel framing
R603
Structural insulated panels (SIP)
R610
Thickness, masonry chimneys
R1003.10
Wood framing
R602
WARM-AIR FURNACES
M1402
Access to
M1401.2
Clearance from
M1402.2
WASTE
Clear water
P2792.1
Continuous, definition
R202
WASTE RECEPTOR
Hub drain
P2706.1.1
Standpipe
P2706.1
Prohibited types
P2706.2
WATER
Distribution system, definition
R202
Heater, definition
R202
Heaters
Chapter 20, Chapter 24, Chapter 28
Individual supply and sewage disposal
P2602
Piping sizing methods
P2903
Pressure
P2903.3
Service, separation from sewer
P2604.2, P2905.4.1
Supply and distribution
Chapter 29
Supply system, definition
R202
WATER CLOSET
Carriers for wall hung
P2702.4
Clearances for
R306.1
Dual flushing
P2712.1
Personal hygiene devices
P2722.5
Seats
P2712.7
Standards
P2712.1
WATER HEATER
Drain water heater heat recovery units
P2903.11
In garages
P2801.5.2
Location
P2801.3, P2801.4, P2801.5
Pan
P2801.5
Plumbing requirements
Chapter 28
Relief valves
P2804
Seismic bracing
P2801.7
Solar thermal
P2802, P2902.5.5
Thermal expansion from
P2903.4
Used for space heating
P2803
WATERPROOFING
And dampproofing
R406
Of openings through roofs and walls
P2607
WELLS (see INDIVIDUAL WATER SUPPLY)
WHIRLPOOL BATHTUBS
P2720
WHOLE-HOUSE VENTILATION
M1507.3
WIND SPEED MAP
Figure R301.2(4)A
WINDOW
R609
Fall prevention
R312.2
Opening limiting devices
R312.2.2
WOOD
Floor construction
R502
Foundation walls
R404.2
Roof-ceiling construction
R802
Shakes
R905.8
Shingles
R905.7
Trusses
R502.11, R802.10
Walls
R602
WORKMANSHIP, PLUMBING
P2608
Y
YARD
Definition
R202

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-i]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part I—Administrative

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-ii]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part II—Definitions

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-iii]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part III—Building Planning and Construction

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-iv]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part IV—Energy Conservation

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-ix]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part IX—Referenced Standards

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-v]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part V—Mechanical

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-vi]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part VI—Fuel Gas

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-vii]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part VII—Plumbing

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-part-viii]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part VIII—Electrical

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[residential-preface]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREFACE
History

The State of Florida first mandated statewide building codes during the 1970s at the beginning of the modern construction boom. The first law required all municipalities and counties to adopt and enforce one of the four state-recognized model codes known as the “state minimum building codes.” During the early 1990s a series of natural disasters, together with the increasing complexity of building construction regulation in vastly changed markets, led to a comprehensive review of the state building code system. The study revealed that building code adoption and enforcement was inconsistent throughout the state and those local codes thought to be the strongest proved inadequate when tested by major hurricane events. The consequences of the building codes system failure were devastation to lives and economies and a statewide property insurance crisis. The response was a reform of the state building construction regulatory system that placed emphasis on uniformity and accountability.

The 1998 Florida Legislature amended Chapter 553, Florida Statutes, Building Construction Standards, to create a single state building code that is enforced by local governments. As of March 1, 2002, the Florida Building Code, which is developed and maintained by the Florida Building Commission, supersedes all local building codes. The Florida Building Code is updated every three years and may be amended in the interim in accordance with criteria set out in Section 553.73, Florida Statutes.

Scope

The Florida Building Code is based on national model building codes and national consensus standards, in addition to Florida-specific provisions. The code incorporates all building construction-related regulations for public and private buildings in the State of Florida other than those specifically exempted by Section 553.73, Florida Statutes. It has been harmonized with the Florida Fire Prevention Code, which is developed and maintained by the Department of Financial Services, Office of the State Fire Marshal, to establish unified and consistent standards.

The model codes used for the Florida Building Code, 8th Edition (2023) include: the 2021 editions of the International Building Code®; the International Plumbing Code®; the International Mechanical Code®; the International Fuel Gas Code®; the International Residential Code®; the International Existing Building Code®; the International Energy Conservation Code®; the National Electrical Code, 2020 edition; or substantive criteria from ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2019. State and local codes adopted and incorporated into the code include the Florida Building Code, Accessibility, and special hurricane protection standards for the High-Velocity Hurricane Zone.

The code is composed of nine main volumes: the Florida Building Code, Building, which also includes state regulations for licensed facilities; the Florida Building Code, Plumbing; the Florida Building Code, Mechanical; the Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas; the Florida Building Code, Existing Building; the Florida Building Code, Residential; the Florida Building Code, Energy Conservation; the Florida Building Code, Accessibility and the Florida Building Code, Test Protocols for High-Velocity Hurricane Zones. Chapter 27 of the Florida Building Code, Building, adopts the National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, by reference.

Under certain strictly defined conditions, local governments may amend technical requirements to be more stringent than the code. All local technical amendments to the Florida Building Code must be adopted in accordance with the requirements of Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes, and reported to the Florida Building Commission, then posted on www.floridabuilding.org in legislative format for 30 days prior to being enforced. Local amendments to the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code may be obtained from the Florida Building Commission website, or from the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation or the Florida Department of Financial Services, Office of the State Fire Marshal, respectively.

Adoption and Maintenance

An updated edition of the Florida Building Code is adopted triennially by the Florida Building Commission. The code may also be amended between updates in order to incorporate the Florida Building Commission’s interpretations into the code, address conflicts, and update standards, among other statutorily specified reasons. Minimum requirements for permitting, plans review and inspections are established by the code, and local jurisdictions may adopt additional administrative requirements that are more stringent. Local technical amendments are subject to strict criteria established by Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes. They are subject to Commission review during each triennial update of the code, and may be either adopted into the updated edition of the code or repealed. Local technical amendments are also subject to appeal according to the procedures established by Section 553.73(4), Florida Statutes.

Eleven Technical Advisory Committees (TACs), which are constituted consistent with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Guidelines, review proposed code changes and clarifications of the code and make recommendations to the Commission. These TACs whose membership is constituted consistent with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Guidelines include: Accessibility; Joint Building Fire (a joint committee of the Commission and the State Fire Marshal); Building Structural; Code Administration/Enforcement; Electrical; Energy; Mechanical; Plumbing and Fuel Gas; Roofing; Swimming Pool; and Special Occupancy (state agency construction and facility licensing regulations).

The Commission may only issue official code interpretations using procedures set out by Chapter 120, Florida Statutes. To obtain such an interpretation, a request for a declaratory statement must be made to the Florida Building Commission in a manner that establishes a clear set of facts and circumstances and identifies the section of the code in question. Requests are analyzed by staff, reviewed by the appropriate Technical Advisory Committee, and sent to the Florida Building Commission for action. These interpretations establish precedents for situations having similar facts and circumstances and are typically incorporated into the code in the next code amendment cycle. Non-binding interpretations are available from the Building Officials Association of Florida’s website (www.BOAF.net) and a binding interpretation process is available online at www.floridabuilding.org.

Marginal Markings

Solid vertical lines in the margins within the body of the code indicate a change from the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential, 7th Edition (2020) to the Florida Building Code, Residential, 8th Edition (2023) effective December 31, 2023.

Sections deleted from the base code are designated “Reserved” in order to maintain the structure of the base code.

Italicized Terms

Selected terms set forth in Chapter 2, Definitions, are italicized where they appear in code text (except those in Sections 1903 through 1905, where italics indicate provisions that differ from ACI 318). Such terms are not italicized where the definition set forth in Chapter 2 does not impart the intended meaning in the use of the term. The terms selected have definitions that the user should read carefully to facilitate better understanding of the code.

Acknowledgments

The Florida Building Code is produced through the efforts and contributions of building designers, contractors, product manufacturers, regulators and other interested parties who participate in the Florida Building Commission’s consensus processes, Commission staff and the participants in the national model code development processes.

